Now, you and I have two very different points of view, and the reason that I consider you
an arch nemesis is that I think your theory based on E8, which is depicted in this crystal
block for those who are viewing on YouTube.
Thanks for bringing your kryptonite to the show.
Our approach to this is to say, let's start out with some object that is mathematically
distinguished and very peculiar, effectively like a platypus of the mathematical world,
and let's try to distill from this thing that has to exist for reasons of logical necessity
and maybe the most complicated naturally occurring object, arguably, that you could
pick, and let's find the richness of our natural world as distilled from this bizarre
freakish occurrence in the laws of mathematical necessity.
Is that a fair telling?
From a top-down perspective, it is, but the way I got there is by describing spinners
and seeing that spinners is part of this one beautiful mathematical object, naturally,
and it's unique to the exceptional E groups, to these small class of objects.
When you say exceptionally groups, what you mean is continuous symmetries that only occur
once, that they don't fall into some regular pattern.
Spinners are naturally a part of their geometry, and they're intricate, beautiful objects.
They have spinners naturally as part of their geometry, and that if you dissect them, you
can see all the other parts necessary to particle physics and gravity.
This was just stunning to me, and at this point, I'm like, all right, I've built up
from the ground up, from particle physics and from gravity and from spinners, I've
built the structure up and seeing how it's all interconnected, and I found that they're
all part of this small class of mathematical objects that are unique in their intricacy
and beauty for finite dimensional objects.
That's why now I appear to have adopted more of a top-down view, where it seems like, oh,
I started with this pretty object, and I said, oh, look, it explains everything, but it's
nowhere near like that how I actually got to there.
The truth is I'm building up, and the truth is the next object is going to be higher dimensional
objects that include E8, like this one, as a subgroup.
The way I'm hearing you, Garrett, and again, this is like one of the most obscure...
This is going to lose so many of your listeners, but I'm happy to talk about this.
Well, but we're trying to describe this.
I would like to describe this a little bit as if we were taking somebody to an opera
in a foreign language so that they can follow the plot, even though they can't follow line
by line.
The way I see what you're saying is that there is a usual kind of symmetry, which we would
associate with bosons, that is, the force particles of the universe.
What makes these very strange objects that you've referred to in referring to exceptional
league groups is that you appear to take something from the fermionic universe, that is, the
spinorial universe, where the spinners come from, and you adjoin it, in some sense, to
the bosonic to get more symmetries.
Yes.
Yeah, that's very clear.
There's a huge problem with the strategy.
Well, wait, but you're forgetting the part where this structure exists as part of these
exceptional objects.
Well, no, no, I'm not...
You've correctly described how these objects occur in nature, that there is some regular
kind of typical symmetry, a bosonic symmetry, then you take some of these spinners that
are related to that symmetry, and you fuse them together to get an even more beautiful
weird symmetric object.
But the problem with that strategy is that we know that nature has these two very different
recipes for how she wants to treat these things quantum mechanically.
One of them goes into the name of bosonic quantization, and the other sort of goes
into the name sometimes of bearish in theory, or anti-commuting numbers.
Numbers were A times B equals negative B times A.
Completely parallel, totally different treatment, and the way you've done it, you've really
taken the fermions, that is, the matter part, the spinners that we've been discussing.
You've lumped them together with the bosons, and now they're fused in a way that it's
going to be almost impossible to treat these spinners in a manner befitting fermionic
quantization.
Yeah, no, it's very straightforward, though.
The fermions just end up being along directions orthogonal to spacetime.
I don't see that that actually works.
This is my great, my criticisms of your theory, which we've known each other now for 11 years,
and this is the basis of our antagonism, is that on the one hand, you ingeniously saw
and I give you your credit, that E8, the largest of these objects, a 248-dimensional behemoth,
carried some numerology surrounding three copies of the spinners that are present,
which looked, in some sense, could be confused for, may be related to, three copies of matter.
It was about that hand-wavy, yeah.
Okay, so all the honor to you, that's not an obvious feature.
Most people who barely know what the exceptional E groups are, most of them don't know that
it has to do with this property called triality.
That was true, but there really wasn't, in my opinion, enough room to pack the particles
that we currently see into this group structure with three generations.
That was one issue.
Second of all, because of the particular way in which bosons and fermions matter and force were
fused together, it really pushed everything towards the bosonic side, that is the force
side of the equation.
So you're going to now have to be in some kind of technical debt, where you would have to
figure out how to get the fermions back into a matter framework, because you would actually
push them too far through unification into a union with force.
That was another basic concern.
My last concern was that because of the properties of this object, you didn't have
any room for what we call chirality, in which the universe that we've seen so far appears to
have a left-right asymmetry to it.
It's as if it has a beauty mark.
Any object that you derive from E8 is going to be very hard to get it to have a beauty mark,
because E8 doesn't have a beauty mark itself.
So these were three things that you were going to have to pay back
if you were going to connect this to the world that we see.
My irritation with you was that I brought this up with you in 2008, not 2009,
when we met at the Perimeter Institute, and I tried to warn you about these things.
I felt like you never took me seriously.
No, I did take you seriously.
I've taken all these problems seriously, and they're discussed in subsequent work.
The way I've been resolving them is by tackling a larger unspoken problem,
which is how to have a quantum description of this sort of geometry.
Our universe is a quantum universe, and E8 is a finite-dimensional object,
and you have to have multiple states, multiple numbers of particles be able to occupy every
state. So if you have a full quantum description of a theory, you need an infinite-dimensional
geometry to do it.
Well, I always thought your goal was to take a finite object and then take waves
on that finite object to create something that was going to be infinite-dimensional.
I didn't see that as being its problem.
But that's not good enough.
Say more?
Because just when you talk about waves on a geometric object,
those act as different representations mathematically, because of the Peter Weill
theorem. But when you do that, that's not enough to give you all the structure you need
for quantum field theory. You really need a fundamentally infinite-dimensional geometric
object to describe quantum field theory. And by looking at what sort of objects you need
that include exceptional E groups, but are infinite-dimensional geometries that can
correspond to quantum field theory, that's how you tackle the three problems you've
discussed. You can have more space to handle the three generations of particles.
You can have the anti-commuting fermions in them so that they behave like fermions should,
like matter particles should. And it's also large enough to give you the dynamics you
need for quantum field theory. So that's why I've, in the intervening 10 years since we've
had a deep discussion about this, I've now started looking at generalized infinite-dimensional
geometries, which are infinite-dimensional generalizations of league groups, which solve
these problems. And that's why I've been working. You really believe that you've solved these problems?
I think I have a really good description that goes a long way. Here's the thing,
if I just think about where we are with the standard model, you've got four dimensions of
space and time, right? Then you've got an extra eight dimensions coming from something called SU
3, three dimensions from something called SU 2, and one extra dimension coming from something
called U 1. That's the basic data that occurs. And gravity. You could put in six dimensions
for something called spin 3 1. But the point is I can add those all up, and I'm going to get
some number probably in 20-some odd dimensions, whatever. That finite thing
generates the infinite-dimensional world of quantum field theory.
Well, wait a minute. But quantum field theory, we have a way of mapping between
those, the base geometry, and then going to quantum field theory, right? And then you have
Fox base, right? And you have occupation numbers for all the different possible states.
You're right. My point is you're working on a problem that has certain foreseeable problems
as part of the challenge. And unlike your detractors from the more standard community,
I'm not telling you that you're dead on arrival just because certain problems can be seen. That
would be unfair. And by the way, there are lots of problems that can be seen from the
string theory community where, let's say, the number of dimensions it wants to play in doesn't
seem to be the right number, or they thought there were only a finite number of theories.
It turns out that there's a continuum of theories, etc.
Or the vast majority come out with...
Right. And I get very irritated that somehow the string theory community
is entitled to make all these mistakes. And anybody outside, if they say one wrong thing,
or one seemingly wrong thing, they're excommunicated. It's a ridiculous standard.
Okay. That's not what I'm trying to do to you. I'm trying to say something very different,
which is you're going to be up against the fact that if your initial data comes from this most
beautiful and most bizarre of all objects, E8, it doesn't contain...
As I said, I'm now working on its generalizations to infinite dimensions.
But there's an issue of intellectual checkkiting. I don't mind the idea that you recognize the
debts that you're in. And then you say, I think I have a way of getting this thing to close off.
But there is a question of, well, now that you've recognized, am I right?
Am I right that the issues that I raised with you initially
turned out to be really serious problem? Of course. I mean, and...
But you didn't know that back then? Yeah, I did. They were in the paper.
They were in the original paper saying that the description of three generations was very
hand-wavy and unsatisfactory. That's in the original paper.
Okay. My recollection was that when I tried to explain to you why
people were going to have the objection about the two different quantization schemes,
that that was not handled correctly. Right. Well, I handled that in a paper in 2010 or so.
Okay. So that was cosmology.
All right. That was one of the issues. Then there's going to be an issue that you weren't
able to bring the left-right asymmetry out of the initial data. There wasn't enough.
And that was a fair description. Absolutely.
Okay. And then you're saying that the... I ceded to you that you were making a connection
between the mysterious appearance of three copies of matter and something called triality,
which was not manifest, obviously, inside of E8. But to the few people who actually care about
this structure, it definitely is there in a very profound way.
It relates to rotations in eight-dimensional spaces.
Yes. But you also haven't taken an interest in what is E8, if not,
the wellspring for the source code of the universe. Like, if it isn't the universe...
I think it's a piece of it, but I'm not religious, Eric. I mean, I'm going to explore whatever seems
most promising to explore. Okay. Well, have you changed your sense of the status of E8 as a candidate
for the unified theory in the fashion that you were originally seeing?
Absolutely. You have changed your... Yes.
Can you talk about that? Right. So, it was in tackling quantum field theory
and how to describe it geometrically, which, as far as I know, nobody is done. I mean, whenever
you start with, as you say, you want an SU2, SU3, and you go through this quantization
procedure for its fields, you get a quantum field theory. Or if you're dealing with strings,
you have this model of vibrating strings in higher dimensions, then you go through this
quantization procedure to get a quantum theory of strings. We physicists have this
toolkit for quantizing things, but that's utterly the wrong way to look at reality.
If the universe is just one thing, which it is, then it's one mathematical object.
I mean, you're making a point that is very well understood, I believe, in the standard
theoretical physics community, which is that if the world starts off as quantum, you should talk
about classicalizing pieces of it rather than quantitizing the classical pieces that appear
to exist. Yeah, that's exactly right. So, what's a quantum geometric object look like?
It's, you know, with all these infinite dimensional fox space and the creation and
annihilation of elementary particles possible. People at home won't know what a fox space is.
A fox space is effectively where the states of the system can live when you have multiple
particles in a situation and you can change the number of particles that you have just the way
a photon can break into an electron and a positron pair. That would be possible in a fox
space, not possible in a simpler quantum system. So, effectively, a fox space is just a large
place to play where the number of particles in the system can change. Up to infinity.
Keep going. So, in order to describe this as one geometric object, you're stuck with a generalized
league group, infinite dimensional generalized league group. Yes. And in order to describe spinners,
it's going to be an exceptional generalized league group.
Yeah, I don't think, I don't think you're adding anything. I think that the problem here is that
E8 is an exceptionally beautiful, exceptionally interesting object. It did have the properties
that you were talking about and that it unifies standard symmetries with these spinners to form
new symmetries. That's right. But it's inadequate. What? It's not only inadequate. It would push them
into a universe of pure force rather than a universe divided between force and matter.
You're actually, the problem is, is the kind of unification it would create
would be completely force unification with an absence of matter. You'd be dragging
matter, if you will, spinners. You're focusing on a problem that was, you know, that was solved
in a paper in 2010. But it's very simply that fermions are orthogonal to spacetime, whereas,
you know, the force fields, the boson fields are a long spacetime.
But the same way the, the same way if you have two force fields that are a long spacetime but
in different directions, they would anticommute, right? So what you're doing is you're using spacetime,
if you will, which is again, kind of a classical Einsteinian concept, to break apart a unified
system, which was the intention in unification to begin with. And then you're going to try to treat
these two things naturally according to two totally different prescriptions. That's, you're
violating, I mean, in some sense, any kind of naturality that you just picked up in the unification
to begin with. In a sense, yeah, but the symmetry has to break somehow.
Does it do it in a natural, I mean, this doesn't feel, this feels like a push.
Probably not. It allows it. It doesn't seem completely natural, but it does allow it.
Well, but the whole point of the thing I thought was to take the naturality and what we had understood
about the nature of these exceptional objects and to say, hey, these things actually unify
beautifully inside of these very unusual, elegant mathematical structures.
They do, but it was too small. As you said, it was too small because it didn't correctly
contain three generations of matter and because it can't correctly portray quantum field theory.
But once you go to the larger generalized league groups, it can't.
Well, you know, if this was a startup, what you're saying is that the business is going great,
but it's just run out of money and I need a fresh infusion of cash. No, I'm not kidding.
This is sounding like an intellectual check, Heidi.
It's round B funding.
Series B. I see. Is it cash flow positive?
Not yet. I mean, put the paper out yet.
Okay. So there's, I mean, I look, it's not a question that I need to see the paper or that
you're not allowed to take out more loans, but are you getting more? I mean, I know you to be,
look, I hate to say this, but I have defended you to the regular community with some frequency
because I have viewed you as an honest broker for your own stuff. I don't think you're trying
to get away with something. I think what you're trying to do is you're trying to say,
I need to take some advances, which I think, and I hope I can pay back, which I think is an
admirable and honorable way to do physics. Are you worried about your own theory?
Are you worried that you're going to infinite dimensions in the way that you've been forced
to modify on several previous occasions? And then in fact, this is not going to close.
I am unusually confident that I'm on the right track with this one.
Really? Yeah.
There are too many things matching up in the right way.
This doesn't sound good, Garrett. I gotta be honest with you.
But you see, I will put a paper out. And people may not find it interesting,
or they might find it really interesting. Well, I wish you the best of luck, but I have to tell
you that I do think that the problems in this program, I mean, again, I should just be honest
about it. I thought that the choice of E8 was so natural that they're really one of two choices
that I can see as being the way to go if you're going to avoid the usual
paths in research into fundamental physics. One is that you start with the most beautiful,
intricate object you can find, and then you find the intricacies of the natural world somehow living
inside of the intricacies which occurred naturally. That would be the E8.
That's the top-down view, and it's quite nice to look at it that way.
The bottom-up view is that somehow you start with something that's practically lifeless,
which I've analogized to a fertilized egg, and somehow it bootstraps itself into this weird,
intricate, and baroque world that we find ourselves in, and the universe auto-catalyzes
from almost nothing. These are the two basic approaches that I can imagine that would
not strain the concept of a theory of everything.
Right. Well, then we both engage in both of these, but once you've used this bottom-up approach,
starting with your fertilized egg and getting up into more and more complexity,
then you start to see a complete object after you've expanded it out.
Sorry. You view yourself as exploring the concept of...
Going from the bottom up.
What is it that you've done that has that character?
Starting from gravity and particle physics, and how they can be matched up together
in a way that brings spinners about natural.
Okay. That's not very simple at all.
Well, I know.
Gravity is already... You're talking about curvature of a space-time manifold.
Oh, it's beautiful stuff, though. I love it.
No, it's absolutely gorgeous. I don't think we're divided by that.
But when it comes to breaking up this object called the curvature tensor
into three different pieces, throwing one of them away called the vial curvature,
and then fine-tuning the other two to be equal to the matter and energy in the universe,
there's a lot of stuff that's going into that story that isn't...
And that's an intricate story. And then the other story is even worse and weirder.
So, you're smuggling in a ton of complexity. When I say fertilized egg,
I'm thinking at the level of cytology, but at the level of the actual DNA, that's incredibly rich.
Maybe it's a bad analogy because it's not bootstrapping itself out of nothing.
You're smuggling in a ton of intricacy.
But you have to look in both directions. You have to look from the bottom up,
and then once you can see the larger picture, then you have to look again from the top down.
And if going that way from the top down doesn't match up very well with what you did to get there,
then you have to go further and see if you can get a different bigger picture.
It's the only way forward.
Yeah, but I mean, to be honest, I feel like something has run into a wall
and there's the sense that how could this beautiful structure not be right?
It doesn't feel to me like...
It's insufficient.
Yeah.
Yeah. But there are larger structures that are not finite dimensional,
but there are still leagroups and exceptional leagroups.
They're just generalized infinite dimensional leagroups that contain E8 as a substructure.
