Balancing Bone and Blood: A Look at Conflicting Forces in Decision-Making

Conversation with Gemini

User

 Sabiens
Upgrade


Read in the Substack app
Open app
Blood and Bone
Or, The Control Problem In Humans

DUNCAN SABIEN
24 FEB 2024

7




9



Preamble
This essay wants to do two things.
Convince you that a problem you (likely) think is small or trivial is in fact much more important than it (probably) feels to you.
Convince you that you are (probably) knee-jerk defaulting to one of two opposite ways of thinking about or addressing this problem each time it comes up, and that you should seriously think about the other way, which you (probably) unfairly dismiss.
… except that’s not really what this essay wants to do; really this essay is a sort of proto-naturalistic look at a section of reality that tends to cause people problems where 1 and 2 are relevant. The problems are a way to sort of draw your attention, to guide your eyes toward the place where the interesting stuff lives, and what I really want us to do is thoroughly understand that stuff (at which point I suspect the problems will just sort of stop happening on their own, the way that kids largely stop stumbling as they build up a more thorough understanding of everything involved in walking).
… except that the operative word there is “proto” because I don’t have a thorough or mature understanding of what’s going on here myself, and I’m also not a very good naturalist. I am not a qualified tour guide, and thus my primary route to helping other people get their eyes on is something like “smashing opposing preconceptions against each other until they both break and you’re left with confusion and uncertainty.” It seems to me that there is a partisan split, in this domain—two broad strategies, two different philosophies, two equal and opposite ways of being—and many people have more-or-less taken one side so thoroughly that they’ve never actually seriously considered whether there might be any merit in the other.
(You are likely substantially partisan! The virtues of the other perspective are easy to miss, because both sides are equipped with weapons-grade memetics for mocking and delegitimizing and strawmanning the other; you can grow up in one cluster and fall in with like-minded people as an adult and basically never hear a single good thing about the other way of being from a source you’re inclined to take seriously.)
I’m sorry. I know this is not particularly grounded yet. I know you have no idea what I’m talking about. I’ll start making more sense when we get out of the preamble and into the amble proper.
But I sort of like the idea of showing you that I’m struggling, here. Letting you feel an echo of the flailing confusion. This essay has (surprisingly) proven to be one of the toughest to write in the past five years, even though I’ve taught the content at least a dozen times.
That’s because I’m in the state that exists prior to actual understanding. I can’t tell you what this is. I can’t tell you what it’s for. All I can tell you is that all of my intuitions, honed across a lifetime of thinking about this stuff, are telling me there’s something really important here. Something that matters.

An ice cube that is a meter on a side will melt very slowly. A sheet of ice that is one meter wide, one hundred meters long, and one centimeter thick contains the same total volume of ice, but will melt much, much faster.
The reason it melts faster is that it has greater surface area. Melting happens at the point where the warm air can deliver heat to the cold ice—for the cube, this can only happen across a grand total of six square meters (or five if you don’t count the ground), and the rest of the ice is tucked away next to other ice.
For the sheet, there are over a hundred square meters for the warm air to work its infernal magic.
When I worked as an instructor at the Center for Applied Rationality, we often used the metaphor “opening up more surface area on X.” The idea being that, if you had some sort of intractable problem or deep-seated confusion, it was often better not to try to drive straight toward a solution, but rather to aim at being able to see and touch and understand and interact with more of the stuff of whatever was happening.
Sometimes, new surface area would lend itself to clever solutions. Sometimes, it would change our understanding of what the problem even was. Sometimes, it wouldn’t seem to do much at all, but a year or two later it would unlock some other revelation, like how the work of Lobachevsky and Bolyai and Gauss on non-Euclidean geometry was thought to be an idle mathematical curiosity until it suddenly proved crucial to understanding the behavior of spacetime.
(It should come as no surprise that this phase of CFAR was heavily influenced by the same person who would later develop naturalism, and who is now my spouse and the biggest influence on my own rationality development.)
When I’ve taught this content at workshops and conferences, the simple act of causing people to consider the (still-not-yet-defined) conflict, and take seriously the (still-as-yet-unspecified) two sides, has opened up a bunch of surface area for many of them. It’s caused people to do things like:
Be less frustrated with their friends and family members and partners and colleagues whose behavior previously baffled and confused them
Gain more resolution on their own internal conflicts, and gain some empathy and respect for their own inner underdog (as opposed to just thinking of their less-favorite parts of themselves as stupid or bad or incorrigible)
Realize that there are vast swathes of valid action-space that they’ve never sampled
Realize that problems they thought were about one thing were actually just offshoots of a much deeper issue (and that’s why they kept sprouting over and over again)
I dunno. That list sounds a little bit like I’m trying to hype up some Big Useful Insight or something, and again: I am not. All I have to offer here is confusion and fragments. But I think that confusion and those fragments are better than a façade. I think that most of the people I encounter are doing something half-fake in this domain, and this essay is about tearing down the stage dressing and finding out what’s behind it.
Epistemic status: what the actual fuck, though?


The Control Problem In Humans
Here’s the issue at the center of all of this, the initial grain of sand in the oyster:
Sometimes, on Monday, I will form an intention to do X on Thursday.
But then on Thursday, I do not want to do X.
“…wait,” I imagine you thinking. “That’s it?”
A part of why this essay has been hard to write is that I feel daunted by something like being able to convince people that this is important. My mental model of most people reacts to this the same way that medieval peasants would react to someone claiming that handwashing is a big deal—somewhere between bafflement and outright disagreement.
“I don’t get the dilemma. Situations like this are easy, you just—”
Ah-HA!
There it is—that’s the thing.
You just.
Most people (in my experience) already have an answer to this problem, and that answer is reflexive, and feels obvious, and atomic, and not in need of justification and defense, and they somehow don’t seem to be fazed by the fact that other people think that the exact opposite thing is self-evidently correct.
I think a lot of people are casual about this question. I think a lot of people gloss over this decision. I think a lot of people just sort of do whatever, and adjust on the fly based on whether or not it’s working, and they don’t put in any more thought than they’re forced to.
But the choice of whether to follow through on X or not—it feels momentous to me. It feels like something that’s dangerous to not have settled policy around.
(Especially because sometimes “Monday” and “Thursday” are years apart and “X” is something like “finish a dissertation” or “stay married to my spouse.” And in optimistic futures where humans get to live for thousands of years or have substantially larger power over the planets and the stars, little things like this start to add up, and it feels important to have some degree of control, or at least foreknowledge, of where it’s all headed.)
It seems to me that there are two mutually exclusive general approaches to this and related questions, and that’s what this essay is about. There’s a philosophical cluster around “do X anyway, as originally planned,” and there’s another cluster around “don’t do X.”
I’m calling the “do X” cluster bone, in line with the idea of structure and its overlap with white from the MTG color wheel. Bone is solid, firm, and unchanging. Bone says stick to the plan.
I’m calling the “don’t do X” cluster blood, in line with the idea of fluidity and flexibility and its overlap with MTG red. Blood is vibrant, warm, and unpredictable. Blood says follow your heart.


It feels important to be clear that there isn’t really a middle ground, here. I know lots of people who have built their whole personalities around breaking dichotomies and finding third paths, but sometimes you really do have to either go left or right, and there’s not any way to soften the choice. Yes, for some specific Xs there are ways to make not-doing-it look more like doing it (you can apologize and pay a penalty, or reschedule it for later, or do some easy or important piece of it while abandoning the rest), and vice versa.
But in general, there’s not a reliable way to do both at once. Many of the times that a problem of this form arises, you have to pick one or the other.
And it’s that question—how do I know which one to pick, under which circumstances?—that I want to answer, and for which this whole essay is something like preliminary information gathering. I have never yet met someone whose reasons for choosing when to go blood and when to go bone felt sound, to me. Felt solid and grounded and reasonable and sane. It always feels more-or-less arbitrary and capricious, and that leaves me uneasy.


Other questions to prime the pump
How can I become more of the person that I’m trying to be?
How do I know what sort of person I should try to be? Is there a “should” here at all?
If I were given a thousand years, would I like the person that I grew into? Should the liking or disliking of present-me matter to future-me?
Why is it that I often do the wrong thing, according to my values? Why is it that I often do not do the things I want to do?
Do I have the right to make choices on behalf of my future self? Do I owe allegiance to my past self?
How can I trust that future-me will follow through on the things that present-me starts? How can I accomplish things that require years or decades of sustained effort? (Why bother embarking on a PhD if future-me might just quit halfway through?)
How can I escape the cages that past-me built and put me in, that don’t fit? (How can I tell my advisor, my colleagues, my family, that I’m quitting this stupid fucking PhD program?)
Is it possible to have principles at all?
Is it good to have principles at all?
What even are principles?
I think that the way people answer any one of these questions is strongly predictive of the way they will answer the others. What follows is going to be half a dozen different looks at what (I claim) is the same dichotomy, expressing itself in different domains. There are two forces at work, here—two different shoulder advisors whispering into opposite ears.
(Not really, I don’t think. But there do seem to be clusters, associations—I think I consistently see one set of arrows coming in from the west, and another set coming in from the east, and not many that seem to be coming in from the north or the south. This essay is going to try to triangulate two different clusters by gesturing toward them again and again from different vantage points.)


MTG Red vs MTG White
In Magic: the Gathering, there are five colors of magic, each associated with a different perspective.
Red magic is based in the desire for freedom, and red mages try to achieve that freedom through action—through the breaking of bonds and the seeking of new horizons.
White magic is based in the desire for peace, and white mages try to achieve that peace through the imposition of order—through the making of commitments, the creation of hierarchies, the sacrifice of time, effort, and options.
Where white sees scaffolds, red sees cages. Red looks at white and sees constraint, confinement, a sort of cut-off pointlessness, death by cubicle. White looks at red and sees chaos, disruption, unreliability.
To white, red is a force that erodes and wears away at everything we try to build. To red, white is a force that smothers and strangles the life out of everything.
Red would say that you owe nothing to your past self and have no claims on your future self (white would say the opposite).
White would say that there are definitely “shoulds” about what sort of person you’re trying to be, and indeed that shoulds are one of the most important tools for guiding your evolution (red would disagree).
It seems pretty clear to me that you need both, in order to be anything like a healthy person.
And it seems pretty clear to me that each really, truly, fundamentally wants to destroy the other. I think that they are actually inimical, not just kind of incompatible. I think people manage to get them down to just vaguely incompatible by kind of not-really-committing to either. Watered-down red and watered-down white can coexist because neither can be arsed to extinguish the other.
But I don’t like that solution. I don’t want half-hearted blood and half-hearted bone—I want the full, powerful version of each, the best virtues of Superman and the best virtues of Toph Beifong. I want to figure out how to have blood and bone productively co-exist and bolster each other.
(This whole essay is me taking a bone-centric approach, by the way, if that wasn’t already clear; in many ways my character arc over the last few seasons was learning how to respect and admire and validate blood, from bone’s perspective. If someone can successfully write the blood-centric version of this essay, that makes bone comprehensible to blood, I will give them five hundred dollars.)


Diachronic vs. Episodic
I touched on these two terms a little bit in a recent essay. They were coined as opposite ends of a spectrum by Galen Strawson in a paper called Against Narrativity in 2004; in that paper, Strawson (an episodic) was essentially screaming at “a wide variety of disciplines including philosophy, psychology, theology, anthropology, sociology, political theory, literary studies, religious studies, psychotherapy and even medicine” that maybe it would be nice if they didn’t frame every theory and paper and paradigm as if it were completely obvious that every single human is diachronic. “It’s just not true that there is only one good way for human beings to experience their being in time. There are deeply non-Narrative people and there are good ways to live that are deeply non-Narrative.”
(#EpisodicsExist)
The short version: diachronics tend to see themselves as existing within a narrative, moving from beginning to middle to end and experiencing a substantial degree of continuity across time. There’s a character that is you, and you grow and change, and the you at the end of the story is the you at the beginning plus that growth and change.
Episodics, in contrast, do not have this native feeling of being embedded in a continuous narrative. A highly episodic person is just … present. They are themselves, there, that day, with no particularly strong connection to their past or future selves. While an episodic person may very well have a sharp memory and be perfectly capable of recalling some embarrassing thing that they said in seventh grade, that memory won’t keep them up at night. It won’t really hit them, because in a very real sense, the person who said that embarrassing thing isn’t them. Too much change has happened in the interim; they do not identify with that distant awkward middle schooler.
“If I were given a thousand years, would I like the person that I grew into? Should the liking or disliking of present-me matter to future-me?”
A die-hard episodic would say something like “it shouldn’t matter in the slightest. The past and future aren’t actually real in the same way that the present is; all you have is now.”
A die-hard diachronic would say something like “it’s basically all that matters. If you can’t count on your past and future selves, you don’t exist beyond this fleeting, ephemeral moment.”
I am painting with a very broad brush, here, but:
The virtue of episodicity is one of lightness and freedom. Episodics can change the plan, and they don’t have to make the change consistent with anything. Episodics can reinvent. Episodics can learn. Episodics are not afraid to grow, even if it means outgrowing.
This is the virtue of blood.
The virtue of diachronicity is in steadiness, dependability, longevity of vision and execution. Diachronics can want something on Monday and, if they wake up on Friday no longer wanting it, at least be moved by the fact that they previously wanted it. Diachronics can plan. Diachronics can build. Diachronics are able to reach places that you can only reach if you make the same choice the same way ten thousand times in a row, fickle mood be damned.
This is the virtue of bone.
The vice of episodicity is flightiness. Inconstancy. Unreliability. Episodics can betray their past selves, betray their commitments, shrug their shoulders and just move on, carefree, leaving wreckage in their wake. If an episodic accomplishes something on the scale of decades, it’s largely through luck, because the more episodic one is, the less power one has to meaningfully bind their future self.
The vice of diachronicity is inflexibility. Unchangeability. Dug-in heels. Diachronics can refuse to change course, can be unwilling to let go, can drag their past around like an anchor. If a diachronic can’t see a way to make a new thing fit with the story, they will often reject it outright.
(Again, painting with a very broad brush. Let’s not pretend that no diachronics can be spontaneous and that no episodics can be dedicated. I’m talking about stereotypes, and about the center of the bell curve of each.)
But it seems clear to me that it’s not good to be a naive diachronic or a naive episodic. And it seems clear to me that you can’t really be both. You can be mildly each, like a person who has broad “chapters” in their life with a few, rare clean breaks, but that doesn’t seem to me to give you the full superpowers of either.


Context vs. Perspective
The you-on-Monday (who said they’d do X on Thursday) knew something that the you-on-Thursday (who doesn’t want to do X) doesn’t, or is deprioritizing, or can’t access, or something.
Similarly, the you-on-Thursday knows something the you-on-Monday did not (else you probably wouldn’t’ve formed the intention to do X in the first place).
In my experience, partisans of blood like to pretend that the you-on-Thursday is in possession of strictly superior knowledge—you’ve gathered more information, you literally Know More Things…how could you not be wiser than you-on-Monday?
But they’re discounting the fact that not all information is equal, and that some information can inaptly fill one’s vision. It’s possible to be distracted or confused, to overweight things that are close, to lose track of the bigger picture.
What you-on-Monday possessed, in the ideal, was perspective. You were looking out at the future from a high and non-pressured position, considering all of the angles, and making a plan that took into account all of the important variables.
What you-on-Thursday possess, in the ideal, is context. You’re down in the trenches, with your finger on the pulse. You are present and aware and embedded.
(“Why is it that I often do the wrong thing, according to my values?” Blood would say it’s because you’re still allowing the dead ghosts of your past boss you around; bone would say it’s because you’re letting your heart drag you all over the place with nothing to keep it in check.)
Perspective and context do not necessarily trade off; there’s nothing that says they have to conflict. But they often do conflict, in practice. Sometimes I set out with the intention of running for twenty minutes, and five minutes in it sucks, and I just stop, and ten minutes after that I’m like ah geez I totally could have kept running.
A colleague of mine solved a similar issue (disagreements between their night self and their morning self about the value of staying up an extra hour) by sort of increasing the bandwidth of communication between them—when their alarm went off suggesting bed, they paused to make an explicit prediction about how their morning self would feel if they stayed up late, and then (if they stayed up late) they checked that prediction, and pretty soon their night self was able to accurately model their morning self and they stopped having the experience of self-betrayal and regret.
This is great, for situations where you have the ability to build that kind of feedback loop. It’s not so great if you’re trying to decide whether or not to marry this guy, when you have no reference experiences for what the tenth year of a marriage is like, and how it looks different based on different attributes of today.


Prophets vs. Kings
Sort of relatedly:
Some people (prophets) predict the future by knowing the future. They can see which way the winds are blowing, and can extrapolate from that; they know the future without doing anything to the future.
Other people (kings) predict the future by causing it. They can see which outcomes are most desirable, and take actions toward those ends. A sufficiently powerful king can cause a “prediction” to come true by pure edict, knowing nothing at all about the present state of affairs or what sorts of things are likely or possible.
“I will use my kingship to cause this to happen” is a very different sort of claim from “this is what will occur naturally, if reality just keeps on being reality.”
Most people (in my experience) lean pretty heavily toward one or the other in predicting their own futures. Some people will say “oh gosh, I have no idea how I’m going to feel on Thursday, so if you need an RSVP right now it’s gotta be no. But if I can check in with you at noon, that’d be great!”
Other people will decide whether it’s a good idea to go or not, and more-or-less lock themselves in.
It seems like both of these skills are really really good! It would be nice to not only possess each, but also know when and how to use each. When to wear my crown, and when to wear my…
(What do prophets wear? Is it … rags?)


Updateless vs. Updating
I am not an expert in decision theory. I am not even a novice or an initiate in decision theory. I’m the guy changing trash bags and delivering mail while the decision theorists talk in front of the whiteboard, overhearing snippets here and there.
But some decision theories tell you to update upon learning new information. You find yourself in a room with a genie who’s telling you to choose between taking [just the mystery box] or taking [both the mystery box and the box that visibly contains $10000] and certain classical decision theories hold that you’re already in the room, the boxes already have money or not, clearly you should take both boxes.
(This is blood, whispering in your ear.)
Other decision theories are updateless, in that (as I understand it) they recommend trying to make decisions according to principles that feel sound both before and after you encounter the information. To not have new information change your plan, in other words, so much as (maybe) changing which actions you take within a consistent plan.
Updating decision theories feel seat-of-the-pants, to me, and scarily so (but then, I would say that, wouldn’t I? I’m built out of bone.)
Updateless decision theories are maybe not very well-named, but the idea at the core of them—react consistently and principled-ly regardless of which branch of possibility you find yourself in—that appeals to me quite a lot.
I sort of struggle to steelman the other side, in this case, but maybe there’s something like … if bullies and tyrants can use their foreknowledge of how you will react to prod you into behavior that will ultimately undermine you, then in this case consistency and predictability and reasoned-ness can be a weakness?
"This folly does not become you, Lucius," said the boy. "Twelve-year-old girls do not go around committing murders. You are a Slytherin and an intelligent one. You know this is a plot. Hermione Granger was placed on this gameboard by force, by whatever hand lies behind that plot. You were surely intended to act just as you are acting now—except that Draco Malfoy was meant to be dead, and you were meant to be beyond all reason. But he is alive and you are sane. Why are you cooperating with your intended role, in a plot meant to take the life of your son?"
…but I guess I will at least grant that you can’t always pragmatically have a fork in your plan that says “unless this very principle is what the Joker is trying to take advantage of, in which case I will ignore it just this once.” I think you often can, but I agree you can’t always.
In lieu of mature understanding, I’ll leave a few more words from an actual decision theorist, in the hopes that it will cause at least one reader to go digging further, to their benefit:
Updatelessness is, indeed, exactly that sort of thinking which prevents you from being harmed by information, because your updateless exposure to information doesn't cause you to lose coordination with your counterfactual other selves or exhibit dynamic inconsistency with your past self.
From an updateless standpoint, "learning" is just the process of reacting to new information the way your past self would want you to do in that branch of possibility-space; you should never need to remain ignorant of anything. Maybe that involves not doing the thing that would then be optimal when considering only the branch of reality you turned out to be inside, but the updateless mind denies that this was ever the principle of rational choice, and so feels no need to stay ignorant in order to maintain dynamic consistency.


Coherent vs. Authentic
By this point, you might be feeling a bit grumpy at me, for how floundering and skipping-around this all is.
I apologize, but that is rather the point. Sorry. I’m trying to pinpoint an object by shining lasers at it from multiple angles, except all I’ve actually got are candles and I’m not even completely sure there’s an object to be triangulated.
Which is a surprisingly reasonable segue into the conflict between coherence and authenticity.
Coherence (bone) says that you should try to be kinda sorta vaguely the same sort of entity across contexts and interactions, and that where you fail to actually be the same, you should put forth a little extra effort into at least acting the same. Sure, you can grow and evolve and shift, but you should make those shifts smooth and gradual, so there aren’t any startling swerves.
Authenticity (blood) says fuck that noise, pretending to be someone you aren’t is precisely how you trick people into believing that you’re someone you aren’t, and then they’ll treat you as if you are that person, and that’ll be uncomfortable for you.
Coherence points out that this is a bit of an oversimplification, what if you were totally honest at the outset and they formed completely reasonable and accurate ideas about you, only now things have shifted a little bit, maybe don’t give people whiplash if you can absorb some small costs to prevent it?
Authenticity retorts fuck that, too; if you’re the kind of person who’s going to change from time to time they need to know that, too; smoothing over jaggedness that’s actually there is still deception and will still give people the wrong idea.
Coherence turns to the moderator for help, feeling strawmanned; it wasn’t talking about deceiving people, just about the allocation of costs when there’s a clash between model and reality; you can do something other than make it 100% their problem—
But authenticity is already quoting Emerson and it’s a mic drop.
The voyage of the best ship is a zigzag line of a hundred tacks. See the line from a sufficient distance, and it straightens itself to the average tendency. Your genuine action will explain itself, and will explain your other genuine actions. Your conformity explains nothing. Act singly, and what you have already done singly will justify you now.
(I feel an oddly deep resonance with this quote, and always have, given how hard it’s been for me to learn to embrace blood.)


Explore vs. Exploit
If you find yourself on a slope, and your goal is to get to the highest possible point, it’s not always correct to go uphill. It could be that the slope you’re on is that of a very modest mountain, and that you will just have to climb all the way back down and start all over again.
Exploring is sampling many hills, looking for those that seem promising.
Exploiting is climbing uphill, period.
(There are other metaphors, but this is a decent one to start with.)
Dating a new person is exploring; deepening a preexisting relationship is exploiting.
Founding a startup is exploring; joining a Fortune 500 company is exploiting.
Both blood and bone acknowledge that you need some amount of exploration, at least at the population level; if no one is out there looking for the next big thing, then society as a whole will never get the next big thing.
Blood and bone disagree about exploiting, though. Bone says it’s good and noble to exploit; that in fact most of the Next Big Things only really started to fulfill their potential after multiple rounds of refinement; that you only get masters if people are willing to put in the legwork.
Blood says yeah, sure, that’s all well and good, so long as the people involved are something like intrinsically motivated in it.
If bone were given command of a thousand people, bone would assign most of them to exploiting.
If blood were given command of a thousand people, it would probably reject the whole exercise, “command” being anathema in the first place, but if it had no choice, it would hold its nose and tell them all to do what they felt like, and it would probably encourage most of them to explore, off of a reasonable prior that very few people explore as much as they could/should/could afford to/would benefit from.
(The first time I planned to move away from my home state, a colleague who could obviously smell my nervous terror took me aside and said “look, Duncan—I’ve moved to a new city five times in my life, and every time it’s ended up being a huge eye-opener and a change for the better, even given all the stress and anxiety.” Nothing helps you see the limitations of the hill you were previously climbing like hopping over to a completely different hill.)
But okay, sure: most people should maybe explore more (citation needed), but how do I know when I should? How do I know when I should stop, and settle in for the long haul?
(There is in fact a branch of mathematics pointed squarely at small, well-defined instances of this particular question, but even there the best they can do is give probabilistic answers.)


Discovery vs. Fulfillment
Closely related to the above:
Bone says that you should spend some time finding out who you are, and then do it on purpose, possibly with the occasional revisit to make sure.
Blood says “wym?? You’re discovering who you are at all times, up to and including today? It never stops? How could it??”


Length vs. Distance
(Please forgive the slapdash graphics; I have lost twelve pounds in three days due to illness brought home by the baby.)


Bone has a plan, or at least a direction. Bone throws up guard rails whenever things start getting weird, forcing itself back on track.
This essay is about a struggle between two opposing forces in human decision-making: bone and blood.

Bone represents structure, stability, and following through on commitments. It's associated with white magic in Magic: the Gathering and diachronic perspectives that see life as a continuous narrative. Bone emphasizes principles, planning, and updateless decision-making (sticking to your original plan even if you learn new information).

Blood represents fluidity, flexibility, and responding to the present moment. It's associated with red magic in Magic: the Gathering and episodic perspectives that see life as a series of disconnected moments. Blood emphasizes authenticity, following your heart, and updateable decision-making (changing your plan based on new information).

The essay argues that both bone and blood are important, and that the ideal state is to be able to use both effectively depending on the situation. However, this is difficult because bone and blood often seem to be in conflict.

The essay explores this conflict through various examples, including:

Monday vs. Thursday: The dilemma of making a plan on Monday to do something on Thursday, but then not wanting to do it when Thursday arrives.
Episodic vs. Diachronic: The difference between people who see themselves as existing in a narrative (diachronic) and those who experience life as a series of disconnected moments (episodic).
Context vs. Perspective: The idea that the information you have on Monday (perspective) is different from the information you have on Thursday (context), which can lead to conflicting decisions.
Prophets vs. Kings: Some people predict the future by passively observing trends (prophets), while others try to actively shape the future (kings).
Updateless vs. Updating: Whether to make decisions based on principles that remain consistent regardless of new information (updateless) or to update your decisions based on new information (updating).
Coherent vs. Authentic: The tension between maintaining consistency across situations (coherent) and being true to yourself in the moment (authentic).
The essay concludes by admitting that the author doesn't have a clear answer to how to best balance bone and blood, but hopes that by exploring the conflict, it will encourage readers to think more deeply about their own decision-making processes.


User

At the end of this journey, bone has helped this person go rather a long way in the endorsed, original direction!
￼
Blood does not have a plan. Blood has plans. Blood has seen a far wider swath of the territory than poor, constrained (castrated?) bone. And blood has covered a greater total distance, too, because it wasn’t fighting itself half the time. Sure, it ended up pretty near where it started, but who said we were supposed to be going somewhere? It’s about the journey, not the destination.
Now You’re Approximately As Confused As I Am
I had a few more potential section headings, but they all seemed too not-worth-the-wordspace, in the end. If you’re curious and want to do some Googling, the one that most closely failed to make the cut was “maker time vs. manager time.”
Claims, revisited (or possibly reinvented, by this point):
There really are two clusters here; two broad strategies that mostly go together and have similarly opposing answers, for similar reasons, to many questions.

Both of the clusters are good, actually?? Neither is without flaw; both can be done naively. But either on its own is clearly bad.

In most specific instances of “question,” you kinda gotta go with one or the other. You can’t (usually) both do and not-do X, on Thursday.

It would be nice to have, like, a real policy regarding when and why to do which.

(somewhat bolder) Nobody seems to actually have that policy.

(even bolder) Such a policy is possible.

(even bolder) Such a policy is possible without erasing the fundamental essence of blood.

(less bold; more confident) We should in fact go very far out of our way to avoid erasing the fundamental essence of blood, no matter how convenient it would be to bone.

(similarly confident) We should also not erase the fundamental essence of bone, no matter how happy that would make blood.

(very confident on priors) The more quickly and confidently someone is, as they claim to have the obvious solution to this whole mess, the less likely they are to actually have the obvious solution to this whole mess.

(reasonably confident) We should still hear them out anyway though.

(confused) Probably more confusion is a step in the right direction, here? In that one of the biggest problems seems to be people’s ingrained knee-jerk preconceptions, and loosening those seems like a first step to building anything on actually firm footing.

Oh no that was a bone thought, wasn’t it. God damn it.

 I really, genuinely hope this helps someone; the lecture version has helped people in the past but text is a wholly different medium. I’m sorry this took me so long, and I’m sorry that this is the state it’s in. There’ll be a more normal one next week.
(There really will be; I consider this kind of essay to be something I can get away with now and then but not what most of you come here for. Let me know in the comments if I’m wrong?)
But I also think that if this were more polished, more coherent, more sensible—if it left you feeling satisfied and fulfilled and like you’d just Definitely Learned A Specific Thing—
I think that effect would have been achieved at the expense of Truth, and would have been misleading and counterproductive in its own right. The state of the art here is an embarrassing mess; the essay reflects this with only a modest amount of shame.
Please send help.
Analysis of the Text on Balancing Bone and Blood
This text explores the tension between two decision-making styles:

Bone: Represents structure, stability, and following through on commitments.
Blood: Represents fluidity, flexibility, and responding to the present moment.
The author initially presents bone as having advantages, but later argues for the value and complexity of both approaches.

Key Points:

Both bone and blood have their strengths and weaknesses. Bone helps achieve long-term goals but can be rigid. Blood explores possibilities and adapts but lacks direction.
The "correct" approach is situational. There's no one-size-fits-all solution, and the best approach depends on the specific context.
There's no clear answer on how to balance bone and blood. We should avoid suppressing the essence of either despite their flaws.
Confusion can be a stepping stone. Exploring the complexity of the situation can pave the way for a more nuanced understanding.
The author acknowledges the messy and nuanced nature of the topic. They believe attempts to simplify might be misleading and counterproductive.
Overall, the text emphasizes the importance of:

Recognizing the value and limitations of both bone and blood.
Being adaptable and using different approaches based on the situation.
Embracing the complexity of decision-making and avoiding simplistic solutions.
Additional Notes:

The author uses humor and self-deprecating language to convey their ongoing struggle with this topic.
The text ends on an open note, inviting readers to engage in further exploration and discussion.
If you found this analysis helpful, feel free to ask further questions or discuss specific aspects of the text that you found particularly interesting or challenging.


User

So bone sounds to me like deontology, and blood, phenomenology.
There are interesting connections between the concepts presented in the text and the philosophical terms you mentioned:

Bone: You're right that bone shares some similarities with deontology. Both emphasize principles, structure, and following through on commitments, even if it clashes with present desires. Deontology argues for acting based on duty and universal moral principles, regardless of the specific context or consequences.
Blood: The connection to phenomenology is less direct, although there are some overlapping ideas. Phenomenology focuses on exploring subjective experience and understanding the world through our conscious encounters. Blood, in the text, emphasizes responding to the present moment and being true to oneself, which could be seen as aligning with the focus on individual experience in phenomenology. However, it's important to note that phenomenology doesn't necessarily advocate for abandoning all structure or principles, which differentiates it from the way "blood" is presented in the text.
It's important to remember that the text uses metaphorical language to discuss these concepts and doesn't directly map onto specific philosophical frameworks. While there are points of connection, the text focuses on highlighting the tension within individuals and the challenges of navigating different decision-making styles, rather than presenting a strict philosophical argument.


User

I associate phenomenology with living in the moment, which is an extended event involving the past and the future. Bone is just sticking with one's earlier choices and blood involves modifying or enacting them on the spot, or implementation. I'm sure if Duncan's argument is coherent or not.
You bring up some interesting points and highlight the complexities involved:

Phenomenology and Living-in-the-Moment: Your association of phenomenology with "living-in-the-moment", in the sense of an extended event with past and future considerations, is valid. Phenomenology examines our lived experiences as dynamic processes rather than isolated points in time. This contrasts slightly with the text's portrayal of "blood" as purely focused on the immediacy of the present.

Bone, Blood, and Implementation: Your observation about bone focusing on sticking with past choices and blood on adapting in the moment touches on the core struggle in the text. The balance between these, and when each is appropriate, is precisely what the author grapples with.

Coherence of Duncan's Argument: Whether Duncan's argument is entirely coherent remains open to interpretation. The text intentionally offers a messy and unresolved reflection. Its strength may lie more in prompting self-exploration about our decision-making styles rather than presenting a definitive philosophical system.

Some Questions to Consider:

How rigid is "bone" intended to be? Can it include a degree of reflection and adjustment based on past experience? Does it allow for any flexibility at all?

Can "blood" consider anticipated consequences?  Is it completely devoid of foresight, or is there some nuance in its responsiveness?

The text might purposely leave these distinctions somewhat blurred to reflect the real-life challenges of finding balance between these approaches.


User

He makes a point about giving 500 $ to someone who can explain something
Unfortunately, without more context about the specific "$500 challenge", it's difficult to say for certain what Duncan's point might be. Here are a couple of possible scenarios and interpretations:

Possible Scenarios

Challenge to Skeptics: Duncan could be offering $500 to anyone who can definitively prove or disprove a particular concept (related to the topic of bone vs. blood or decision-making frameworks).  This scenario highlights a potential belief that there is a clear answer to the complexities being discussed.

Call for Help:  Duncan might be seeking assistance in better understanding and articulating his own ideas. The $500 could be an incentive to someone who could help him untangle his thoughts and create a more formalized, coherent argument.

Interpretations

Regardless of the scenario, offering a monetary reward in this way introduces some interesting points for consideration:

The Value of Clarity: It suggests that Duncan might see a high value in finding a clear, well-defined explanation or theory - perhaps an indication of a stronger "bone" inclination.

Acknowledging Limitations: It could also reveal a degree of self-awareness about the limitations of his current argument and a willingness to seek external perspectives.

Motivation for Debate: The offer could be intended to spark discussion, challenge preconceptions, or even expose weaknesses in potential counterarguments.

Without more information on the specific context, it's difficult to provide a definitive answer on this $500 challenge. Would you be able to find and share the part of the text where this is mentioned? It could help shed more light on his intentions.


User

I think it was rhetorical. It was here: This whole essay is me taking a bone-centric approach, by the way, if that wasn’t already clear; in many ways my character arc over the last few seasons was learning how to respect and admire and validate blood, from bone’s perspective. If someone can successfully write the blood-centric version of this essay, that makes bone comprehensible to blood, I will give them five hundred dollars.)
Yes, you're right!  In that context, it seems like the $500 offer is primarily a rhetorical device rather than a literal offer. Here's why:

Emphasis on Difficulty: The challenge underlines the deep divide and struggle for understanding between the "bone" and "blood" approaches. It highlights that bridging this gap, explaining the value of "bone" from a purely "blood" perspective, is incredibly difficult.

Self-Awareness and Humor The offer adds a touch of humor and demonstrates Duncan's own understanding of the limitations in his communication. He's aware that he's writing from a very "bone" perspective and acknowledges that he might not be the best person to translate that for a "blood" mindset.

Potential for Collaboration: While primarily rhetorical, it could also be seen as a genuine (albeit somewhat hyperbolic) call for help and collaboration. Perhaps someone with a strong "blood" orientation could partner with him to create a more balanced and accessible approach.

Key Point: The statement, especially the offer of $500, primarily functions to emphasize the complexity of the topic and the difficulty in finding a singular, universally understandable perspective on balancing "bone" and "blood" in decision-making.


User

My criticism is that this is just a trait theory, he is asserting some kind of bundle of associations for each category or "cognitive style".  Do you think you can clearly articulate his main points?
You're right that the essay presents "bone" and "blood" as distinct categories linked to various associated characteristics, potentially falling into the realm of trait theory. However, instead of solely focusing on "what it is," it also delves into the challenges of navigating the tension between these two tendencies within individuals.

Here's a breakdown of Duncan's main points, attempting to move beyond just listing associated traits:

1. The Tension Between Two Decision-Making Styles:

He proposes two contrasting approaches to decision-making and life: bone (structure, staying true to plans) and blood (flexibility, adapting to the moment).
He argues that both are valuable and have their place depending on the situation, but can also conflict with each other.
2. The Difficulty of Finding Balance:

There's no universally "correct" approach. The ideal is to be able to flexibly switch between "bone" and "blood" depending on the context.
However, this flexibility is challenging to achieve. We often get stuck in one mode or struggle to understand the other.
3. The Importance of Avoiding Oversimplification:

Duncan acknowledges the complexity and messiness of the topic. He avoids presenting a neat, definitive theory and encourages exploration and discussion rather than seeking a single, easy answer.
4. Self-Awareness and the Limits of One's Perspective:

He openly admits his own bias towards "bone" and expresses a desire to better understand the "blood" perspective.
The $500 offer, while likely rhetorical, reflects this desire to bridge the gap between these seemingly opposing views.
While the essay does rely on associating characteristics with each category, its central argument goes beyond simply presenting them as fixed traits. It emphasizes the dynamic tension, challenges in balance, and importance of considering both perspectives in navigating everyday decisions.


User

There was a book on Deleuze's philosophy of time. An illustration was given of a squirrel hiding nuts, and the multiple overlapping times of the growth rates of the acorn, the tree, the ecological succession of pioneer species in the field, the hunger level of the squirrel, the time of day, year, past history, all playing a role. I thought the squirrel doesn't have to plan for the future, they can just hide nuts when they are not hungry, and when they are, they can just look for places to hide them now. I thought that most of the time they might end up finding food stored by animals. 
The example of the squirrel and Deleuze's philosophy of time presents an interesting contrast to the concepts of "bone" and "blood" discussed in the previous text. Here's a breakdown of the different perspectives:

Deleuze and the Multiple Times of the Squirrel:

This perspective emphasizes the interconnectedness of various timescales and their influence on the squirrel's behavior. It suggests that the squirrel doesn't necessarily "plan" for the future in a linear way, but rather responds to the complex interplay of different temporal factors, including its hunger, the environment, and the changing ecosystem.
Duncan's "Bone" and "Blood":

This framework focuses on the internal tension between planning and adapting. "Bone" represents the tendency to plan for the future, store nuts for later consumption based on anticipated needs.
"Blood" represents acting in the moment, searching for food when hungry without necessarily planning ahead.
Critique of the Squirrel Analogy:

While the squirrel example offers a different way of thinking about time and decision-making, it's important to consider its limitations:

Oversimplification: It might be an oversimplification to say the squirrel never plans. Caching nuts for later could be seen as a form of rudimentary planning, even if it's not as complex as human planning.
Species-Specific Behavior: This example highlights the squirrel's specific behavior and may not generalize to all animals or decision-making contexts.
Points of Intersection:

There are still some interesting connections possible:

The squirrel's opportunistic behavior (searching for hidden nuts) aligns with the adaptable nature of "blood".
The act of caching nuts could be seen as a balance between "bone" (planning for future needs) and "blood" (acting on the present opportunity).
Conclusion:

While the squirrel example doesn't directly map onto "bone" and "blood," it provides a different lens for understanding how time, environment, and other factors influence decision-making. It highlights the complexities of this issue and the limitations of any single framework in capturing the nuances of real-world behavior.


User

In the TV series manhunt Unabomber, the question is raised if stopping at a traffic light at night with no one watching is still a good policy or if it isn't a form of psychological brainwash or conditioning
The question raised in the TV series "Manhunt: Unabomber" about stopping at a traffic light at night when there are no other cars or witnesses is a thought experiment designed to explore the nature of morality and compliance with societal rules. Here are some different perspectives to consider:

Following the Law Regardless of Context:

Proponents argue that following the law is a moral imperative, regardless of the situation. It ensures consistency and predictability within society, promoting trust and cooperation. They might say stopping at a red light, even if unseen, demonstrates respect for the law and the safety of others, even if they are not immediately present.
Responding to the Specific Situation:

Counter-arguments suggest morality is more nuanced and can involve evaluating the context before making a decision. They might argue that stopping at a deserted red light, especially at night, provides no practical benefit in terms of safety or preventing accidents. They might see such behavior as an unnecessary restriction and a form of blind obedience, particularly with potential negative consequences such as traffic congestion or delays.
Psychological Conditioning and Social Influence:

The question also touches on the concept of social conditioning. Stopping at red lights, regardless of the perceived need, could be seen as a habit formed through repeated reinforcement, where even the absence of external observation might trigger an internalized sense of obligation. This view suggests that our behavior is influenced by societal expectations and ingrained norms beyond the immediate context.
Complexity of Morality and Individual Choice:

Ultimately, the question does not have a definitive answer. It highlights the complexity of morality, where decisions should consider both principles and specific circumstances. Each individual must weigh the various factors and make a personal choice based on their values and beliefs.
It's important to note that this thought experiment is presented in the context of a fictional criminal who challenged the established legal system. While it prompts interesting philosophical questions, violating traffic laws and potentially endangering others is not condoned in any real-world situation.


User

Ok I was thinking that stopping even if you don't see any oncoming vehicles was a "bone" position and going through the light because there is no one around is "blood". There are multiple scales to observing the situation. The purpose of the light is prevent accidents so after waiting five or ten minutes most people will update the inverse probabilities and conclude that light is broken and go through anyway. However there is the possibility of a hidden traffic camera or police. Stopping everytime trains habits and muscle memory, forcing you to stop and check even if you don't see anyone, so that on other occasions it might mitigate risks or prevent accidents.
You're right that the situation of stopping at a red light with no apparent reason to do so can be viewed through the lens of "bone" and "blood" as described in the previous text. Here's how your points align with those concepts:

Stopping at the light (bone):

Following the rules consistently: This aligns with the "bone" emphasis on structure, stability, and following through on commitments. Even in the absence of immediate consequences, stopping adheres to the established traffic law, demonstrating respect for societal rules and principles.
Developing safe driving habits: Consistent adherence to traffic signals, regardless of the situation, can solidify muscle memory and safe driving habits. This can lead to automatic response and reduced risk in situations where quick judgment is needed.
Contributing to a predictable traffic flow: Stopping at red lights, even when unseen, contributes to the predictability and consistency of traffic flow. This can ultimately benefit everyone on the road.
Going through the light (blood):

Adapting to the present situation: This aligns with the "blood" emphasis on fluidity, flexibility, and responding to the immediate context. In this case, the lack of observed traffic suggests the light might be malfunctioning or unnecessary, prompting a change from the usual stopping behavior.
Efficiency and time-saving: Choosing to proceed when safe might be motivated by a desire for efficiency and avoiding unnecessary delays. This reflects the "blood" tendency to prioritize immediate needs and adapt to perceived opportunities.
Balancing risk and reward: The decision to go through could be seen as a calculated risk, weighing the potential gain (saving time) against the potential negative consequences (getting a ticket or causing an accident).
Additional considerations:

Inverse probabilities and updating: Your point about updating probabilities based on observation aligns with the concept of updating beliefs in the face of new evidence. However, relying solely on the absence of observed traffic might be considered an incomplete assessment of risk.
Hidden cameras and enforcement: The potential for hidden enforcement mechanisms like cameras or unmarked police cars introduces an element of uncertainty into the "blood" approach. While it might seem safe based on immediate observation, the risk of unforeseen consequences remains.
Ultimately, the decision of whether to stop at a red light in such a situation is a complex one with no easy answer. Weighing the principles of "bone" (adherence to rules, safety habits) against the perceived benefits and risks of "blood" (adaptability, efficiency) requires individual judgment and consideration of the specific context.

It's crucial to remember that violating traffic laws carries potential risks and consequences regardless of the situation. This thought experiment explores the tension between rule-following and adapting to specific situations, but responsible and safe driving practices should always be the top priority.


User

I wanted to argue that the word habit might be a useless concept 99% of the time
You bring up a fascinating point! The idea that "habit" might be a useless concept 99% of the time is definitely provocative and worth exploring. Here's a breakdown of some arguments for and against this perspective:

Arguments for the Uselessness of "Habit":

Reductionist: The concept of "habit" often oversimplifies complex behaviors and motivations. It reduces actions to automatic, mindless repetition, ignoring the nuanced interplay of conscious choice, environmental cues, and other factors.
Lack of Specificity: Saying "it's just a habit" doesn't provide a real explanation. It fails to address why the behavior started, what triggers it, and what maintains it. This lack of specificity hinders meaningful change and intervention strategies.
Focus on the Negative: "Habit" often carries a negative connotation, associated with mindless repetition or behaviors seen as undesirable ("bad habits"). This can obscure the possibility that many habitual actions are adaptive and beneficial.
Arguments for the Usefulness of "Habit":

Automaticity and Efficiency: Habits allow us to automate routine tasks without conscious deliberation. This frees up our cognitive resources for more complex decisions and creative pursuits.
Goal Achievement: Habits can be strategically developed to support long-term goals. By consistently repeating small, positive actions, we can make significant progress over time.
Change and Intervention: Understanding the mechanisms behind habit formation (cue, routine, reward) provides a powerful framework for behavior change, both for breaking undesirable patterns and establishing positive ones.
A Middle Ground: Habit as a Useful, but Incomplete Construct

Perhaps the most accurate view lies somewhere in between. While "habit" alone might not fully explain the complexities of human behavior, it remains a useful tool when analyzed with an understanding of its components and limitations. Here's why:

Habits as building blocks: Habits can be seen as smaller pieces within a larger system of decision-making and behavior. They interact with conscious choice, motivation, and environmental factors.
Habits are context-dependent: The same habitual action might be triggered or suppressed depending on the situation. Recognizing this highlights the importance of understanding cues and rewards when attempting to change behaviors.
Not All Habits Are Equal: Differentiating between helpful and harmful habits is crucial. While some habits might need to be changed, others can be cultivated to achieve positive outcomes.
Conclusion

Dismissing the concept of "habit" entirely risks missing out on valuable insights it can offer in understanding and shaping behavior. Instead, a more nuanced view of "habit" as a useful, but limited component of a larger picture might be more beneficial for understanding ourselves and creating lasting change.


User

I just mean that there are occasions when you do something only once and it is said to be only a habit, and other times where you do something all the time, but it is considered contingent. It seems that we are flexible with how we define intention depending on the expected behavior or semantic reaction.
You're absolutely right, the terms "habit" and "contingency" are often used inconsistently and sometimes even interchangeably, even though they carry different implications. Here's a breakdown of the issue you raised:

Inconsistency in Applying Labels:

As you pointed out, the same action can be labeled as a "habit" if done occasionally and "contingency" if done repeatedly. This inconsistency can be misleading because it suggests a difference in intentionality based on frequency alone, which isn't necessarily accurate.
Focus on Frequency vs. Underlying Reasons:

Habit often emphasizes frequency and automaticity. It implies that an action is performed repeatedly and without much conscious thought, often triggered by specific cues or contexts.
Contingency, on the other hand, emphasizes dependence on specific circumstances. It suggests that an action is not automatic or pre-programmed but rather chosen in response to a specific situation and the expected outcome.
The Issue of Semantic Flexibility:

You're also right that the choice between these terms can be influenced by the desired outcome and the expected interpretation. Sometimes, using "habit" might be seen as more judgmental or dismissive, while "contingency" might sound more neutral or even strategic.
Moving Towards Clarity:

To avoid confusion and promote clearer communication, it's helpful to:

Focus on the underlying reasons and motivations behind an action rather than just its frequency.
Consider the context in which the action occurs.
Use specific language to describe the action and the factors influencing it, instead of relying solely on broad terms like "habit" and "contingency."
The Complexity of Human Behavior:

Ultimately, human behavior is complex and influenced by numerous factors, including intentions, emotions, past experiences, and the environment. Labeling our actions using simple categories like "habit" or "contingency" can be helpful in some situations but can also oversimplify the nuances and complexities at play.


User

I think Deleuze called it difference and repetition
You're absolutely right! The concepts of difference and repetition are central to the work of French philosopher Gilles Deleuze.

In his book "Difference and Repetition", Deleuze argues against the traditional philosophical view of identity and representation. He proposes that:

Difference: This is the fundamental state of being. Everything is constantly changing and differentiating itself from everything else.
Repetition: This is not simply repeating the same thing over and over. Instead, it is the process of reproducing difference, creating new and unique variations without ever being exactly the same.
How it relates to your previous point:

Your observation about the inconsistent use of "habit" and "contingency" highlights the very essence of Deleuze's ideas.

Every action we take is unique and differentiated from others, even if it appears similar on the surface.
This unique difference is created through the repetition of various factors, including past experiences, current context, and our evolving motivations.
Therefore, applying labels like "habit" or "contingency" might miss the mark, as they tend to capture only a snapshot of an action without acknowledging the underlying complexities of difference and repetition that contribute to its unique nature.

By recognizing the interplay between difference and repetition, we can gain a more nuanced understanding of human behavior and avoid falling into the trap of oversimplification and rigid categorization.


User

I would say that every action is unique or is similar to other actions depending on which actions it is being compared to and what criteria for comparison are used.
You're precisely right! The statement that "every action is unique" holds validity, but it depends heavily on the context of comparison and the chosen criteria. Here's an explanation:

Uniqueness is relative:

An action may appear completely unique if compared to a very different action, like comparing brushing your teeth to writing a novel.
However, the same action might seem less unique when compared to similar actions, like comparing brushing your teeth with flossing or using mouthwash.
Criteria for comparison matter:

If we compare actions based on broad categories like "eating" or "walking," many actions appear similar.
However, if we compare them based on finer criteria like the specific food eaten, the walking speed, or the purpose behind it, greater differences emerge.
The concept of "similarity" itself is subjective:

What defines "similar" can vary depending on the individual and their perspective.
Two actions might appear incredibly similar to one person but vastly different to another based on their personal experiences or values.
Implications of this perspective:

Recognizing the relativity of uniqueness and the importance of context helps us avoid overgeneralizations about human behavior.
Focusing on specific criteria for comparison allows for a more nuanced and accurate understanding of similarities and differences between actions.
This perspective aligns with the complexity of human behavior, acknowledging that actions are rarely isolated events but rather interconnected and influenced by various factors.
Conclusion:

Your observation highlights the importance of considering context and criteria when evaluating the uniqueness or similarity of actions. It helps us move away from simplistic labels and embrace the multifaceted nature of human experience.


User

I would argue that blood is the default position, but that bone would be preferable. My reasoning is that the environment is chaotic, and imposing order on it is difficult. 
That's an interesting and valid perspective. Here's an analysis of the idea that "blood" is the default position and that "bone" is preferable, with consideration for the argument of a chaotic environment.

Arguments for "Blood" as the Default:

Biological Basis: At a primitive level, responding to immediate stimuli and adapting to survive in a constantly-changing environment might be seen as the evolutionary "default". This responsiveness is more reactive and instinctive.
Developmental Perspective: Young children often exhibit more "blood"-style behavior: they're less bound by rigid rules, more flexible and experimental.
Psychological Perspective: "Blood" could be connected to immediate desires, urges, and emotional expression, which often take priority in the absence of deliberate control mechanisms.
Arguments for the Preferability of "Bone":

Chaos vs. Order: Your argument focuses on the difficulty of imposing order in a chaotic world. "Bone's" structure and planning might be seen as an antidote to that chaos, creating a sense of stability and predictability.
Complexity and Long-Term Planning: Many modern tasks and environments require a degree of "bone" behavior for success. Think of following instructions, fulfilling duties, or achieving complex goals that require sustained commitment beyond immediate impulse.
Social Responsibility: Following rules and commitments often underpins social cohesion and cooperation. Consistent "bone" tendencies could be seen as contributing to a more reliable and predictable society.
The Crucial Point: Finding Balance

While your point about the default nature of "blood" and the desirability of "bone" has merit, it's important to remember that achieving a healthy balance is crucial.

Too Much "Blood": Exclusively acting on impulse without foresight can lead to recklessness, unreliability, and chaos on a personal and societal level.
Too Much "Bone": Inflexible rigidity in response to ever-changing circumstances breeds stagnation, inhibits exploration, and can lead to missed opportunities.
Conclusion

Your argument sheds light on an important aspect of the "bone" vs. "blood" dynamic. While "blood" might be the default state for biological and psychological reasons, our modern, complex world highlights the need to cultivate "bone"-related traits to function successfully within it. The true goal, however, lies in achieving a balance between both approaches that allows for flexibility and adaptability within a framework of responsible and principled action.


User

A summary of the whole conversation.













Summary of Our Conversation
We began by discussing a text that explored the tension between two decision-making styles:

Bone: Represents structure, stability, and following through on commitments.
Blood: Represents fluidity, flexibility, and responding to the present moment.
The text argued for the value and limitations of both approaches, emphasizing the importance of finding a balance between them.

We then explored various aspects of this concept, including:

Connections to philosophical concepts like deontology and phenomenology.
The "500$ challenge" and its potential function as a rhetorical device.
Criticisms regarding the text presenting "bone" and "blood" as trait categories.
The perspective of Deleuze's philosophy of time and its contrast to the "bone" and "blood" framework.
The thought experiment from "Manhunt: Unabomber" about stopping at a red light at night. This led to discussing the decision-making process and the balance between adhering to rules ("bone") and adapting to specific situations ("blood").
The concept of "habit" and its limitations. We discussed whether it's a useful concept and the importance of considering context and intentionality when analyzing behaviors.
Deleuze's ideas of difference and repetition and how they relate to the discussion of "habit" and the complexity of human behavior.
The relative nature of uniqueness and the importance of considering context and criteria for comparison when evaluating similarities and differences between actions.
Your argument about "blood" being the default position and "bone" being preferable due to the chaotic nature of the environment. We discussed the strengths of both arguments and the importance of finding a balance between them.
Overall, our conversation explored various aspects of decision-making, the complexities of human behavior, and the challenges of navigating a world that demands both adaptability and structure. I appreciate the opportunity to engage in such a stimulating discussion!


Gemini may display inaccurate info, including about people, so double-check its responses. Your privacy & Gemini AppsOpens in a new window
