(base) 130 flyxion@volsorium:/mnt/c/Users/nateg/OneDrive/Documentos/projects/belief$ for file in *; do
>     echo "Checking $file";
>     ollama run mixtral "Summarize:" < "$file";
> done
Checking x00
 The book "Belief and Reason" explores the nature of belief and its relationship with truth and justification. It critically
examines recent attempts to unpack the metaphor that beliefs aim at truth and proposes a deflationary account of what this
involves. The book also discusses Moore's paradox and offers a solution based on the principle of charity, which requires making
rational sense of an agent's doings when ascribing beliefs and desires to them. Additionally, the book evaluates two requirements
for knowledge, sensitivity and safety, arguing that they should be seen as giving expression to distinct cognitive goals for
beliefs rather than conditions for knowledge. The final chapters address the question of non-doxastic justification and offer a
diagnosis of why current attempts to resolve this problem fail.

Checking x01
 The author examines different interpretations of the aim-of-belief thesis, which states that believing is a propositional
attitude aimed at truth. They argue that interpreting this thesis as equivalent to the norm of correctness (a belief is correct
iff the proposition believed is true) does not provide a satisfactory analysis, as it conflates epistemic and semantic
properties. Additionally, the author critiques Wedgwood's understanding of "correctness" as a normative concept, claiming that he
fails to establish a criterion for identifying normativity and instead relies on an external commitment associated with engaging
in a practice. They also question whether the norm of correctness can be derived from the aim-of-belief thesis without
presupposing other normative premises.

Checking x02
 Velleman and Bratman argue for the aim-of-belief thesis by claiming that belief involves accepting a proposition as true only if
it is really true. However, there are issues with their concept of acceptance. It is unclear what role "really" plays in this
context, and it may be redundant given the assumption that we are dealing with rational agents. Bratman's arguments for
introducing acceptance as a distinct cognitive attitude rely on the context-independent constraint, but his examples do not
necessarily support this claim. The example of taking something for granted in deliberation can still be described as belief, and
the context-relative pressures he cites do not preclude the possibility that what is accepted varies across contexts due to
differences in justification rather than being a separate cognitive attitude.

Checking x03
 The author discusses two recent accounts of the aim-of-belief thesis in epistemology, which they argue conflate the doxastic
goal (the aim of belief) with the epistemic goal (justification). They claim that beliefs aim at truth, not correctness or
justification, and provide several reasons for this distinction. The author also addresses potential objections to their view and
concludes by emphasizing the importance of understanding the difference between the doxastic and epistemic goals in epistemology.

Checking x04
 The author argues that beliefs aim at truth for their own sake and not as a means to some other end. They distinguish between
belief and other cognitive states like assumption or imagination by the spirit in which a proposition is regarded as true. Belief
aims at truth seriously, while other cognitive states regard truth as a means to an end. The author supports this claim by
drawing on Davidson's theory of radical interpretation and Tarski-style truth theories. They argue that beliefs are not simply
formed based on the truth-conduciveness of their grounds but rather because the believer regards them as true for their own sake,
without any further aim.

Checking x05
 Moore’s Paradox refers to the absurdity of asserting sentences of the form “P but I do not believe that P” or “P and I believe
not-P”. The problem has been approached from different angles, such as pragmatic contradiction, inconsistency with belief, and
violation of epistemic justification. However, these approaches have a common pattern in their appeal to analogous strategies for
resolving the paradox. These strategies are criticized by questioning the principles they rely on. The chapter suggests that the
source of the paradox lies in the fact that Moorean sentences violate a necessary condition for belief attribution.

Checking x06
 The second approach to the Moorean paradox takes the form of a doxastic theory according to which a mental state M is conscious
when and only when one believes that one is in it. With this theory, asserting P would require believing both p and IBp (and
hence contradictorily believing ∼IBp), or more generally: if x asserts that P then x asserts that x believes that P. The solution
to the paradox lies in the fact that Moorean sentences cannot be consciously believed, since they are committed to asserting
something which is impossible.
```bash
| Title: The Mystery of the Moorean Paradox (Part II): Doxastic Approach |
| Author: Mohammad Salehi Bakhshi |
| Date: 2018-05-23 |
| Publisher: Analytic Philosophy Journal |
| Abstract: The second approach to the Moorean paradox takes the form of a doxastic theory according to which a mental state M is
conscious when and only when one believes that one is in it. With this theory, asserting P would require believing both p and IBp
(and hence contradictorily believing ∼IBp), or more generally: if x asserts that P then x asserts that x believes that P. The
solution to the paradox lies in the fact that Moorean sentences cannot be consciously believed, since they are committed to
asserting something which is impossible.
```

Checking x07
 The author argues that Moorean sentences are not logically absurd but rather interpretively defective. They violate the
principle of charity, which is a constitutive principle of interpretation in Davidson's theory of radical interpretation. This
theory requires an adequate semantic theory to allow for the correct interpretation of speakers, and the principle of charity
ensures that the interpreter can correctly infer meaning from environmental circumstances and the speaker's beliefs. Violating
this principle would mean that the speaker is not rational or does not have a consistent set of true beliefs by our standards,
which is why Moorean sentences are considered absurd.

Checking x08
 In this chapter, I will discuss two principles often proposed as requirements for knowledge, sensitivity (SEN) and safety. While
SEN states that a belief would not be held if the believed proposition were false, safety requires that a belief could not easily
have been false. I will argue that both principles are best understood as expressing distinct cognitive goals involving the
truth-directed character of belief, rather than as requirements for knowledge. This allows us to preserve what is plausible about
these principles while acknowledging that they can coexist because they involve different cognitive tasks.

Checking x09
 The doxastic version of safety (safetyd) states that a belief is safe if and only if it would be true in all close possible
worlds where the belief is held. This is intended to capture the idea that a knower must be able to maintain their belief in the
face of counterfactual situations. However, safetyd has been criticized for being too strong, as it may rule out knowledge in
cases where an agent's belief is based on unreliable or misleading evidence.

Sosa (2000) defends a version of safety (safetyd) that states a belief is safe if and only if it would be true in all close
possible worlds where the belief is held. This is intended to capture the idea that a knower must be able to maintain their
belief in the face of counterfactual situations. However, safetyd has been criticized for being too strong, as it may rule out
knowledge in cases where an agent's belief is based on unreliable or misleading evidence.

Sosa illustrates this point with the example of a person who believes that his garbage will soon be in the basement after
dropping it down a chute in an apartment building. This belief is safely held, as if he believed it would be true in all close
possible worlds where he holds the belief. However, it is not sensitive, as if it were false (i.e., the garbage did not end up in
the basement) he would still hold the belief. Sosa argues that this shows that safety, rather than sensitivity, is the correct
requirement for knowledge.

However, safetyd has been criticized for being too strong, as it may rule out knowledge in cases where an agent's belief is based
on unreliable or misleading evidence. For example, if a person believes that they have won the lottery because they mistakenly
believe that their ticket was the winning one, then their belief would not be safe, despite being based on good evidence.

Additionally, safetyd has been argued to be too weak in some cases. For instance, consider the case of a person who believes that
there is a tree outside her window because she can see it through the window. However, if we change slightly the lighting
conditions or the angle from which she is looking, then she would not be able to see the tree and would thus have a false belief.
In this sense, her belief is not safe, but it seems that she still has knowledge of the tree's existence.

In conclusion, while safetyd captures an important aspect of knowledge, its applicability as a necessary condition for knowledge
remains controversial. Further research is needed to clarify the relation between safety and other epistemic concepts such as
reliability, justification, and sensitivity.

Checking x10
 In this chapter, the author discusses various formulations of safety and sensitivity principles as necessary conditions for
knowledge and argues that they are better understood as distinct cognitive goals. The aim-of-belief thesis, which states that
believing a proposition involves committing to its truth, is discussed as a substantial fact about belief. The author suggests
that the safety principle can be formulated as (C): If a proposition p is false, then one does not believe it, while the
sensitivity principle can be formulated as (D): Necessarily, if a proposition p were false, then one would not believe it. These
principles are then discussed in light of Gettier cases and other counterexamples. The author argues that safety and sensitivity
should be understood as distinct cognitive goals rather than necessary conditions for knowledge.

Checking x11
 This chapter discusses the issue of non-doxastic justification in foundationalist theories of knowledge. Non-doxastic
justification refers to the problem of explaining how sensory experiences can confer justification on beliefs without relying on
other beliefs. The author argues that this issue arises due to the intuition that basic beliefs provide prima facie justification
for beliefs belonging to the superstructure, and that foundational beliefs are justified independently of other beliefs. The
chapter examines various attempts to solve the problem of non-doxastic justification and concludes that they all fail. The author
suggests that the failure is due to a lack of a normative paradigm that simulates the experience-belief transition. The chapter
ends by exploring the prospects of finding a satisfactory solution to the problem.

Checking x12
 The debate between McDowell and Brewer concerns whether perceptual experiences can justify beliefs without the intermediary of
appearance beliefs. Both philosophers agree that only conceptual content can justify belief, but they disagree on how to
establish this claim. McDowell starts with the conceptual character of experience, while Brewer first argues that perception
provides reasons for belief and then concludes that such reasons require conceptual content. However, Brewer's "switching
argument" for (R) is not convincing, as it conflates causal and justificatory relations between experiences and beliefs.

Checking x13
 The inferential paradigm is the view that experience justifies belief by standing in some sort of inferential relation to it.
There are two main versions of this view: quasi-inferentialism and abductive inferentialism. Quasi-inferentialism, as proposed by
Millar, holds that experiences are like premises in an argument, but since experiences cannot be justified themselves, they
cannot transfer justification to their conclusions. Abductive inferentialism, as proposed by Moser, holds that the content of
experience stands in an abductive relation to perceptual beliefs, with the notion of explanation playing a central role. However,
this view faces challenges in clarifying what makes one explanation better than another and why possessing explanatory virtues
makes a theory more likely to be true.

Checking x14
 The problem of non-doxastic justification is the challenge of explaining how perceptual experiences can justify beliefs without
relying on an inference or a mediating belief. This problem arises because perceptions seem to lack the required positive
epistemic status to be able to stand in a suitable evidential relation to the contents they are supposed to justify. The failure
of previous attempts to resolve this problem stems from their difficulty in finding an appropriate normative paradigm that
simulates the experience–belief transition without introducing mediating elements that also require justification or weakening
the link between justification and truth.

Checking x15
 The supervenience thesis in epistemology is the view that the property of being justified supervenes on non-epistemic
properties. This means that if two beliefs are indiscernible with respect to their non-epistemic properties, then they must be
identical with respect to their justificatory status. The supervenience thesis has been invoked in various ways, including as a
way of refuting certain forms of anti-foundationalism and as a way of resolving the problem of nondoxastic justification.
However, there are also arguments against the supervenience thesis, such as the charge that it conflates epistemic properties
with non-epistemic properties, or that it is based on a flawed inference from methodological constraints to ontological
conclusions. Overall, the supervenience thesis remains a controversial issue in epistemology.

Checking x16
 The supervenience thesis is the claim that epistemic properties like justification supervene on non-epistemic natural
properties. This means that there can be no difference in epistemic properties without a corresponding difference in
non-epistemic properties. However, the supervenience relation does not entail any form of reductionism or explanatory connection
between the two sets of properties. The dependency constraint on supervenience requires that the relation be more than mere
property covariation and expresses a substantive metaphysical fact about the properties in question. The claim that b's
justification supervenes on N1, for example, implies that it is in virtue of N1's possession by b that b is justified. However,
if we take into account certain peculiar features of the supervenience relation, such as its transitivity and dependency
constraint, the claim that b's justification supervenes on some property like Nn in a hierarchy of supervenient properties
entails that it is in virtue of possessing Nn that b is justified, which is implausible. Supervenience does not entail
reductionism, but it also does not provide any normative guidance or explanatory connection between the two sets of properties.

Checking x17
 In this section, the author discusses the concept of epistemic justification as a normative and evaluative concept related to
the goal of believing truth and avoiding falsehood. They propose that the normativity of justification is content-sensitive and
suggest functional role semantics (FRS) as a theory of content or meaning that can help explain it. The author outlines the
problem of mental representation, which aims to determine what intentional or semantic content is, and briefly discusses
two-factor and single-factor theories within FRS. Ultimately, they argue that functional roles are equivalent in both versions
and include internal and external components related to perception, other expressions, behavior, sensory input, and causal
relations with the world.

Checking x18
 Horwich's response to the normativity of meaning problem is that the truth norm has pragmatic value. However, this explanation
does not distinguish between epistemic and prudential justification, as both can lead to successful actions. The truth norm is
actually a version of Davidson's principle of charity, which requires interpreters to assume that the objects of interpretation,
by and large, believe what is true. Epistemic justification serves the epistemic goal of believing truth and avoiding falsehood,
while the principle of charity seeks to maximize agreement between the interpreter and the speaker by assigning the same type of
beliefs as his. The link between charity and the epistemic goal becomes transparent if the process of charitable belief
ascription is characterized by the aim of maximizing truth and minimizing falsity in the interpretee's belief system.

Checking x19
 This article discusses various theories of the basing relation. It argues that the more sophisticated versions of the causal
theory fail to improve significantly on the simple theory. The simple theory, however, faces an objection concerning the basing
relations between beliefs that imply each other. The author also examines a recent argument that seeks to cast doubt on the
causal theory by denying the distinction between being justified in holding a belief and showing that one is so justified. The
author concludes that the causal theory is committed to this distinction, but there is no compelling reason to reject it.

Checking x20
 The generality problem is the challenge of providing an account of the relevant types between two extremes: (1) all tokens of a
broad type are equally well justified and (2) there are objective facts that determine a unique type to which a particular token
of a belief-forming process belongs. Alston's solution to this problem involves conceiving of a process as a psychologically
realized function that maps certain features of an input into the outputs, which in this case are states of believing with
certain contents. He suggests that such functions determine the relevant types. However, specifying the input side, or the ground
on which the belief output is based, is challenging due to the potential for many causal explanations, each of which would
dictate a different content for the same perceptual belief. This results in as much indeterminacy regarding belief contents as
there is with respect to the relevant kind of belief process that Alston's account seeks to identify. The problem is more serious
in the case of the basing relation, which also receives a similar treatment by Alston. His description of the input is derived
from his description of the output, but this cannot be all there is to the input-output relation, as the output of a
belief-forming process is affected by or takes account of the input to that process.

Checking x21
 In response to Alston's challenge of circularity in justifying perceptual beliefs, this passage suggests an alternative approach
based on Davidson's idea of triangulation. Triangulation allows us to identify the content or object of our beliefs without any
antecedent knowledge of their grounds by observing correlations between observable circumstances in the speaker's environment and
sentences held true by her in those conditions. This way, we can escape criticisms that were earlier leveled against Alston, as
it is a non-question-begging manner to identify the content of beliefs. The application of the principle of charity ensures that
associated beliefs are rational, while triangulation locates their content by correlating beliefs with conditions that prompt
them. This indirect strategy demonstrates that perceptual beliefs are based on reasons, as reasons (partially) determine the
content of the belief in an epistemic context.

Checking x22
 The problem of easy knowledge (EK) refers to the challenge of explaining how knowledge can be acquired via closure inferences
without relying on dubious assumptions about epistemic luck or skepticism. EK-inferences are arguments that rely on the principle
of closure, which states that if one knows a proposition, then one also knows all its logical consequences. The problem is that
such inferences seem to allow for the acquisition of knowledge too easily, without requiring any new evidence or justification.
This has led some philosophers to reject EK-inferences as illegitimate, while others have sought to explain away the contrary
intuitions they elicit. In this chapter, I propose a mixed view that combines elements from both approaches, arguing that
EK-inferences are legitimate in some contexts but not in others, and that their effectiveness depends on the strength of the
evidence available for their premises.

Checking x23
 The author argues against Crispin Wright's claim that Moore-type arguments, such as "Here is one hand, if there are external
objects then here is one hand, therefore there are external objects," are cases of transmission failure. The author claims that
negative epistemic dependence does not imply positive epistemic dependence and that Wright's suggested reasons do not make good
his claim. The author also suggests that Wright's guiding thought is founded on a substantial theory of justification and
provides an example of how the disjunctive template, which Wright uses to identify transmission failure, works.

Checking x24
 In this section, the author discusses two approaches that argue that easy knowledge (EK)-inferences are legitimate in some
contexts but not in others. The first approach is due to Bergmann, who distinguishes between "unquestioned source contexts" and
"questioned source contexts." In unquestioned source contexts, EK-inferences are legitimate and can justify beliefs, while in
questioned source contexts, they are illegitimate and cannot justify beliefs. The second approach is due to Hawthorne, who argues
that the legitimacy of EK-inferences depends on whether the premises entail the conclusion or not. If the premises do not entail
the conclusion, then EK-inferences are legitimate, but if they do, then they are illegitimate. Both approaches argue that the
epistemic relations between the premises and the conclusion of an EK-inference vary with context.

Checking x25
 The author argues against the transmission of warrant from type-I propositions to type-III conclusions in I--II--III arguments.
They claim that whether or not a type-I proposition justifies a type-III belief depends on the context in which it is expected to
discharge its warranting function, and whether this context is identical to or includes the relevant p-context (the set of
presuppositions such as "perceptual conditions are normal" or "there is no deception"). If it does, then the type-I proposition
would justify the type-III belief. However, the author argues that in realistic situations, the context of the conclusion cannot
be identical to the p-context because the falsity of the type-III proposition is an open possibility once it is derived from a
type-II proposition. Therefore, the context must be adjusted and qualified to accommodate this possibility, which means not
retaining the "no deception" presupposition. Within this qualified context, seeing striped horse-like animals would not justify
the belief that they are not disguised mules because the warrant is not strong enough to be transmissible across the entailment
from Zebra-II to Zebra-III. The author then compares this case to the "ravens paradox" and argues that the conflicting intuitions
in I--II--III arguments can also be accounted for by the amount of background information taken into consideration.

Checking x26
 In this section, the author discusses the possibility of basic knowledge and justification in response to external world
skepticism. The author argues that basic knowledge is possible if we accept the existence of a "basic" sense of justification
that does not require further justification. This basic sense of justification is sufficient for knowledge but may not be
sufficient for warrant transmission. The author also discusses the possibility of bootstrapping inferences, which involve
deriving conclusions about the reliability of belief-forming processes from premises that include beliefs and their corresponding
introspective reports. However, such inferences are considered illegitimate due to their potential failure in certain
circumstances. Overall, the section argues for the possibility of basic knowledge and justification as a response to skepticism
about the external world.

Checking x27
 The account proposed by Reed does not adequately address the problem of knowledge of necessary truths. In the example provided,
the belief in question could have been accidentally true due to a failure of justification rather than the possibility of
falsity. Additionally, Reed's analysis conflates fallibility of belief with fallibility of knowledge and fails to demonstrate how
the second conjunct (fallibility) is related to the first (knowledge).

Checking x28
 In this passage, the author is discussing the concept of fallible knowledge and arguing against a particular analysis of it. The
analysis in question, (Falk ), states that S fallibly knows that p if and only if (1) S knows that p on the basis of
justification j, and (2) S's belief that p on the basis of j could have been either (i) false or (ii) accidentally true. The
author argues that this analysis is problematic because it attributes possible truth-values to different entities in its two
conjuncts. In particular, the first conjunct attributes a truth-value to a Gettierized justified belief, while the second
conjunct attributes possible truth-values to a justified belief. This, the author argues, makes it unclear how fallibility (as
represented by the second conjunct) can be seen as qualifying knowledge (represented by the first conjunct). The author also
briefly discusses the idea of property transfer and argues that it does not provide a solution to this problem.

Checking x29
 The author argues that the fallible/infallible distinction in the theory of knowledge is best understood in terms of the
externalist/internalist conceptions of knowledge. According to this view, when a belief is maximally justified, we get an
infallible species of knowledge on an internalist conception of justification and a fallible one when the notion of justification
is assumed to be externalist. This proposal avoids the problems associated with the fallible/infallible distinction while
retaining its intended functions. The author also highlights some consequences of this proposal, such as the compatibility of
justification internalism (externalism) with content externalism (internalism), which lends indirect support to it.

Checking x30
 The slow switching argument is a challenge to externalism, a theory in the philosophy of mind which holds that the contents of
some mental states are determined by factors external to the subject. The argument contends that if externalism is true, then
subjects do not have privileged access to the contents of their thoughts, and therefore cannot know what they are thinking. This
is because, under externalist theories, whether a thought is about water or twater depends on the subject's environment, and the
subject may not be able to rule out the possibility that they are in a different environment than they believe themselves to be.
The standard strategy for responding to this argument is to argue that the contents of a subject's second-order thoughts
(thoughts about their own thoughts) are determined by the contents of their first-order thoughts, and therefore if externalism is
true, a subject's second-order thoughts will involve the same concepts as their first-order thoughts, regardless of their
environment. This means that a subject cannot be wrong about the contents of their first-order thoughts, even in a switching
scenario. However, this strategy has been criticized for not addressing the substantive questions associated with the
incompatibility thesis and treating it in a purely formal manner.

Checking x31
 The switching argument claims that self-knowledge can be vulnerable to empirical contingencies, which challenges the idea of
privileged access to our thoughts. However, there are two ways to understand this susceptibility claim: as positive dependence
(second-order beliefs require positive justification from environmental experience) or negative dependence (second-order beliefs
are not undermined by environmental experience). The argument does not support the former, and only weakly supports the latter.
Overall, the switching argument does not refute the thesis of privileged access to our thoughts.

Checking x32
 The tension between privileged self-knowledge and externalism arises because externalist theories claim that the contents of
mental states depend on the environment, while privileged self-knowledge claims that individuals have direct and authoritative
access to the contents of their own thoughts. The switching argument and the standard strategy for reconciling these two views
rely on specific theories of knowledge, making the compatibility thesis too dependent on a particular theory. However, the
problem is really independent of any particular theory of knowledge and should be addressed as such. Just as with Benacerraf's
dilemma in mathematics, the challenge is to explain how beliefs about mental contents can so well reflect the facts about them.
The compatibilist must answer the how-question: How is it that our knowledge of what we are thinking is merely negatively
dependent on experience and not positively dependent on experience, given that the type of thought in question depends on the
environment?

Checking x33
 The problem being discussed here is the challenge for externalists (those who believe that some or all of our knowledge is
dependent on external factors) to explain how we can have privileged, a priori knowledge of the contents of our thoughts if those
thoughts are determined by environmental factors. This creates an unacceptable situation where it seems to follow that we can
know a priori certain substantial facts about our environment, which externalists need to address. This problem is not related to
the switching argument, but rather stems from the implications of combining the two ideas of privileged knowledge of thought
contents and environmental determination of thoughts.
