(~IIINil'S 
Also by Hill Gates: 
Chinese Working-Class Lives: 
Getting By in Taiwan 
A 
Thousand 
Years of 
Petty 
Capitalism 
Cornell University Press 
Ithaca & London 
Copyright © 1996 
by Cornell University 
All rights reserved. 
Except for brief quotations in a 
review, this book, or parts thereof, 
must not be reproduced in any form 
without permission in writing from 
the publisher. For information, address 
Cornell University Press, Sage House, 
512 East State Street, Ithaca, 
New York 14850. 
First published 1996 by 
Cornell University Press. 
First printing, Cornell Paperbacks, 1997. 
Printed in the United States of America. 
Cornell University Press strives to utilize 
environmentally responsible suppliers 
and materials to the fullest extent possible 
in the publishing of its books. Such 
materials include vegetable-based, low-
VOC inks and acid-free papers that are also 
either recycled, totally chlorine-free, or 
pardy composed of nonwood fibers. 
Cloth printing 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
Paperback printing 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
Cornell University Press gratefully ac-
knowledges a grant from the Center for 
East Asian Studies, Stanford University, 
which aided in bringing this book to 
publication. 
Library of Congress 
Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Gates, Hill. 
China's motor : a thousand years of 
petty capitalism I Hill Gates. 
p. em. 
Includes bibliographical references 
(p. 
) and index. 
ISBN o-8014-3143-3 (cloth : alk. 
paper).- ISBN o-8014-8476-6 (pbk. 
alk. paper) 
1. Capitalism-China-History. 
2. China-Economic conditions. 
3. Capitalism-Taiwan-History. 
4. Taiwan-Economic conditions. 
I. Tide. 
HC427.G34 
1995 
330.12'2'0951--dc20 
95-23812 
For VERA NEILL GATES 
and for ARTHUR 
yin and yang of my life 
Contents 
zx 
Acknowledgments 
xz 
Chinese Dynasties of the Late Empire 
Chapter 1. Introduction 
13 
Chapter 2. The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist 
Modes of Production 
42 
Chapter 3· Motion in the System 
62 
Chapter 4. Cities and Space 
84 
Chapter 5· Patricorporations: The State 
and the Household 
103 
Chapter 6. Patricorporations: The Lineage 
121 
Chapter 7· Dowry and Brideprice 
148 
Chapter 8. Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners 
177 
Chapter 9. Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
204 
Chapter 10. Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
243 
Chapter n. Re-creating the Tributary in China 
270 
Chapter 12. Conclusions 
281 
Appendix: Dowry to Wedding-Cost Ratios 
287 
Sources 
321 
General Index 
325 
Index of Place Names 
Vll 
Acknowledgments 
In view of Marxism's anomalous present position, the author's 
traditional thanks should be rendered with care, lest they prove to be tar and 
feathers rather than frankincense and laurel leaves. No one who has written a 
book, or even read one carefully, however, can be unaware of how idiosyncrati-
cally writers use their sources of inspiration and how little responsibility for the 
final outcome falls on the shoulders of teachers and colleagues. Yet the sense of 
gratitude to those perhaps-innocent bystanders persists; I will thank them, 
whether they like it or not. 
In trying to understand China's political-economic trajectory, I have relied for 
criticism and encouragement more on anthropologists with varied regional in-
terests than on China specialists. Over the years while I wrote this book, my lack 
of colleagues obsessed, as China scholars are apt to be, with the difficult and 
wordy world the Chinese have made for themselves has forced me constantly to 
discover the wider significance of each sinic treasure unearthed from documents 
and interviews. This naivete is not a bad thing. "Why does that matter?" -
or 
more bluntly, "Who cares?" -
are questions that fellow specialists do not ask 
one another frequently enough. The questions I have asked of my materials come 
largely from the work of people with interests in macrotheoretical issues that cut 
across disciplinary barriers and cultural boundaries: anthropologists whose goals 
are the explanation of commonalities and variations among all human societies. 
Eminent among these are Eric R. Wolf, whose work epitomizes what anthropol-
ogy can contribute to human understanding; and Norma J. Diamond, whose 
razor tongue and laser politics take studying China into the trenches. I will always 
be grateful for what they taught me in the late 1960s, when the University of 
Michigan Department of Anthropology was full of dancing revolutionaries. 
Time to formulate this interpretation of Chinese culture was conjured up only 
much later when I visited the Anthropology Department at Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity, in 1981-82. Katherine Verdery and Emily Martin listened with patience to 
my views, while a light teaching load enabled me to put some of them on paper. 
In the following years at my home base in the Department of Sociology and An-
thropology of Central Michigan University, colleagues argued, compared, and 
offered alternative hypotheses as I tried to find a vision of China at once Marxist 
and not Eurocentric. Among these demanding and delightful workmates, I have 
IX 
gained most from Alice Littlefield, a true feminist and the clearest social thinker 
I know; R. Carlos Kirk, who sharply evaluated my perceptions of east Asia against 
his politically sensitive and intimate fieldworker's knowledge of Mexico; and 
Larry T. Reynolds, whose encyclopedic knowledge of social theory and leftist per-
fect pitch reassured me that long-distance vision best focuses social analysis. That 
department, and Central Michigan University, gave generously of their minus-
cule research resources, providing the time and money for me to undertake the 
fieldwork that lies behind my generalizations. I owe special debts to then-Dean 
Ronald L. Johnstone, scholar and gentleman, and to the members of my depart-
ment -
especially Nancy Leis -
who carried my teaching load when I was ab-
sent. 
Time to write is the most valuable thing an academic can be given. A lovely, 
uncomplicated year was the gift of the American Friends of Cambridge Univer-
sity and Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1989-90. Following the strictest tradi-
tions of English academic life, my busy colleagues at Newnham left me to enjoy 
their elegant architecture and superb gardens and to finish this manuscript. They 
could not have been more kind. The shade of the late Barbara Ward, a Newnham 
Senior Fellow and excellent ethnographer, kept me silent company as I read my 
way through the Chinese collection she had left to Newnham College Library. 
Thanks are due to Keelung Hong, Ellen Oxfeld, John Rohsenow, William 
Rowe, and David Schak, who read the manuscript in whole or in part and 
pointed out some of my doubtless many errors. 
Finally, I acknowledge my debt to Arthur P. Wolf. Arthur and I began a series 
of conversations about this book- and other things -
late in 1985; we have not 
yet finished them. He told me bluntly then that if I did not take the Chinese kin-
ship system seriously in my analysis, no one would read it. Having always found 
Chinese kinship dull, at first I listened skeptically. But pondering the point en-
abled me to resolve difficulties that had for many years prevented my completing 
the book. Arthur could hardly have views on China, theory, and method more 
different from my own. Yet we stand on common ground: we live in a material 
world and are old-fashioned enough not to pretend otherwise. His criticisms, his 
suggestions for the use of quantitative data, and the fruitless but enjoyable 
process of trying to persuade him I am right have helped more than anything else 
to shape and finish this project. 
H. G. 
Stanford, California 
x 
Acknowledgments 
Chinese Dynasties of the Late Empire 
SONG 
960-1279 
YUAN (MONGOL) 
1279-1368 
MING 
1368-1644 
QING (MANCHU) 
CHIN A'S HEARTLAND 
>, 
·-t' 
N!NfxtA:~·--- ·;: 
,,, 
.-·-'· GANSU 
~:_---•. -: ,r·· 
'.,-, 
---- .. __ .. _. 
SICHUA 
~-,' 
"Chengdu 
'-, 
Kunming . 
YUNNA 
HEBEl 
,_ 
.---····',/Beijing 
__ .., __ :'Dato•ng-·:. 
• 
--· 
, 
' 
. 
' 
.-~' 
-· 
.. 
' 
i SHANXl .:· 
·:.-----< 
·-·---
HE 
--------·.: 
----
HUBEI 
---·~ ... :. 
The Pearl 
River Delta 
The Nanyang 
/ 
I 
""-
The 
Introduction 
The assortment of goods at the Mao Chou fair is complete, yet there are 
no collars made of the skin of hedgehogs, no long jackets of pigskin; nei-
ther are there golden manure forks nor silver manure baskets. 
-Proverb 
In March 1895, China was exhausted from its current war with 
Japan and from a demoralizing half-century ofWestern imperialist intrusions. 
While the war rolled over Manchuria in the north, the Japanese were also prepar-
ing to attack the prosperous island of Taiwan -
Formosa -
off the southwest 
coast of China. Into that steamy frontier province came a young American war 
correspondent, James W. Davidson, to observe the inevitable hostilities. 
Davidson found little information available about Formosa and so set out to 
write its history from the year 1430, when Chinese immigrants began to colonize 
the island. The Island of Formosa, published in 1903, contains both his historical 
researches and anecdotes and observations gathered during his several years' stay. 
At that time, the people of Taiwan were in the midst of a decades-long tea-export 
boom. Yet they had seen few foreigners, received almost no Western products, 
and remained innocent of the effects of highly mechanized industrialization. The 
tea, rice, and sugar they exported were produced with age-old technological and 
social devices -
ingenious, simple equipment and heavy reliance on family 
firms. These people were very different from what they are today, their economy 
unlike Western economies in some interesting and subtle ways. 
One of the earliest mechanical intrusions from the West into that very Chi-
nese society was the railroad, built in 1887 between Taibei, the capital, and the 
small port of Jilong. Davidson's travels on this railroad inspired an irritable 
description: 
The conductor awakened to his duties and commenced the collection of fares. 
But few were provided with tickets, the others desiring to pay, or as it proved, 
not to pay, on the train . ... They [the delinquents] comprised a large propor-
tion and appeared greatly opposed to adding their mite to the collection. Still 
our conductor was obdurate and stuck to each one until he got something out 
of him. The passengers commonly produced a small string of cash which they 
handed to the conductor who made a rough estimate of their value, ordinar-
ily to find a great shortage .... At it they went at the top of their voices until 
the passenger by dealing out a few cash at a time had paid somewhere near the 
amount, or by greater vocal power had worn out the conductor .... But re-
gardless of this labor, the conductor was no doubt pleased; it permitted him to 
abstract his "squeeze" which would not have been possible had all provided 
themselves with tickets .... the conductor next tackled the destitutes; at least 
such they were according to their own distressing tales. Three or four of these 
refused absolutely to produce anything, and the wrangling recommenced. The 
conductor now searched the clothes of the offenders, ... and then seizing a 
chicken from one of the delinquents, a sort of combination pillow and small 
trunk from a second, and a roll of filthy clothing from a third, he returned to 
my small compartment, tranquil and apparently satisfied. Whether or not the 
stuff was redeemed on the arrival of the train at Keelung, I cannot say. 
(1967:251) 
Davidson further informs us that freight was consigned to this railroad only after 
various neighboring stationmasters had bid on it. Rates depended more on com-
petition among employees of the railroad than on any fixed schedule. The low-
est-bidding stationmaster got a cut of the shipping charges. 
Davidson came from a part of the world where railroads were large, complex 
organizations. He therefore made an error that perhaps most people make on 
first reading his patronizing description: he assumed that the importation of 
track, cars, and engines automatically carried with it the importation of a system 
of human activities, habits, and values. He assumed that every reasonable, hon-
est person would accept the idea that one must buy a ticket to ride the railroad; 
that it would be deeply embarrassing to be publicly berated for not paying; that 
riders would feel obliged, contrary to their immediate interests, to follow the rail-
road's rules; that "they have to make a buck, too"; and, ultimately, that "if every-
one did that" the railroad would fail (as Taiwan's did, rather soon). 
Davidson had an oversimplified idea of what a railroad is. Track and cars do, 
in one sense, make a railroad, but without certain habits on the part of employ-
ees and passengers, equipment will not move people and freight or constitute an 
impersonal capitalist corporation. 
The Taiwanese had received only the hardware of railroading. They brought to 
their transactions with it a set of attitudes and values indigenously developed by 
petty capitalists -
family businesspeople -
because these were the economic 
circumstances with which they were most familiar. Chinese firms were nearly all 
run on the principle that the buyer should buy as cheap, and the seller sell as dear, 
2: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
as possible, the gain from the transaction going directly into their respective 
pockets. Most employees were trusted relatives or apprentices, who were closely 
watched to make sure they put the owner's interests before their own. Personal 
ties constrained relations of production; impersonal corporations were simply 
unknown. 
In the 1990s, petty-capitalist businesses with similar principles and practices 
still flourish in Taiwan (and Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, and South Korea). 
They have been reinvented in China, where they bear a startling resemblance to 
those that the socialist experiment attempted to expunge. Once again, one may 
haggle with conductors over the price of space on trains, as I have done recently 
in Fujian. Indigenous petty capitalism continues to coexist with, benefit from, 
and invade large-scale enterprises. 
Is the notion of "petty capitalism" useful? What does it mean, how does it op-
erate, what are its political-economic consequences? This book is an attempt to 
discern macrostructural continuities that underlie the changing surface of Chi-
nese life in what may be loosely called modern times: the late empire and its suc-
cessor states in China and Taiwan. Twenty years ago, when China seemed to be 
cutting an absolutely original path to socialism, such a focus would have been ab-
surd. Since the privatizations of the 1980s, the astonishing familiarity of present-
day social invention there insistently poses the question of what late-imperial and 
contemporary Chinese have in common. 
In this book, I entertain both the not-very-radical proposition that something 
that can be called Chinese culture coheres over this large stretch of time and space 
-
despite all the reasons why it should not -
and the far more radical proposi-
tion that we can sketch its outlines fairly parsimoniously. We can determine not 
simply what are the characteristics that are at once common to the Han and dis-
tinctive of them -
a list of traits can do that -
but rather what was the political-
economic dynamic that pressured people in widely varying circumstances, over a 
very long time, to make similar life choices, to act and believe in ways that they 
and we recognize as Chinese. Chinese history is anything but static, and change 
must be part of any useful analysis of it. But there are congruences as well that en-
able the Chinese of the present to recognize those of the past as their cultural as 
well as their biological ancestors. People continuously chose to act in similar ways, 
but they made those choices within certain constraints. Like the rest of us, the 
Chinese made their own history, but not under conditions of their own choosing. 
This book is about those conditions, about the armature of constraints 
around which the Chinese people, in all their vast variety of environment, expe-
rience, and action, lived and, to a very great extent, still live their lives. In it, I in-
vent abstractions- the petty-capitalist mode of production and its patterned 
interaction with tributary relations of production -
which, I contend, render 
more transparent some of the more apparent contradictions in Chinese life. Im-
portant among these are: the simultaneous adeptness of Chinese people in creat-
Introduction 
: 3 
ing both positional distribution hierarchies and rough-and-tumble market com-
petition; a kinship system that stresses kin ties as fixed, determinate relationships 
indissolubly linking the living with the dead and the unborn but that also permits 
an extraordinary pragmatism in the disposal of family members through infan-
ticide, sale, arranged marriage, and obligatory sojourning; popular religious be-
liefs that deify bureaucratic power but revere quid-pro-quo transactions that 
establish equality between gods and humans; the existence of relations between 
women and men which, in all logic, should have rendered women utterly power-
less but which have produced instead striking images of and anxieties about fe-
male power; the passive unproductivity of state workers in late-imperial China, 
Taiwan, and the People's Republic of China contrasted with the irrepressible en-
ergy of those employed in small private firms. 
I stress oppositional tendencies but not the vacuous notions of"tradition" and 
"modernity" or the inappropriate ones of capitalism and socialism. The antino-
mies emphasized here have long struck newcomers to China and have been 
raised by Chinese themselves to the level of philosophy. I return in each chapter 
to the dialectic between a petty-capitalist and a tributary mode of production, 
drawing evidence from the history of urbanization and the gendered division of 
labor, from kinship, from folk ideologies, and from economic development in 
Taiwan and the People's Republic of China. 
This is a book of immodest scope, written from a distant perspective that 
makes most historians grumpy and many anthropologists tart. I write in this 
fashion not out of simple ignorance or for lack of sympathy for dose-grained 
concrete analysis. Indeed, I have spent most of my anthropological time in the 
past twenty years getting to know three wards of Taibei City fairly well, largely 
through talking to hundreds of their inhabitants about the ordinary matters of 
life. This experience has been excellent preparation for writing a book about the 
grand sweep of Chinese culture. The real women and men who have taught me 
their versions of that culture are a constant reminder that only if I can show that 
their lives too have been shaped by the constraints and contradictions I hope to 
delineate does my argument have a chance of being useful. 
One of the ways I hope it will be of use is in bringing the increasingly large and 
sophisticated body of literature on China into closer touch with the rest of social 
analysis, especially anthropology. Anthropologists pride ourselves on the cross-
cultural perspective that enables us -
or so we fondly imagine -
to avoid some 
of the moral and scientific parochialism of disciplines that abstract conclusions 
about "society;' "politics;' "economics," and the like from a narrow and recent 
range of human possibilities. But even anthropologists rarely make use of either 
data or theoretical insight gained from the study of China/ although peoples as 
1. Recent examples have been Esther N. Goody (1982), David Nugent (1991), Marshall Sahlins 
(1988), and Francesca Bray (1986). 
4: CHINAS 
MOTOR 
few in number as the Trobrianders and the Nuer have influenced our and other 
disciplines. Recent textbooks summarizing current knowledge rarely refer to 
matters Chinese for proof of a proposition or as a source of theory to illuminate 
other problems. Conversely, the study of Chinese society has not been deeply 
penetrated by the intellectual excitement of the 1960s and 1970s, or even by the 
safe scholasticism of the 1980s. The unfolding drama of European social histori-
ography- reshaped by feminism, demography, the social psychology of child-
hood and the family, attention to state autonomy, and a sophisticated 
neo-marxism- are reflected in Chinese studies, but the compliment is rarely 
returned. 
Both Eurocentrism and Sinocentrism contribute to this lack of mutual in-
fluence. We need abstractions and language with sufficient scope to encompass 
within a unifying theoretical framework the great historical divergences between 
these two influential centers of human culture. In trying to build such a frame-
work, I begin with the best actually existing tools I can find, those of Marxism. 
My approach derives from important traditions in French and American 
scholarship. French anthropologists such as Maurice Godelier and Claude Meil-
lassoux began to revivify the Marxist strain in the study of nonclass societies dur-
ing the 1960s and 1970s. Louis Althusser and those who worked his structuralist 
vein opened new directions in the study of class societies, some of it directed to-
ward China, especially during the Cultural Revolution (a primary stimulus to 
their thinking). But despite some effort to rethink China's late-imperial society 
(e.g., Ferenc Tokei 1966), this new Marxism remained stubbornly old Marxist in 
the categories and historical expectations it brought to contemporary China. 
This European work, along with that of the Chinese Marxists with whom the 
French especially hoped to remain in tune has faded, and it inspires little re-
search. These matters are taken up at greater length in Chapter 2. 
More influential on my own rethinking of the political and economic condi-
tions that shaped Chinese culture is the work of American historical materialist 
anthropologists, best exemplified by two men who revolutionized anthropology 
for many of us: Eric R. Wolf and Sidney W. Mintz. It is primarily through their 
1950s work on peasants and complex or class societies that the study of societies 
like China's were admitted within the anthropological pale. Wolf's and Mintz's 
interests in history, in political economy, and in the experience of these in peas-
ant life has provided a framework adequate for a burst of new work on nonin-
dustrial contemporary peoples. 
At about the same time, Maurice Freedman, writing in a very different tradi-
tion, called for the incorporation of China into British social anthropology (1963, 
1979). Brilliant as his work is, it has focused the attention of China scholars on 
kinship as an autonomous entity, as if China were a vast tribal congeries of freely 
competing kin groups; his efforts to understand the role of class and state insti-
tutions have been largely ignored. Eric Wolf's Sons of the Shaking Earth (1959), a 
Introduction 
: 
5 
sociohistorical study of Mesoamerican civilization, might have been a better 
starting place for a new look at China than the largely African materials on which 
Freedman's thinking was based. Influenced in part by Wolf and Mintz, and in 
part by direct return to Marx (especially Capital III), fine anthropological work 
has been accomplished in the tradition of this period by -
to cite only two no-
table examples -
Jane Schneider and Peter Schneider (Culture and Political 
Economy in Western Sicily [1976] and Michael Taussig (The Devil and Commodity 
Fetishism in South America [1975]). 
An antimaterialist theoretical turn beginning in the late 1970s, coinciding with 
China's drastic revision of its antimarket policies, appears to have halted most 
Chinese and Western attempts to use Marxism productively and appropriately in 
analyzing China. This book may be of use, then, in beginning to formulate for 
China a set of categories which are Marxist in spirit but freer from the Eurocen-
trism that has led many analysts into fruitless debates about "how much" capital-
ism developed indigenously or why it did not develop. 
In Europe and the Peoples without History (1982), Eric Wolf argues that the 
world since 1400 has been reshaped by the pressures of a capitalism originating in 
western Europe. In my view, China, perhaps east Asia as a whole, constitutes an 
important exception in this process. People of Confucian traditions resisted Eu-
ropeans long and successfully, took much of the process of economic penetration 
and even industrialization into their own hands, and are now energetically creat-
ing odd-looking "capitalisms" and "socialisms" that are generally predicted to be 
of the greatest significance for all our futures. Capitalism, at least the capitalism 
guided by Euro-American domination, now has a rival. Our full knowledge of 
capitalism and what may replace it depends greatly on a better understanding of 
the Chinese political economy as it was before Europeans meddled with it. China 
constitutes the only case of a globally significant political economy (Immanuel 
Wallerstein would call it a world empire) to have survived the Western imperial-
ist remaking of the world of the past few centuries. The "century of humiliation" 
under foreign influence, though highly salient to critics of capitalist imperialism, 
was less influential than is generally believed -
as I argue in Chapters 2 and 11. 
Marxist theorists, strongest in the analysis of classical capitalism, must think new 
thoughts if they are to deal intelligently with either capitalism itself or this vast 
and increasingly significant exception to its laws of motion. 
A new perspective is pinpointed by Hermann Rebel: "One of the political 
economist's strongest perceptions has been of people who experience in them-
selves ... intersecting articulations of modes of production and are split inter-
nally by the double or triple lives they must lead" (1989:131). Classical Marxist 
models in which one class single-mindedly pursues one set of goals while another 
class acts on different lines, are almost always insufficient, especially in political 
economies offering some class mobility. This insufficiency has been dramatically 
true for Chinese. I identify an abstract, two-tiered class structure characteristic of 
6: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
Chinese societies in Chapter 2: a person may be a commoner in relation to the 
state-servitors class but also an owner-operator in a petty-capitalist complex that 
also includes laborers and producer-merchants. Often, however (and this point 
cannot be stressed strongly enough), the same people must make hard choices 
about which mode-of-production logic should guide their actions in a particular 
case. By the twentieth century, Chinese people had to make choices among four 
distinguishable modes of production as capitalism and, briefly, socialism, joined 
the much older options of petty capitalism and the "tributary" mode. 
Chinese people have lived for at least a thousand years within the reach of two 
different political-economic patterns that offered them different and partially 
contradictory possibilities and limitations. One is the state-managed tributary 
mode of production for state use, the other the petty-capitalist mode, a system of 
commodity production by kin corporations. Modes of production are behav-
ioral/ideational systems for transferring surplus wealth from less powerful to 
more powerful classes. For a thousand years in the late-imperial tributary mode, 
a class of scholar-officials has transferred surpluses from the various producer 
classes (peasants, petty capitalists, laborers) to themselves by means of direct ex-
traction as tribute, taxes, corvee, hereditary labor duties, and the like. In the pri-
vate markets that flourished in China from the Song forward, free producers 
transferred any remaining surpluses among the commoner classes by means of 
wage labor and a hierarchical kinship/gender system. China provides the type 
case of petty capitalism because of its exquisite integration of kinship and gender 
systems with state control. 
Brevity engenders reification: "petty capitalism" and the rest are, of course, 
abstractions from repetitions of human behavior and from congruences between 
language and action. Let me expand this somewhat mechanistic sketch to include 
a clearer specification of the actors on which my argument depends. 
Petty capitalists are commodity producers -
producers for market more 
than for use -
through firms organized in the idiom of kinship. Household pro-
ducers rely on the labor of a finely graded spectrum of blood kin, married, 
adopted, or purchased members, apprentices, and waged labor. They depend on 
a class culture that assures supplies of reliable labor, materials, credit, and capital. 
Petty capitalism generates relationships among the commoner classes necessary 
to their continued existence at a level beyond mere "natural economy." They de-
fend their communities against the avid suction of officials and (more recently) 
capitalists. Along with commodities, petty capitalists produce and are produced 
by a deep-rooted and subtly effective resistance, in word and deed, to the tribu-
tary purposes of Chi11;ese ruling classes. 
The economic activities of petty capitalism are embedded in a dominant trib-
utary mode managed by state officials who put their own requirements for reli-
able revenues, stable class relations, and continued hegemony above any 
perceived need for economic expansion. State officials define kinship relations as 
Introduction 
: 7 
relations of production; by maintaining kinship orthodoxy (and, of course, 
through other means), they regulate labor and set limits to the private accumula-
tion of resources. 
The petty-capitalist mode remains subordinate, subsumed within the tribu-
tary mode, because the kinship/gender system crucial to petty capitalism is 
defined and maintained principally by the ruling class as an aspect of its hierar-
chical control of the entire social formation. The kinship/gender system is nego-
tiable as it bears on women. But its principal, patrilineal structures are fixed -
supported, in the last instance, by ruling-class power. 
Late-imperial China's two modes of production both displayed a secular ten-
dency to grow more sophisticated and complex over the centuries. Official ex-
traction was met with household resistance, endlessly complicating the practices 
of each. Recent scholarship now offers much evidence that Chinese history owes 
more to its internal dynamic than to Western influence, including that of capital-
ism (P. Cohen 1984; Spence 1990 ). I argue here that the motor of China's history 
was the petty-capitalist tendency toward accumulation unrelentingly harnessed 
by tributary might, turned to tributary rather than capitalist purposes. When 
petty capitalism began to articulate with capitalism, however, the old order was 
threatened. Indigenous petty capitalists flourished, creating class polarization 
and misery for many, modest prosperity for some, and great wealth for a very 
few. Although Chinese who benefited primarily from the tributary mode resisted 
Western capitalism as long as possible, those who benefited from petty capitalism 
embraced the new commerce and industry, often in flagrant contravention of 
ruling-class wishes. 
The oldest and probably most influential effects of capitalism on Chinese cul-
ture came not from nineteenth- and twentieth-century European and Japanese 
incursions on China's soil. They came as Western merchant adventurers encoun-
tered Chinese merchant adventurers in southeast Asia. In the sixteenth to eigh-
teenth centuries, Chinese petty capitalists founded a discreet economic empire of 
permanent colonists and shuttling sojourners who channeled wealth from "the 
Nanyang" and played an incalculably significant role in the fortunes of most 
Pacific nations. This shadowy overseas kingdom, with its flow of family tribute 
and cross-cutting investments, has repeatedly forced China's solipsistic rulers to 
squint in puzzled irritation at the world beyond the center of the world. Overseas 
Chinese, whose tributary experience is limited to subjection to foreign imperial-
ism, the hermetic needs of family business, and tribute-extorting gangsterism, 
act out the submerged political implications of petty capitalist vision and con-
tinue to play an ever-increasing role in China's destiny. 
Because petty capitalism never attained hegemony in the Chinese system, the 
primary capitalist contradiction between capital and labor was subordinated to 
other, more insistent contradictions, notably that between state and household 
economies. Money did not come to wear the fiendish face that the people of Eu-
8: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
rope's colonies (Taussig 1975) and working class could sometimes see. The pur-
suit of profit was idealized in common life as a virtue, and the use of money as 
capital -
invested at a profit -
was sanctified in popular religion. During the 
decades following the 1949 revolution, the operation of petty capitalism, with all 
its cultural complexity, was systematically restricted in the interests of building a 
new state mode. Chinese socialism began with a commitment to the socialist 
ideal of egalitarian abundance, to a growth-oriented and ultimately classless so-
ciety. With the privatizations of the 1980s, petty capitalism increasingly forced so-
cialist institutions into apparently tributary molds. In Taiwan an alliance of petty 
and proper capitalists has become a formidable opponent of a still-formidable 
system of state production. More precision in distinguishing among tributary, 
petty-capitalist, and capitalist modes of production is found in Chapter 2. 
Chinese culture is immensely sophisticated. It is also riven by oppositions, du-
alities, wasteful struggle, and a division of social labor easily disequilibrated; the 
national ideal of a "great harmony" is an act of sublime wishful thinking. The 
Chinese imperial official, like his Chinese Communist and Guomindang coun-
terparts, had nightmares of luan, of social chaos. After a dynastic upheaval or 
some other epochal event, Chinese people settled back as a peaceable citizenry 
with a counterintuitive quantum of self-esteem. In individuals and in collectivi-
ties, vigorous support of some grand moral program was abruptly succeeded by 
apparently equally vigorous support for something entirely different. The sus-
ceptibility of the Chinese to mass enthusiasm for alternating models of right liv-
ing has been vividly exemplified over the forty years since the 1949 revolution in 
the early stages of land reform, in the Great Leap, in the Cultural Revolution, and 
in the intervening periods of reaction. Neither China watchers nor the Chinese 
themselves predicted or anticipated such vast oscillations, and their existence re-
mains a puzzle that makes us who study China cautious of prognostication. An 
important motivation for this book has been my puzzlement about this high de-
gree of moral lability. 
Chinese culture offers other stimulating puzzles. One of these is the danger-
ous persistence of the extraordinary strength of patriarchy. Taiping rebels, May 
Fourth schoolgirls, half a century of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong-thought, 
and the formidable counterexamples of their own mothers have had little in-
fluence on the profound sexism of most Chinese. Parents have been prosecuted 
lately in Taiwan for selling a daughter into prostitution (China Post 1992); alarm-
ing reports of female infanticide and the sale of women to be workers, prosti-
tutes, and "brides" (WuDunn 1991) show that the situation is worsening under a 
revived petty capitalism in China. That such treatment of women is inhumane 
goes without saying; further, low status for women has been an important factor 
in the sustaining of a high birth rate, which China simply cannot afford. A his-
torical-materialist explanation of China's extreme patriarchy, with its byproduct 
of rapid population growth, is offered in Chapter 3· 
Introduction 
9 
China's regional variation has become a recurring theme in research of the 
past two decades. Was Chinese regionalism rooted in an ineluctable logic of 
transport costs, as such analysts as G. William Skinner (1964, 1965a, 1965b) and 
Evelyn Sakakida Rawski (1972) have argued? Was it not at least as much the con-
sequence of the multiple possibilities and difficulties of living in two contradic-
tory modes of production? This question is examined in Chapter 4· 
The presence of powerful lineage organizations in an old and complex class 
society is problematic in a world where states generally commandeer the social 
power that kinship exercises in classless, stateless systems. In Chapters s, 6, and 7, 
I examine Chinese kinship as a system in part imposed by state administrative 
imperatives and in part a response to commodity production. In doing so, one 
can account systematically for some of the variations in household form, pattern 
of lineage distribution, and dowry/brideprice exchanges. 
Chapters 8 and 9 explore popular ideologies -
those centering on power and 
class placement and on gender. When read carefully, Chinese folk ritual and be-
lief reveal much about the complications petty capitalism engenders in an appar-
ently hierarchical cosmos, and about the skeptical and disaffected views of 
women in what should be a crushingly convincing patriarchy. 
Chapters 10 and 11 undertake to compare economic development in Taiwan 
and the People's Republic of China from the point of view of their different ap-
plications of the double mode of production, along with their differential inser-
tion into world capitalism. In Taiwan, many events of recent history have been 
conducive to the expansion of an indigenous petty capitalism that compensates 
for Guomindang state-sector failures; in China, misanalysis of that mode has re-
sulted in the expression of some of the society's worst characteristics and obliged 
the socialist mode to attempt things for which it is as yet ill suited. The contrast 
enables us to see clearly the political limitations of the world view the petty-cap-
italist mode encourages, along with its more positive features. The puzzle of why 
the wicked Guomindang succeeded while the virtuous Communists did not will 
seem a puzzle only, perhaps, to those who accept my adjectives. But for those few, 
perhaps, Chapter 11 will provide some cheap intellectual solace for the great left-
ist disappointment of mid-century. 
My interpretation of Chinese culture as the slowly shifting outcome of the 
same people's living through two different modes of production is suggestive 
rather than definitive. I have supported the argument with some quantitative 
data, but mostly with what I hope are appropriate examples and anecdotes. Some 
come from years of observation and conversation in Chinese places, from Chi-
nese working-class people. Much evidence comes from persons outside the Chi-
nese cultural hegemony -
foreigners or Chinese social scientists. I emphasize 
their views because my goal is not to synthesize an internalist understanding of 
Chinese political economy, but to provide a synthesis that comprehends and then 
transcends the limitations of its ideology. I do so too because I fear drowning in 
10 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A 
S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
the great sea of ink which native historians have poured forth for reasons very 
different from my own. It would be impossible to deal with all the exceptions and 
anomalies which that literature presents. As the epigraph to this chapter suggests, 
"unreasonable exceptions may be taken to any kind or degree of completeness" 
(Arthur H. Smith 1965:133). This book contains no hedgehog-skin collars or 
golden manure forks. 
I have turned frequently to "outsider" sources also because Chinese literati 
documents are silent on so many key issues. Women and the money-grubbing 
lives of ordinary commodity producers are nearly invisible in the Chinese record, 
except when they invented and successfully propagated cultural variants suffi-
ciently threatening to attract literati attention. Important work on "precapitalist" 
petty capitalists is being done, but matters I consider crucial are not well docu-
mented. 
Jonathan Spence, connoisseur of Chinese complexity, observes that "no one is 
easy to understand. And the more blurred and multifaceted our perceptions of 
China become, the closer we may be to that most elusive thing: the truth" 
(1990:14). The humane tradition that inspires such a remark offers little guidance 
to those of us who hope (against much evidence!) that reason may yet redress 
age-old cruelties. My own approach to apprehending China is better epitomized 
by another masterly student of great civilizations, Eric Wolf: , 
In social formations that deploy labor through relations glossed as kinship, 
people are assigned to networks or bodies of kin that are distinguished by cri-
teria of gender, distinct substances or essences of descent, connections with 
the dead, differential distributions of myths, rituals, and emblems. Tributary 
formations hierarchize these criteria and set up distinct social strata, each 
stratum marked by a distinctive inner substance that also defines its positions 
and privileges in society. Capitalist formations peel the individual out of en-
compassing ascriptive bodies and install people as separate actors, free to ex-
change, truck, or barter in the market, as well as in other provinces oflife. The 
three modes of categorizing social actors, moreover, imply quite different re-
lations to "nature" and cosmos. (1990:593) 
Kinship, tributary ruling/commoner classes, and market relations have all been 
salient in Chinese lives for a millennium. To see how these lives are lived, and to 
take the necessary step oflinking them with our own, we must frame Wolf's cat-
egories so that they are both Chinese and universal. 
No matter what the Chinese wish to do with their future, they must first come 
to terms with their past. Chinese thinkers are amply alert at present to the threat-
ening legacy of tributary "feudalism" (Zhang 1994:128). Their heritage of petty 
capitalism has been less clearly considered. Petty capitalism exploits in two ways: 
through the wage relation, which Chinese socialists understand and have strug-
gled to eradicate, and through the kinship/gender system, which many Chinese 
Introduction 
: 
u 
see as their only haven in a dangerous world. The kinship/gender system is not a 
natural, unconstructed reality. Many people are damaged by it, as thoughtful 
Chinese have been aware for centuries. Its convenience for Chinese states, how-
ever, has ensured the survival of some of its worst aspects into the present. To 
eradicate petty capitalism, Chinese people would need to change the laws and 
obligations that make it possible to treat kin like commodities. The commoditi-
zation of women and the young harms them and society and puts us all in 
demographic peril. 
But petty capitalism has positive features when compared with the tributary 
face of Chinese culture. It is economically productive, a result that Chinese all 
agree they surely need. It has egalitarian tendencies, which most Chinese, most of 
the time, would like to foster. Sorting out which parts of their political-economic 
inheritance will be preserved, and which left behind, will require distinguishing 
clearly among tributary "feudalism;' socialism, capitalism, and petty capitalism. 
Intellectual distinctions, themselves drawn from the experience of present life, 
are only a second step to change, however. For the third step, choosing among 
these sometimes deadly heirlooms, people must take risks. Exempt from these 
risks, foreigners may analyze and suggest, but only Chinese can act. 
12 
CHINAS 
MOTOR 
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist 
Modes of Production 
They do not grudge tending the rice in the spring 
But fear the payment of taxes in the autumn. 
The evil officials act like sparrows or rats, 
And the thieving clerks like locusts or caterpillars. 
They take extra with their enlarged measures, 
They profit by accepting strings of cash at a discount. 
People cannot avoid being flogged to make them pay up, 
And are further oppressed with private debts. 
-
Fan Chengta, Song scholar 
Chinese economies have been intensively studied since east 
Asian economic development began to challenge Euro-American dominance 
during the 1970s. According to Dwight H. Perkins, this growth in the east 
Asian region cannot be easily accounted for. Attempts to explain the phenom-
enon in terms of the policies pursued (export-led growth versus import sub-
stitution) or the economic system employed (laissez-faire capitalism versus 
socialism) have all foundered on the unavoidable fact that the rapid growth 
has occurred under a wide variety of economic systems governed by very diff-
erent policies. What these rapid developers do have in common, most aver, is 
a historical or cultural heritage (1981:360). Others have made similar argu-
ments: for South Korea (Mason and Kim 1979- 1981; Koo 1981), for Japan 
(Morishima 1982), and for the "Neo-Confucian" systems on China's periphery 
as a group (e.g. Redding 1990). 
These conclusions have been turned on China proper as well, with Ramon 
Myers (1980) arguing that its cultural characteristics make China a special case 
that sheds little light on development elsewhere. Perkins observes a new acade-
mic interest in "positive elements" in China's economic heritage (1981:361) which 
13 
we may assume will contribute to its future development as they have to those of 
the other sinitic systems. 
What then is the "Chinese heritage" that may be such an advantage in eco-
nomic development? Why has it not worked as well in the People's Republic of 
China as in the other sinitic systems? Can we specify the structure of these sys-
tems to learn if east Asians are creating fundamentally different and indigenous 
political economies in the age of capitalism? 
The attempts to identify a Chinese heritage are generally unsatisfying, consist-
ing of laundry lists of traits after the fashion of nineteenth -century anthropology. 
Hard work, respect for education, experience with complex organizations -
the 
list could be extended indefinitely. But which traits are actually relevant? Traits 
that at one time were viewed as obstacles to development, such as kinship ties and 
the small scale of business organization (K. T. Li 1976:314-15) have come to be seen 
in a more positive light, as David Buck now views lineage corporations (1984:463) 
and as some Japanese authors have long seen small businesses (Shinohara 
1962:23-25; Kiyonari 1983). But such lists remain lists, not the set of systematically 
related ideas that constitute theory. 
Neoclassical analyses of Chinese economic history and development are par-
ticularly unsatisfying in ways that are dealt with in detail in Chapter 4. In this 
chapter, I expand on the Marxist interpretation already outlined in Chapter 1, 
hoping to show both how China can be illuminated by properly grounded appli-
cation of its concepts, and how Marxist thought can flexibly and authentically 
meet the challenge of recent history. I briefly criticize Marxist attempts to apply 
classical theory to China, examine the mid-century debates about modes of pro-
duction- and then turn to a fuller description of China's tributary and petty-
capitalist modes. These having been expanded beyond the outline in Chapter 1, I 
show the implications of this dual system for class analysis and return to the dis-
tinction between petty capitalism and capitalism proper. 
The Marxist paradigm of historical change in which societies evolve, strug-
gling and resynthesizing, from primitive communism through ancient, slave, 
feudal, and capitalist societies to socialism is only with difficulty applied to 
China. Its rejection by most Western sinologists is not due solely to political an-
tipathy; even scholars sympathetic to Marxism have been unwilling to force his-
tory into these categories (e.g. Huang 1985), while others have flirted briefly with, 
and then abandoned them (e.g. Ho P'ing-ti 1954). Stalinist-Marxist analyses of 
China written during the middle of this century now often seem Eurocentric and 
sociologically barren even to those who wrote them. 
In the 1960s and 1970s, enthusiasms for China's socialist experiment and for 
retooling Marxism inspired important world-systems-theory studies of China 
(e.g. Moulder 1977; contributions by Winckler, Basu, and Kraus in Goldfrank 
1979; So 1986). Proponents of the world-systems paradigm, however, failed to 
14: CHINA 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
give sufficient attention to the precise nature of the Chinese social formation as it 
first confronted capitalism. In this, they were not unusual; the burden of later 
scholarly critique of such work was that Marxists treated capitalism as a jugger-
naut that nullified all that had gone before (Sahlins 1981). 
By the late 1970s, Marxist failures to explain complex phenomena through 
a simple ideological-superstructure-is-epiphenomenal-to-material-base anal-
ysis precipitated a wave of criticism of mechanical economism. Rather than 
seeking more refined understandings of noncapitalist political economies and 
of their persistence past the moment of capitalist contact, many concluded 
that material life was no more important than any other aspect of human ex-
istence. 
A particularly apt example of this unfortunate theoretical detour is exempli-
fied in Andrea Sankar's dissertation, "The Evolution of the Sisterhood in Tradi-
tional Chinese Society: From Village Girls' Houses to Chai T'angs in Hong 
Kong" (1978). Alive with the voices of women silkworkers and servants, this 
study downplays the influence in the Guangdong silk boom of the late nine-
teenth and early twentieth centuries on what Marxists see as the key element in 
capitalism -
wage labor in industrial production. Instead, Sankar stresses the 
variability of labor circumstances in the delta. Her arguments assume that a 
Marxist analysis of the production complex she so effectively describes would 
define it as capitalist. Because proletarian factory labor demonstrably did not 
create the unusual local patterns of female labor, she makes a characteristic an-
timaterialist leap. "The economic" (i.e. capitalism) did not determine the social 
outcome; therefore "culture" did. This strips to its osteoporotic bones the an-
thropological argument that came to dominate the 198os: if the economy does 
not work in a simplistically conceived capitalist fashion, then the economic 
should not be "privileged" in our explanations. 
At the same time, Sankar describes in wonderful detail the importance of 
what I call petty capitalism in Guangdong's early industrialization. Silk thread 
was made by daughters at home and for neighbors in small workshops as well as 
in capitalist steam filatures. Women and men worked side by side in household 
enterprises dependent on the complex ecology of fish, mulberry, and silkworm 
culture (Sankar 1978:65-66). Ten to 20 percent of households had hand-powered 
reels with which they produced "large quantities of raw silk for local and Indian 
consumption ( 69-70 ). Women preferred to work in household production sites 
"because working conditions were more pleasant and compatible and work more 
profitable" (72), although much of the work women did in their own parents' 
homes contributed directly the household income. A silk reeler who also picked 
mulberry leaves might add half again as much to the yearly family income (74). 
Production was connected to wider economic networks not only through capi-
talist wholesaling and export but also through many and varied petty-capitalist 
undertakings. In one striking example, spinsters invested savings in trading ex-
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production 
: 
15 
peditions of women broker-peddlers who sometimes traveled as far as southeast 
Asia (120). 
Although this was classical petty capitalism, its output was not small. Sankar 
writes, "In 1925 at the height of the silk boom women in the domestic sector and 
in the old-fashioned foot powered filatures produced twice as much silk thread as 
the steam filatures" (78). She points out that "in the early twentieth century the 
wealth created by silk production was so great that Shun-te capital underwrote So 
percent of the banks in Canton, and earlier it paid for 14 percent of the costs to 
put down the Red Turban Revolt" (64-65). 
This is strong evidence for the political-economic complexity that under-
pinned the unusual behavior of delta women. In Sankar's study, however, that ev-
idence lacks a frame that would allow for the systematic exploration of its 
noncapitalist elements. Sankar, like so many others, was left leaning on the crutch 
of "culture." An appropriate frame can be effectively supplied by a historical ma-
terialism that explores the interaction of modes of production in a complex soci-
ety. Subtle but not radical reconstruction can easily reshape this frame to fit the 
Chinese of the late empire, the Republic, Taiwan, and the People's Republic of 
China. 
Terry Eagleton has forcefully restated the argument for a materialist analysis 
in contemporary social theory: 
For there is surely no doubt that [material production] is what the vast ma-
jority of men and women throughout history have spent their time engaged 
on. A socialist is just someone who is unable to get over his or her astonish-
ment that most people who have lived and died have spent lives of wretched, 
fruitless, unremitting toil. . . . The sheer struggle for material survival and 
reproduction, in conditions of real or artificially induced scarcity, has tied 
up such enormous resources of human energy that we would surely expect 
to find its traces inscribed in the rest of what we do. Material production, 
then, is "primary" in the sense that it forms the major narrative of history to 
date; but it is primary also in the sense that without this particular narrative, 
no other story would ever get off the ground. Such production is the pre-
condition of the whole of our thought. (1991:82-83) 
Coming to an appropriate understanding of the role of various forms of produc-
tion in Chinese life takes logical priority over other styles of investigation. 
THEORIES OF MODES OF PRODUCTION 
A mode of production is "the mechanism which regulates the activity of 
human beings in producing what they need to sustain life" (Stevens 1983:4), or, in 
Marx's words, 
16 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A 
S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
The specific economic form, in which unpaid surplus labor is pumped out of 
direct producers .... [This] determines the relationship of rulers and ruled, 
as it grows directly out of production itself and reacts back on it as a determi-
nant. On this ... is based the entire configuration of the economic commu-
nity arising from the actual relations of production and hence also its specific 
political form. It is in each case the direct relationship of the owners of the 
conditions of production to the immediate producers . . . in which we find 
the innermost secret, the hidden basis of the entire social edifice (1981, 3:927). 
Marx used the terms "social formation" and "mode of production" in several, 
sometimes overlapping ways. 1 Dominique Legros et al.'s definition of a "mode of 
production" as a "whole composed of (1) an economic base [both technical and 
social] and (2) the superstructural apparatuses required for the replication over 
time of the economic base (1979:248) makes too much of the heuristic distinction 
between "base" and "superstructure"; a view of modes of production with a 
greater emphasis on the mutual influences of material, social, and ideological el-
ements is found in Susan Himmelwert (1983). Legros et al. relate the mode of 
production to the wider entity, the "social formation;' which is "a geopolitical en-
tity" seen as "a complex whole which may be composed of several modes of pro-
duction" (1979:248). A definition by Antony Cutler et al. of a social formation as 
"a set of relations of production together with the economic, political, and cul-
tural forms in which their conditions of existence are secured" comes usefully 
close to the traditional anthropological usage of "a culture" (1977). 
A social formation may consist of more than one mode of production. In-
deed, many social formations do so consist; some would argue that they must 
(Legros et al. 1979). In every known class society, kin groupings within which 
joint production and generalized reciprocity govern economic relations coexist 
with other patterns of economic relations with nonkin (Wolpe 1980; Foster-
Carter 1978; Rudra 1988). When we analyze articulated modes of production, we 
observe a "combination of distinct but uncomfortably related processes" (Bloch 
1983=159). Although the dominant class of the dominant mode has great power, 
class distinctions within the subordinate mode create both parallel and contra-
dictory forces that shape the cultural hegemony. 
Have not generations of Marxists, especially Chinese ones, already accom-
plished the task of anatomizing Chinese modes of production? With respect, and 
with admiration for the powerful insights already achieved, I submit that they 
have not. 
This statement sounds curious, even impertinent, for the Chinese revolution 
was inspired by Marxism and impelled by a Marxist class analysis of Chinese so-
1. I refer the interested reader to the excellent summary of the semantics of these phrases to Legros, 
Hunderfund, and Shapiro 1979:243-49, and to the entry on "Modes of Production" in Bottom ore 1983. 
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production : 17 
ciety. After the revolution, Chinese historians explored "sprouts of capitalism" in 
China's indigenous commercialization. 2 Such analyses, although often of great 
interest for the historical complexities they reveal, differ from my own in that, 
first, they employ mode-of-production categories taken directly from Marx's de-
scription of European circumstances, with only limited attempts to adapt these 
to China's historical particularities. Second, they do not attempt to integrate kin-
ship relations and gender roles into the process of social reproduction of the cap-
italist mode they describe. Japanese Marxist scholarship, to which I have only 
limited access, also appears to hesitate to tamper with classical categories of 
modes of production. In a useful summary by Linda Grove and Joseph W. 
Eshrick, they are criticized for ignoring European protoindustrialization litera-
ture (1980 ). Arif Dirlik has called for reconceptualization of the problem of cap-
italist -like tendencies in Chinese economic history but suggests no solutions 
(1982). 
Marx himself was not very knowledgeable about China, his writings indicate, 
although he followed the forcible intrusion of imperialism there with interest 
(Torr 1951; Marx 1968). He appears to have known little about the empire's eco-
nomic complexity and often lumped China with India (e.g. Marx 1968:333). 
Marx (and Engels) placed China, along with all the other non-European an-
cient empires, in a broadly sketched Asiatic mode of production (1965), and the 
Asiatic mode continues to inspire political and scholarly debate.3 The original 
formulation of the Asiatic mode implies economic and social equilibrium so 
complete that only external forces could impel change. As this view suggested 
that societies such as China's were unable to make their own revolutions without 
preliminary imperialist intervention -
putting imperialism in a positive light 
-
Stalin prohibited further explorations into the Asiatic mode, defining all pre-
capitalist state-level formations as ancient, slave, or feudal modes of production. 
Chinese Marxists inherited this position. 
The Asiatic mode is defined by its powerful state that owns all productive re-
sources, by the absence of private property, and by strong village communes in 
2. Sprouts-of-capitalism research is retrospectively explored in Myers 1976; Wakeman 1980; Fu 
Yiling 1980; and Fu Zhufu 1981; see also Kishimoto-Nakayama 1984 and Philip Huang 1985:11-12. For 
a useful compendium of some of the original1950s sprouts research, see the unauthored f n.a. in my 
sources] Zhongguo zibenzhuyi mengya wenti taolun ji (Collected discussions of the problem of China's 
sprouts of capitalism) 1987 [1959]; and also Fu Yiling's Ming-qing shidai shangren yu shangye ziben 
[Merchants and merchant capital in the Ming/Qing period] (1986 [1955]); and also Peng Zheyi (P'cng 
Tse-i) 1987. Peng's work is referred to at length in Rowe 1984:134. 
3. See Hobsbawm's Introduction in Marx 1965; Tokei 1966; Garaudy 1969; Kahn and Llobcra 1981; 
Brook 1989. Brook's collection of 1980s essays by Chinese scholars on the Asiatic mode of production 
is of considerable interest for our understanding both of history and of the development of Marxist 
thought in China. For the most part, however, the views expressed are subject to the same criticisms 
of sprouts-of-capitalism research expressed above. 
18 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
which the state, in Maurice Bloch's words, halts "the disruptive process of class for-
mation" (1983:40 ). Marx's emphasis on the economic role of Chinese states is worth 
attending to. Still, his Asiatic rubric omits much of importance in recent Chinas, 
where markets, private property, and classes are highly visible. Nor, as we now 
know, was Marx's image of an unchanging China accurate. In contrast with the 
dramatic alterations he associated with the capitalist Opium Wars, Marx saw 
China, in an ugly metaphor, as utterly stagnant, "a giant empire ... vegetating in 
the teeth of time" (Marx 1968:323). Such a position, from our vantage, is untenable. 
Marx misread the significance of China's indigenous commerce in two ways. 
First, he classed it with "natural economies" in which subsistence producers lo-
cally trade small quantities of surplus goods as a convenience rather than for 
profit (Marx 1977, 1:911). Although natural economies can be found at some times 
and places in the Chinese world, in others something much more dynamic 
emerged. Second, he did not see Chinese petty production as dependent on the 
exploitation of waged labor (1981:938-43); it therefore lacked the mechanism for 
accumulation that gives capitalism its force. 
Marx frequently mentions production based mainly on household labor as of 
no importance in the emergence of capitalism (especially 1981,3, chap. 20). This 
idea remains contentious among scholars.4 The significance of small-scale com-
mercial producers was debated at length, but inconclusively, in a collection of es-
says edited by Rodney Hilton titled The Transition from Feudalism to Capitalism 
(1976). It was clear from this landmark debate that for Marx, and Marxists in 
mid-century, small owner-operated production was considered historically im-
portant but unable to stand as a mode of production independent of a feudal rul-
ing class. The possibility of articulated subordinate and dominant modes in a 
single formation remained outside this debate.5 These scholars also generally, 
with Marx, expected that such forms of production would disappear with the 
spread of industrial capitalism. Indeed, the great majority of work on household 
production assumes that the households exist within the orbit of capitalism as a 
dominant mode. Scholars have overlooked the Chinese case, in which, especially 
prior to 18oo, commodity production was enormous but capitalism could hardly 
be considered a factor. 
4· Maurice Dobb spoke in 1946 for an important role for "petty-mode" producers in creating the 
preconditions of English capitalism; Takahashi Kohachiro noted in 1952 that Japanese scholars had al-
ready come to similar conclusions about Japan (1976:89n, and passim). 
5. A. V. Chayanov's 1925 analysis of a domestic mode of production (1986) has been applied to the 
Chinese case, generally in passing, by many scholars (e.g. Philip Huang, 1990:5-10 ). Susan Greenhalgh 
applies it to Taiwan petty-capitalist firms, with good effect (1985b). Although it has considerable 
power, Chayanov's approach contains a fatal flaw. To argue that peasant economies are motivated 
principally by family cycles and dependency ratios is to take the structure of patrilineal extended fam-
ilies as an assumption. In China, at least, that structure was not an irreducible given but a construct 
largely of the state, as James P. McGough sketches (1984) and as I argue in Chapters 3 and 5. 
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production : 
19 
Recent work by anthropologists has shown that the persistence or reinvention 
of petty commodity production on the fringes of capitalist production is ex-
tremely common.6 Many other authors prefer to remain outside the Marxist pale 
by labeling this complex the informal sector (e.g. Hart 1992). Most would concur 
with James Wessman, who categorizes "petty" and "agrarian" capitalism along 
with mercantile, industrial, and monopoly capitalism as "subtypes of the capital-
ist mode:' In the petty subtype, "agents in [the petty mode] sell in order to buy, 
not vice versa. In the economic shorthand used by Marx, their transactions are of 
this type: C-M-C (a commodity is exchanged for money, which is then used to 
buy another commodity). A capitalist, on the other hand, is engaged in transac-
tions of this type: M -C-M' (money is advanced for a commodity, which is then 
sold for a profit)" (1981:245-46). The Chinese case, in which petty capitalism long 
predated the capitalist mode, is paradoxical. Transactions of the M-C-M' (capi-
talist) type were extremely common, as enormous indigenous commodity pro-
duction attests. It is plain, however, that the resulting accumulations of wealth 
did not effect a transition to capitalism. 
The debate over petty commodity production was given new importance by 
European scholars interested in the effects of household production on popula-
tion growth rates. Unlike analysts in Hilton's collection, analysts of protoindus-
trialism (Mendels 1972, 1981; Kriedte et al. 1982, 1993) link petty production with 
kinship relations and demographic outcomes. With more effective inclusion of 
gender issues (e.g. Collins 1991; Lem 1991), students of petty production have 
begun to grasp the potential coherence of the petty mode. 
Not all forms of petty production take the same historical trajectory. As all 
agree, these are subordinate forms, guided by political-economic context as well 
as by inherent capitalist-like tendencies. China's unitary state constructed its sub-
jects' gender and kinship relations directly, unmediated by church, caste, or other 
obscurantist mechanisms. And so the Chinese petty-capitalist mode of produc-
tion emerged as a clearer opponent to state and ruling-class power, to its tribu-
tary mode, than did similar patterns in other parts of the world. 
THE CHINESE TRIBUTARY MODE OF PRODUCTION (TMP) 
All precapitalist, class-organized social formations can be combined into a sin-
gle generic TMP so that the term becomes applicable, at a high level of generality, 
to the whole range of ancient agrarian states and feudal systems (Amin 1972; E. 
Wolf 1982). Eric Wolf defines a TMP as one in which "the primary producer ... is 
6. See, for example, Kahn 1978, 1982; Littlefield 1978; Cook 1982, 1985; Littlefield and Reynolds 
1990; Binford and Cook 1991. 
20: CHINAS 
MOTOR 
allowed access to the means of production while tribute is exacted from him by po-
litical or military means" (1982:79-80 ). It specifies a nonmarket mechanism of sur-
plus extraction in the dominant mode, while leaving open the possibility of 
additional, subordinate mechanisms based on private ownership and free labor. 
Such usage also assumes a social dynamic: in tributary modes of production, direct 
producers and state officials confront each other as antagonistically as laborers con-
front their employers under capitalism (Currie 1982:16). China's late-imperial TMP 
engaged officials in the direct extraction of tribute, in the direct monopoly pro-
duction of goods and services for its own use and for sale, and in myriad attempts 
to contain, manipulate, and benefit from private markets. 
In this outline of China's tributary mode, I emphasize the economic functions 
of officials. These have been obscured in two ways. First, some analysts applying 
modern standards assume that the state was not able to control the late-imperial 
economy effectively (Feuerwerker 1984:298-305), that its economic role was thus 
not great. This view seems untenable. China's basic product was grain, and from 
the extraction of taxes in kind and of relief supplies, mid-Qing officials con-
trolled perhaps 20 percent of all grain consumed (estimated from L. Li 
1982:697-98; Wil11990). The state held vast amounts of arable land as well. In the 
early Qing, twenty million of China's seven hundred and forty million mu (6.6 
mu =one acre) were distributed by the court (Philip Huang 1985:87), enough to 
give officials enormous economic power in addition to the administrative, mili-
tary, and ideological might they also wielded. 
Second, the economic activities of officials are slighted by those who take 
extreme culturalist positions. Some see the Chinese state -
as Clifford Geertz 
perceives the Balinese (1980)- as an administrative end in itself, with a Fou-
cauldian fixation on power and ideological expression outweighing material 
considerations. Albert Feuerwerker writes of administrators' "unwitting inter-
vention (e.g. through the collection of taxes)" [my emphasis] in the economy 
(1984:297). Although Chinese officials may have given priority, at times, to the 
cosmological order-creating aspect of their duties, they were certainly not blind 
to the need of the government for cash (Zelin 1987:308; Dodgen 1991:51; Lin 
Man-houng 1991). 
Both commoners and officials, the two great tributary classes, can be stratified 
in a variety of ways -
by wealth, consumption patterns, social esteem, and so 
forth. Hereditary state miners were easily distinguishable from academics of the 
"Forest of Pencils;' county magistrates, and the magistrates' bullying runners, 
though all were state servants; rich pawnshop owners were different in important 
ways from owner-operator farmers or artisans and from hired laborers, though 
all were commoners. Those who served the state in commoner-like manual posi-
tions rather than in bureaucratic managerial ones are well exemplified by such 
low-ranking beneficiaries of tributary employment as soldiers, yamen-runners, 
domestic staff, innkeepers, and communications workers, who made govern-
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production : 
21 
ment possible. Foreign travelers in China were especially likely to record obser-
vations about the networks of inns and residences that housed officials on their 
travels and were staffed by servitors of many descriptions. Some -
lesser 
innkeepers, for example -were merely impressed into official service on an oc-
casional basis. Others were permanent state employees. One of the earliest de-
scriptions we have of this system was written by the Portuguese Gaspar da Cruz 
as he traveled to negotiate for the release of his compatriots, imprisoned in 
southeast China in 1575: 
When the [officials] are dispatched at the Court with offices for the provinces 
where they go to govern, they depart carrying nothing of their own more than 
the apparel they are to wear, and some few servants to serve them, even when 
they have no offices, neither need they carry any provision for the journey, nor 
carriage or shipping at their own charge; for through all the ways where he 
goeth are provision as well of shipping as of necessary carriage, and necessary 
food for all the King's officers, which are provided of the royal rents. 
In all the cities and great towns, the King hath many good and noble houses 
for the [officials] both great and small to lodge in (as also all those who by any 
means are the King's), which houses have sufficient rents for the maintenance 
of every person that shall dwell in the house, according to his degree. And that 
which is to be given to every one for his expences is already limited. Wherefore 
he that may lodge there being come, the officer of the house cometh to him, 
and asketh him if he will have his ordinary in money, or in things necessary 
for provision ... , flesh, fish, ducks, or hens, or what he will. And any [ offi-
cial] that doth lodge there, may command the host of the house to be 
whipped, if he serve him not to his will. And if any [official] will go to lodge at 
the house of any acquaintance of his, he taketh the money, which the inferior 
[officials] do also sometimes, either to spare some money, or to be merry at 
their wills more freely .... 
Along the road at every league, and at every two leagues, are houses which 
only have beds and chairs for the travellers to rest and ease themselves. And 
some . . . give wine to the guests; others give nothing but cha, which is 
water .... 
After the [officials] come to the city where they are to be resident and exe-
cute their offices, they find the houses where they are to lodge; and according 
as their offices are great or small, so they find their houses greater or smaller. 
In these houses they find all the servants necessary, scriveners, porters, and all 
other ministers needfull for their office. For these are continually in the 
houses, for to minister at all times to all the officers of the houses in which 
they serve. And every officer according to his house and person hath his pro-
vision necessary for his food, clothing and shoes (limited so that it sufficeth 
him well) which is paid to him without fail, at the beginning and end of every 
22: CHINAS 
MOTOR 
month. When the [officials] are old ... , they are lodged in their native places 
or where they will, and the King alloweth them every month so much accord-
ing to their quality for their maintenance till they die ... 
All the porters, serjeants, scriveners, executioners, and all the other ministers 
whom there are in each house of the [officials], have their own ample ordinar-
ies which are paid them very punctually each month. (Boxer 195p63-66) 
The Abbe Hue, traveling in the mid-nineteenth century, was struck by the lux-
uriousness of accommodations for itinerant officials, especially when compared 
with those available privately (1970, 1:23). In 1612, almost 12 percent of Fujian's 
Putian county's taxes were disbursed for 
a) regular items, for which the local government had established twenty funds: 
receiving high officials, treating examination graduates, repairs to the yamen 
buildings, street lights, costumes of officials, clothes for orphans, etc. and 
b) official expenditures of an irregular nature: common porterage and service 
personnel, stationery, fuel, candles, firewood, and rice for investigating offi-
cials, banquets at the inauguration of new officials, firewood and oil for offi-
cial guests, food for visiting investigators of detained criminals, scholarships 
and travel expenses for examination candidates, etc. (Vermeer 199ob:157-58) 
Lin Renchuan informs us of the enormous expenses paid by the Maritime Trade 
Supervisorate of Fujian for the entertainment of tribute envoys in 1439: 
According to the report by the Investigation Censor of Fukien, Ch' eng Kui: 
"The tribute envoys from the Ryukyu isles all stop over in Fuchou. The costs 
of the reception of the guests are extravagant. Last time the interpreters Lin 
Hui and Cheng Chang took with them more than 200 sailors. Except for their 
daily ration of rice, other necessities, such as tea, salt, soy-sauce are provided 
through the li-chia system .... During this last half year more than 796,900 
pieces of copper coinage have already been used" (1990:174-75). 
China's present government continues this Ming/Qing pattern; the most im-
portant question asked of an official traveler at present as in the past is "What's 
your (stipend) standard?"- not a Communist invention, as it turns out. 
Among the state's servants, holders of higher academic degrees who served in 
officialdom constituted a ruling class. Scholar-officials, chosen since the Song by 
imperial appointment from among those who successfully passed competitive 
examinations, were the most unlikely of agrarian state elites. Heredity, strictly 
defined, did not channel men into these exalted ranks. Any man with literary 
ability and respectable antecedents might offer himself on the market for talent 
established in the commercially minded Song. 
Upper scholars, who managed the social production of tribute and its dis-
bursement for social purposes and their own support, ruled China; even imper-
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production : 
23 
ial dictates passed through this highly class-conscious social filter. Although both 
upper and lower scholars formed an honored, privileged elite, distinguished 
from ordinary men (see Vander Sprenkel1962:51), exempt from conscription, 
corporal punishment, and corvee, lower scholars were treated less gingerly in 
lawsuits and punishments. Upper scholars found it easier to avoid or minimize 
taxation and to share public revenue. Government regulations distinguished be-
tween the forms of marriage, funeral, and sacrifical ceremonies allowed upper 
scholars' families and those enjoined on lower scholars and commoners (Chang 
Chung-li 1955:7-8, 35-40). One investigator classes the lower scholars as 
"scholar-commoners" (Ho P'ing-ti 1962:35). China's fundamental class distinc-
tion is made graphic on this book's jacket: rulers differed from comm.oners as if 
they were separate biological phyla. 
Transfers from commoners to officials in the form of taxes, corvee labor, and 
other exactions from nong, or agriculturalists/ have been explored by many 
scholars; they are the obvious sources of state revenue, official perquisites, and 
peasant perceptions of exploitation. Officials taxed the owners of property, up-
held land contracts, created or improved arable land by building irrigation works 
or reclaiming wasteland, allocated such new land and land left vacant after the 
frequent catastrophes of the era, confiscated property from criminals, seized or 
purchased land for roads, cities, and city walls, and performed rituals that orga-
nized agricultural production. The historically minded Chinese were well aware 
too that these officials, in the name of the emperor, had many times in the past 
entirely restructured the agrarian economy, instigated mass migrations, and al-
ways claimed the right to determine the relationships between people and land. 
By late-imperial times, heads of agricultural households were ideally owner-
operators of small farms producing for their own frugal subsistence and to meet 
the officials' demands for taxes and corvee labor. Recent research emphasizes the 
late-imperial tendency for land tenure to move to private smallholdings rather 
than to feudal manorial and other forms of large-scale tenure (Elvin 1973; Marks 
1984; Philip Huang 1985). Agriculturalists were exhorted to produce enough for 
both taxes and subsistence and to consume frugally so that their surplus would 
be large (Hsiao Kung-chuan 1960:188-89). To assist them, officials managed and 
improved irrigation systems, roads, and canals and maintained substantial re-
serves of grain (L. Li 1982:689, 694-99; Wil11990) to alleviate famine for a popu-
lation apparently not expected to be able to retain sufficient reserves to survive 
economic shortfalls. 
7· "Nong' is best rendered as "agriculturalist" rather than "peasant" or "farmer;' because in gen-
eral anthropological usage (following E. Wolf 1966:2) these latter terms imply political-economic con-
texts -
a precapitalist social formation for "peasant," and a capitalist one for "farmer" -
whereas 
it is my intention here to argue for a more precise characterization of the Chinese case than the resid-
ual "precapitalist" category. 
24: CHINAS 
MOTOR 
Although officials sometimes attempted to increase productivity through the 
dissemination of agricultural innovations, they aimed for a stable or static econ-
omy (R. Huang 1969:77, 112; 1974:229). Intentionally or not, Qing China reached 
a plateau of agricultural involution (Elvin 1973) -population expansion paral-
leling production expansion, with no growth in per-capita income. In conse-
quence, officials could increase their share of the exploitable agricultural surplus 
only by taxing more efficiently or by gaining rights over more taxable households 
-
perhaps by rising in rank or by expanding the territory they oversaw. The offi-
cials' concern for political control over persons and territory was firmly rooted in 
their economic interest, which sometimes overrode all other considerations; peo-
ple sometimes had to sell their children to pay taxes to these officials (Waltner 
1990:83). 
As well as accumulating agricultural surpluses, officials as a class also con-
trolled large industrial and commercial enterprises, acquiring products and re-
sources needed for public use -
salt, armaments, porcelains for imperial use, 
bricks for a city wall -
through nonmarket mechanisms such as state factories, 
franchises, and monopolies. The enormous salt monopoly, a mainstay of gov-
ernment revenues from its inception in the Han (206 BPE to 220 PE), shows us 
state production in action. By late-imperial times, most salt was made inhered-
itary salt households and distributed regionally by hereditary government 
franchise holders known as salt "merchants." For eighteenth- and early-nine-
teenth-century Hankou, William T. Rowe describes the two hundred salt mer-
chants of the central Yangzi area not as private entrepreneurs, as were most 
merchants, but as an extension of officialdom: they were "virtually accorded the 
status of government officials. As holders of hereditary ... privileges, these mer-
chants in essence held enfeoffed title to a particular salt distribution route." Salt 
transactions "were formally viewed as little more than internal accounting pro-
cedures between agencies of the imperial administration"; the stored salt and 
storage facilities "were officially held to lie in the public domain, as were the 
funds covering the depot's operating budget." These extraordinary salt "scholar 
merchants" had high prestige burnished by literati lifestyles, and they bought 
degrees by the hatful (91, 99, 119, 117, 184, 205, 207), though these did not make 
them eligible for administrative office. Such "merchants" differed from the clas-
sical administrative scholar-officials in two principal ways: they were not subject 
to the rule that kept officials from holding posts in their native places (99 ); and 
their franchise entitled them to sell not administrative services only (like a mag-
istrate), but a concrete material product. They constituted a special, slightly 
"lower" branch of officialdom -
an officialdom that expected to draw goods 
and services directly from the population and also to sell some monopolized 
goods and services directly to them. 
The state production of salt (and other goods such as coal, copper, and porce-
lain) became less "feudal" from the late seventeenth century on, when quasi-
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production : 
25 
official roles such as that of the Hankou salt merchants were eliminated in favor 
of more numerous and more completely privatized channels of production and 
distribution (Rowe 1984:119-20 ). These facts are consistent with the growth of a 
more capitalist-like system of urban commerce- which is Rowe's point. There-
structured privatized salt system of the later nineteenth century also greatly lim-
ited the scale of the now purely private salt merchants, pressing them more firmly 
into the petty-capitalist mold. 
Officials could both tax and charge for their administrative duties; they held 
low-paid franchises to sell official services. The Abbe Hue was amused at a mid-
nineteenth-century Chengdu magistrate's candor on the subject: "If it is allow-
able to make a fortune by trade and commerce, why may one not also grow rich 
by teaching reason to the people, and developing the principles of justice?" This 
magistrate was noted for sending agents to dig up cases for him to try, and he 
complained that one of his districts had "never given me a single suit; concord 
reigns among all the families in it." Hue observes that these "not very elevated 
sentiments are common to all the Mandarins, and they express them openly and 
without scruple" (1970, 1:104-5). 
These routine rights of extraction easily blended into the power to squeeze 
commoners for extraordinary contributions (R. Huang 1974: 229, 230, 232; 
R. Huang 1969: 103, 105, 125; Yang 1979; The Far East 1871:1-3). The British consul 
to Taiwan, a Mr. Swinhoe, reported in 1864 on the division of spoils among the 
four civil levels and the one military level of officials on the island at that time. 
The governor was expected to draw most of his remuneration from the "fabu-
lous" camphor trade; the head of the prefecture drew on court fees and the salt 
monopoly; the various county magistrates supplemented their salaries with court 
fees and by intimidation; the marine magistrate had the right to commandeer 
vessels for state grain transport, so his income came largely from boat captains 
who wished to evade this onerous service. "But the military offices of Formosa 
may be looked upon as so many gambling lotteries. The mandarinate of the 
[chief military officer] is said to be the most lucrative on the island." One of 
these, in office for only eight months, made 4,000 taels (Davidson 1967:100 ). 
Although the state squeezed everyone, there were both practical and ideolog-
ical reasons for them to squeeze even harder those who trafficked regularly in pri-
vate commodities. In official eyes, a modest income for owner-operators was 
legitimate; substantial petty-capitalist profit was tainted and vulnerable (Mann 
1987a:16). Merchants and profit-making producers were officially viewed as trou-
blesome elements existing outside the fundamentally agricultural integrity of the 
TMP, undeserving of the social esteem reserved for agriculturalists and their 
scholarly overseers. At least one Qing emperor is remembered for measures that 
intentionally benefited small commerce while suppressing "self-seeking" gentry 
who, presumably, were accumulating too much wealth through the private econ-
omy (Huang Pei 1974:269-70). The efficacy of the Ming state fluctuated from 
26: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
"slothful and unresponsive" to "more organized and benevolent;' varying greatly 
according to the state's linked capacities to punish and to nurture petty capital-
ism (Tong 1991:195). 
At moments of power, officials sometimes pursued tax revenues to the point 
of destroying the economic success that produced them (H. Clark 1990:57). In 
1876, when nearly 70 percent of Hubei province's revenues came from commer-
cial sources, Hubei officials exported 520,000 taels for court and military use; 
Hubei was hit again in 1883-84 with special levies. It is no wonder that, as Rowe 
notes, by the 188os "the post-Taiping commercial boom centering on Hankow 
had begun to lose its momentum" as the state regained its capacity to channel 
wealth into the TMP (1984:18, 202-203)! 
Scholars have long assumed that private marketing lay outside official concern 
except insofar as it could be taxed. Gary Hamilton summarizes: 
The government played an active role in regulating commercial activity in its 
official monopolies on foreign trade, salt, porcelain (from the government 
factory) and several other lesser items. But in the main ... the Ming and Qing 
government[s] did not determine the value of commodities, enforce con-
tracts, set standards for weights and measurements, or even specify the 
medium of commercial exchange. The government[s] played no significant 
role in establishing credit institutions, in creating commercial insurance, in 
setting acceptable interest rates, or even in backing its own paper currency. 
Beyond occasional attempts at taxation of commodities in transit (which was 
only institutionalized after 1853), government officially made no attempt to 
regulate the distribution or to tax the sale of goods. (1985:195) 
Yet some scholarship suggests that controlling markets in private commodities 
was an important aspect of tributary organization. The state not only taxed pri-
vate markets; it also manipulated them, subordinating market processes to trib-
utary ones. In the late empire, private nonagricultural production made up as 
much as 30 percent of the national per-capita value added (estimated by Feuer-
werker 1984:299). Writing of early Qing officials in Shandong, Susan Mann 
observes that a "paramount concern was controlling competition in the market-
place: curbing the power of brokers; protecting the local peasant producers, ped-
dlers, and small traders who formed the lateral trade networks supplying local 
demands for goods and services as well as interregional trading systems; and reg-
ulating the activities of the merchant guilds, itinerant traders, and local entre-
preneurs" (1987a:58; and see Perdue 1987:149). 
The principal channel for state control of merchants was a system of franchised 
brokers, inaugurated in the Song and perpetuated and strengthened through to 
the Qing. Brokers' franchises were issued in fourteen agricultural commodities 
and in cotton and silk cloth. In their respective trades, brokers handled transport 
and contract labor and acted as legal witnesses to all wholesale transactions, it 
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production : 
27 
being illegal to trade at this level without the presence of the state go-between. 
Though commoners, brokers held very considerable police, tax, and administra-
tive powers as well (Rowe 1984:187). In conducting fieldwork among Sichuanese 
and Fujianese communities of former short-haul porters, I became convinced of 
the power of broker roles in the early twentieth century and of their probable effi-
cacy in earlier periods; broker power was not an administrative fiction. 
Brokers' families became a small, hereditary, and kin-linked elite among mer-
chants, somewhat similar to salt-merchant families. They formed a quasi-official 
extension of the ruling class with the specific privilege of charging fees for oblig-
atory services while at the same time monitoring their merchant brethren in the 
interest of the state. Although brokers may have served to regularize business 
practice through the application of bureaucratic standards to various commer-
cial undertakings, the system seems rather to have invited particularization. Ties 
and fees to a particular broker, not a framework of even-handed law, settled dis-
putes brought to such men. 
Apart from their licences to squeeze lesser merchants, brokers appear to have 
done what Rowe idiosyncratically calls "maintaining market order." By this he 
means that they prevented price fixing by powerful merchants or consortia. They 
thereby helped create an oddly artificial market that limited the power over prices 
of those with large capital. The brokerage system -
if it indeed functioned with 
the fullness Rowe outlines -
may have been an important element in official 
management of the total productive process. By checking the inherent tendency 
of free markets to produce ever-larger pools of capital, official policy encouraged 
the maintenance of an intensely competitive market for petty capitalists while re-
taining the power to monopolize that market for its own use. 
Accepting a natural economy level of local trade but keeping incipient capital-
ism petty absorbed much official attention. According to Ray Huang, the Ming 
state preferred a low level of economic development to potentially disruptive re-
gional imbalances (1974:2). Mann's insightful study of Qing attempts to tax com-
merce shows that concern for limiting a challenging mode of production at least 
equaled desire to tap revenue. On this point, economic historians of Fujian are 
especially supportive. Chang Pin-tsun sums up a position that underpins most of 
the essays in an important collection (Vermeer 1990a): 
The economic mechanism of late imperial China was formed primarily to 
achieve stability rather than efficiency .... no single economic sector was al-
lowed to grow large and strong enough to shake the foundation of the conti-
nent-centered agrarian economy. The maritime-oriented economy in late 
Ming Fukien was no exception. The Fukienese maritime merchants, therefore, 
like their inland counterparts, preferred to conform to the norms of the con-
tinental economy rather than venture to replace them with mercantile ones 
which were more conducive to their maritime undertaking. In consequence, 
28: CHINA's 
MOTOR 
the sector of maritime economy in late Ming Fukien did not accelerate its effi-
ciency orientation so as to erode the continental economy, but was instead 
eroded by the latter. If the maritime merchants of late Ming Fukien were not 
initiative and innovative enough to be labeled "commercial capitalists;' their 
restraint from initiation and innovation was well justified in view of the risks 
involved in the challenge against the whole setup of China's continent-
centered agrarian economy. (Chang Pin-tsun 1990:79-80) 
THE PETTY-CAPITALIST MODE OF PRODUCTION (PCMP) 
Although this outline of the TMP is familiar as the traditional Chinese cul-
tural ideal, the PCMP has not been explicitly recognized as a coherent part of an 
integrated Chinese social formation. 8 It is therefore necessary to describe the 
petty-capitalist mode and its class relations more fully. Here, I focus on several 
aspects of petty capitalism and the problem of distinguishing between capitalism 
and petty capitalism. A fuller analysis of state/kinship control of labor is devel-
oped in subsequent chapters. 
The PCMP is a system of private production of agricultural and other com-
modities -
as when an agricultural household markets part of its grain or tex-
tiles, a tofu manufactory sells bean curd, or a family raises more children than it 
can employ because it can sell their labor power. Products of these households 
enter a market in which, despite the personalism of many Chinese petty-capitalist 
activities, concern for profit dominates other considerations in setting prices (De 
Glopper 1972:311). Petty-capitalist households, especially agricultural ones, often 
produce for their own use, and they maintain noncapitalist exchanges with kin, 
friends, and fellow villagers. But their continued reproduction depends on en-
gagement with the market, including the buying and selling of labor power. 
Although private, ownership is not individual; household enterprises are 
managed by men who ideally are agnatic kin. Household and lineage enterprises 
-
here, "patricorporations" -
own or control the means of production, such as 
farmland or workshops. Patricorporate enterprise depends first, and heavily, on 
its own members for labor. Outsiders are hired primarily to make up for family 
8. Analyses of China as an Asiatic or tributary system by John Gledhill1984 (138) and Eric Wolf 
1982 (chap. 8) contain no hint that the complexities of the system might be resolved by the use of such 
a concept; Karl Wittfogel's treatment of the TMP seems hardly to notice the role of private property 
in China, though he refers to the rarity of peasant possession of land in agrarian societies generally 
(1957:276). Asian Marxists, as has already been indicated, continue to attempt to decipher economic 
history using only classical "feudal" and "capitalist" categories; non-Marxist sinologists generally pro-
duce empirical studies that rest very lightly on comparative theory. 
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production 
29 
labor deficits. Household members may be treated as commodities by the corpo-
ration of mature men who own its property; wives, daughters, and immature 
sons can be sold by the household head, and persons may be purchased to take 
up such positions for the productive and reproductive advantage of the house-
hold as a whole. The boundary between kinsperson and hired hand is often 
blurred. This blurring, to be explored more fully in Chapters 5, 6, and 7, accounts 
for the difficulties in characterizing Chinese forms of commodity production 
(see Judd 1994: chap. 4). In late-imperial China, labor was free neither to escape 
the control of kin seniors nor to enter any and all segments of the market. 
Nonkin laborers were hired, typically in small numbers, for long, fixed peri-
ods such as the agricultural year or for the customary three to five years of the 
craft apprentice (Morse 1966:33). The commoditization of this labor was partly 
controlled by China's famous guilds. Scholars note that guilds produced "practi-
cally all manufactured goods sold" in pre-twentieth-century China, and the "ma-
jority of the town population live[ d) by their handicraft, working in small shops" 
(Burgess 1966:29). These guilds "establish[ed] rules and compel[led] obedience 
to them; they fix[ ed] prices and enforce[ d] adhesion; tlley settle[ d) or modif[ied] 
trade customs and obtain[ed] instant acquiescence" (Morse 1966:31). As long as 
the guilds' institutional behavior remained orthodox, the state permitted this 
customary regulation of labor. 
Many artisans and laborers thus were organized against competition from 
non-members. Wages were not set entirely by market mechanisms, and entry 
into some occupations was impeded by guild monopoly. Yet guilds did not con-
trol occupations as completely as the quotations from John Burgess and Hosea 
Morse might indicate. Their tendency in the late nineteenth century to make an 
occupation hereditary may have resulted from competition with foreign com-
merce and technology (Fewsmith 1983:626). Even where they were strong, guilds-
men did not always insist on their trade monopoly (Burgess 1966:126; Rowe 
1984:141). Guilds were typically neither difficult nor very expensive to join, and 
they responded rapidly through changes in their rules and wage levels to chang-
ing economic conditions (Burgess 1966:99, 102). Their existence and considerable 
power surely affected the market for skilled and semiskilled labor, but that mar-
ket existed nonetheless. 
China's late-imperial labor market was sticky not only in response to market 
competition but also in response to TMP demands. Guilds were organized as 
much to defend members against excessive exactions by officials as against com-
petitors. Protests and boycotts were often successful (Burgess 1966:;8; Morse 
1966:30,31, 45-46). Responsiveness to market pressures was also slowed, though 
not precluded, by the tendency of employers to require introductions by guaran-
tors or brokers from employees. 
Markets in labor (as well as in other things) were also indirectly affected by the 
constraints the state placed on the transport of goods by sea (Davis 1972, 2:375) 
30: CHINAS 
MOTOR 
and by the willingness and ability of officials to construct and maintain such in-
frastructural supports in production as irrigation systems, roads, and canals. But 
these and other constraints mentioned above, including those of kinship, seem 
not to have greatly impeded constant flows of Chinese workers from rural to 
urban areas, into lands left empty by disasters, and from China to every corner of 
the earth. 
That markets in land were important in late-imperial China is beyond dis-
pute. It is important to recognize that, when means of production were held by 
patricorporations rather than in individual tenure, land sales were complicated 
by the multiple rights of agnatic kin. (Aspects of these issues are explored in 
Chapters 5 and 6.) 
Patricorporations and communities formed production networks through an 
extensive repertory of business skills and institutions.9 Such skills were learned 
mostly informally from kin, community, and even from the play of children (Hue 
1970, 2:149). 
Petty-capitalist business dealings were based on personalistic ties and a local 
reputation for honesty that made possible a great deal of extension of credit se-
cured by unofficial rather than legal sanctions. The courts of the late empire, the 
People's Republic of China, and to a lesser degree Taiwan have generally been un-
9· Excellent descriptions of petty-capitalist business practice are found in Fried 1953; Skinner 1961; 
De Glopper 1972, 1979; T'ang Mei-chun 1974: chap. 4; Nonini 1979, 1983a, 1983b; Cooper 1980; Omo-
hundro 1981; Harrell1982, 1987; Stites 1982, 1985; Smart 1983, 1986; Rowe 1984; Numazaki 1986, 1991, 
1992; Wright 1988; Xu Xinwu 1988; Bosco 1989; Hill1989; Gardella 1990; Redding 1990; Mao Zedong 
1990: chap. 3; Basu 1991a, 1991b; Smart and Smart 1991, 1992; Oxfield 1992, 1993; Skoggard 1993. 
Tim Wright focuses on the "management practices of China's capitalist entrepreneurs up to 1937'' 
(1988:185); these capitalists came from the bureaucracy or politics rather than from private commerce, 
or industry. Rather than use "universalistic criteria in staff selection, capital mobilization and eco-
nomic transactions, the entrepreneurs were impelled by 'traditional' values to work mainly through 
particularistic criteria -
especially familial ties, but also many other relationships, such as native 
place loyalities and teacher-pupil, school or institutional links" (187). That is, they maintained many 
aspects of petty-capitalist practice. 
Ann Maxwell Hill's study of the tea trade in a predominantly Dai area of South China stresses 
effortful participation by merchants, their development of personalistic ties, and their cautious capi-
talization dependent on social relations and guarantees. "Merchant associations, tea 'futures; short-
term loans, and production for market using labor-intensive technology" characterized this trade 
(1989:333-34). 
In discussing the persistence of handicraft cotton production against early industrial competition, 
Xu Xinwu concludes (as, he says, did the English diplomat, W. H. Mitchell) that handicrafts com-
peted so well because "domestic handicrafts and the small peasant economy were so intertwined that 
they were able to resist stubbornly machine industry. The small peasants of China could fully utilize 
and rationally distribute surplus household labor. They also economized with the greatest of care, as 
for example in the use of raw cotton." They could make cloth for domestic consumption "almost 
witl!out concern for cost-benefit calculations" (1988:46). 
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production 
31 
sympathetic to business disputes. Recourse to the courts was and is too danger-
ous to complainants to be anything but a last resort. People uphold their business 
agreements because the gods enjoin probity (Saso 1982), because they want to 
protect reputation and future creditworthiness, and because creditors sometimes 
enforced repayment through political clout or physical muscle. These sanctions 
have long worked well enough for the regular transaction of business (Hue 
1970:2:150 ). In the present as in the past, in the absence of trust nurtured through 
personalistic ties, one observer notes that "financial control practices are still so 
clandestine that they are only partly rational" (Redding 1990:11). 
Petty-capitalist enterprises, whether enormous or tiny (Hue 1970:2:145), found 
capital and arranged for the extension of credit through rotating credit clubs, 
personal loans, the transfer of brideprice and dowry, pawnshops, moneylending, 
gambling, protection rackets run by gangs, and other mechanisms large and 
small. Private postal systems of great efficiency and honesty connected much of 
the Chinese world, including southeast Asian settlements (Ball1982:522-23; Bird 
1983:158). Effective money transfers within China by highly personalistic private 
banking systems are also well attested (e.g. Ball1982:63-66; Commeaux 1970:61). 
Even the poorest experienced money as a commodity (Ball1982:445-50 ). 
Personalism in business, like many aspects of petty capitalism, was strongly 
reinforced by the state. The official pawnshop interest rate in mid-nineteenth 
century, for example, was 30 percent. Officials intended this high charge, accord-
ing to Chinese views of the time, to keep land prices from rising by offering a 
strong alternative investment so as to "render the distribution of land propor-
tioned to the number of families, and the circulation of money more active and 
uniform" (Hue 1970, 2:133; see also Staunton 1810:530-32). Such usurious interest 
encouraged borrowers to "pull" on personal ties for loans. 
It is difficult to manage capitalist-like relations of production without a sys-
tem of law that is directed to protect private property and that transcends kin-
ship. Authors seeking sprouts of capitalism have ferreted out examples of 
corporate-like partnerships, such as those discussed by Rowe (1984:72-74; see also 
Numazaki 1991:42-45). I have encountered them myself in fieldwork among or-
dinary folk: unrelated men in some Fujian coastal villages have traditionally put 
in small capital shares to pickle oysters for sale to Xiamen City. They split the 
profits; then the temporary production unit dissolves. But impersonal business 
ties were viewed negatively by officials who feared the expansion of local for-
tunes. They sometimes forbade joint land purchases by multiple households, 
even if these were organized as lineages (Perdue 1987=147). Impersonal dealings 
were also risky. In Hankou during a speculative credit boom between 186o and 
1890, thousands of debtors absconded. The domino effect of one bankrupt's 
bringing down others shows that mechanisms to protect purely commercial con-
tracts were virtually absent (Rowe 1984:166). Susan Mann Jones makes the same 
point (1972). 
32 
: 
C H I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Businessmen could and did petition local officials for legal status for the reg-
ulations they and their organizations drew up to protect their contracts. This 
bottom-up mechanism for creating a legal framework for private property rights 
was inherently weak, if relatively democratic. The initiative must generally have 
been the merchants'; the laws thus enacted must have been localized and frag-
mentary; and officials willing to accept the laws in principle might have been un-
willing to enforce them. In late-nineteenth-century Hankou, merchants of the 
tea guild successfully pressed regional rulers to authorize a series of measures en-
suring honest business practice. Both the pressure and the legalization were reit-
erated in language that Rowe sees as suggesting "a resemblance between the 
forms of market management the guild and the brokers desired for the tea trade 
and those employed in the government-supervised salt market" (1984:146). The 
merchants requested the same degree of legal and practical protection for private 
as for state transactions. No measures for enforcement of these laws appeared, 
however. For the most part, "The Chinese seemed willing ... to rely upon private 
compulsion to guarantee prompt and fair payment" (1984:145). Although brokers 
themselves were in an excellent position to enforce official commercial codes to 
protect merchant property (against default, breach of contract, etc.), it is not at 
all clear that they did so. Rowe's detailed account of brokers' roles offers no sug-
gestion that merchants took problems, such as the wave of absconding debtors, 
to brokers as they might have to a court. One must also assume that the multi-
tude of brokers in many trades and circumstances, concerned primarily with 
trade and with their role as privileged middlemen in their associates' business 
deals, could hardly have formulated and promoted the sort of regular legal prece-
dents required to protect individual, corporate, or other nonfamily-estate prop-
erty. Until evidence to the contrary comes to light, we must continue to assume 
that Chinese officials were more inclined -
and strongly so -
to protect family 
estates based on inheritance than the recent and individualistic earnings of en-
trepreneurs and nankin partnerships. 
Rowe himself disagrees with the idea that officials did not try to enforce com-
mercialliability, noting that Chinese merchants in Hankou frequently brought 
debtors to magistrates' courts, and he illustrates the point with three cases. In 
one, the governor's yamen compelled the dishonest dealers to pay up, but his 
other two examples remind us why courts were understandably feared and 
avoided in business as in other matters: the defendants -
one, apparently inno-
cent- were beaten to death in open court (168-70). Legal action was punitive 
and ex post facto rather than aimed at the construction of a legal framework for 
the protection of property. Only in the realm of property as it undergirded the 
patricorporations was the state both firm and enduringly consistent in its legal 
stance. 
Harsh and unceasing competition was another factor that limited the growth 
of business relations outside the patricorporation. Market processes generated 
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production : 
33 
pressures that trade associations attempted to limit, but against which agricul-
turalists, artisans, and merchantsliving in their home communities had few de-
fenses. Where each producer household's earnings threaten every other's, the 
long-term tendency of commoditization is to dissolve the bonds of human rela-
tionships in the impersonality of the market, where everything can be bought 
and sold. Such an economy breeds fear and distrust of one's neighbors in addi-
tion to that felt for autocratic authorities. 
Distrust and fear of strangers, or even of those who are simply outside the cir-
cle of kin, are striking characteristics of Chinese people (as well as of others, such 
as rural Italians and Mexicans who struggle on the fringes of capitalist economies 
[G. Foster 1967 ]). This distrust is vividly dramatized in the near-universal Chi-
nese anxiety about ghosts. Ghosts represent perhaps the ultimate fear in Chinese 
life, that of being alone in an exacting, competitive world, with no economic 
base. Their lack of human connection to material resources makes them essen-
tially evil. In life, such a person is a wandering stranger, or a beggar (Jordan 1972; 
A. Wolf 1974b; Weller 1985, 1987), the ultimate in propertylessness. Many vivid rit-
uals and beliefs are foils for these images; funeral and marriage rites, for example, 
stress the family as the only safe haven in a dangerous world. The chasm between 
the household and the outer economy is built into China's highest ethics, and 
into its deepest fears. 
People in the PCMP produced their own ideologies, symbols, and rituals 
through which common folk articulated their perceptions of their world, in-
structed the young and one another, and enacted them into reality. These ideolo-
gies were vast and protean in scope, responsive as they were to problems of 
practical production, ecological balance, political power, gender definition, ulti-
mate meaning, and a myriad of other cultural complexities. (see D. Johnson et al. 
1985; Gates and Weller 1987). They are similar in many ways to those produced by 
peasant peoples generally. Fertility, for example, whether of people, animals, veg-
etation, or the soil itself is stressed, symbolized, and sacralized. 
Some PCMP ideological preoccupations are unique to and characteristic of 
petty-capitalist culture. Money is c:1 magical and a sacred substance in Chinese 
folk life, offered to gods and spirits, used for purification and to symbolize pro-
ductive and reproductive increase. The highly commercialized Cantonese tell folk 
tales of fetishized money that chooses to "come to a new home" or "run away 
from [its] old home" (Sung Hok-pang 1974:163-66). Folk rituals support the 
virtues of getting rich, paying one's debts, and investing for profit. Petty-capital-
ist commoners, producing for market with wage labor and partially commodi-
fied patricorporate labor, oppositional to a demanding tributary mode, created 
moral visions in which upward class mobility is both possible and imperative. 
The climb began on the rugged petty-capitalist path to wealth through work, 
from which a few talented fortunates might float free into the tributary 
empyrean. 
34 
: 
C H 
I N A 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
THE PETTY-CAPITALIST CLASSES 
Competition among patricorporate producers created a ferment of social mo-
bility among commoners, dividing them into three petty-capitalist classes: those 
that owned capital and hired labor, those that largely labored on their own capi-
tal or on land in secure tenancy), and those that depended primarily on selling 
their labor for survival. 
Class relations within the PCMP enabled some households to accumulate re-
sources from the exploitation of labor, the renting of land, commerce, the 
profitable production of commodities, and the lending of money. Whatever may 
have been the long-term effect of such accumulations, the circulation of wealth 
through the economy had a profound effect on its constitutent households, di-
viding them roughly into labor-hiring owners, owner-operators (and, some-
times, secure tenants), and laborers. Economic limitation and political caution 
converged to make owner-operators/secure tenants the statistical norm, but 
competition and the secular growth of commoditization made the line between 
them and surplus-accumulating households only a quantitative matter. 
In cotton-growing north China, Philip Huang sees these as "social strata" dis-
tinguished by different motivations as well as by different production relations. 
He contrasts "managerial landlords" who employed family and waged labor with 
"leasing landlords," usually absentee, who rented out to tenants. Of the two, the 
managerial households derived higher returns "because most managerial farmer 
households did some farm labor themselves, whereas those who leased out their 
land did not." As this pattern emerged, Qing officials characterized these em-
ployers of labor together with their workers: "they were all commoners who got 
their hands dirty in the lowly and menial task of farming" (72, 98). To the hired 
hands, although they were relative equals who shared in household life and work, 
the gap must have seemed much wider. 
Huang's study reveals another important characteristic of petty-capitalist 
commodity production -
its tendency to emerge from leasing landlord/tenant 
relations, and to return to them when the boom was over (78). The leasing land~ 
lord/tenant relationships that are the foil to Huang's managerial system operated 
more on tributary than on petty-capitalist principles. In times and places of un-
dynamic markets, such landlord/tenant relations might have been (as they were 
Huang's description) a relatively unprofitable but secure means for merchants to 
protect accumulated wealth. In other regions, such as Taiwan or the Pearl River 
delta, where wealthy men speculated in land, imported tenants, built infrastruc-
ture, and sometimes processed and sold the products, tenancy was part and par-
cel of petty capitalism, their tenants a semi proletariat. John Shepherd warns us 
against mistaking tenant status for poverty (1988:427); Dwight Perkins observes 
that southern tenants were sometimes better off than northern owners 
(1969:106-7). The vexed question of what tenancy meant in China must be an-
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production : 35 
swered in locally specific terms and must take into account the local concatena-
tion of tributary and petty-capitalist options. 
Household firms circulated through the petty-capitalist classes in a social eddy 
internal to the TMP, spinning off into officialdom members of the rare families 
lucky and clever enough to groom outstanding scholars. Although scholarly work 
on social mobility in China emphasizes movement between official and com-
moner classes, most mobility in fact occurred among commoners. Except in rare 
periods when economic expansion greatly outstripped population growth, most 
of that mobility was always downward. 
Class relations in the PCMP -
the relations among landlord/merchants, 
owner-operators (including Huang's managerial landlords), and the largely prop-
ertyless -
are clear in principle but blurred in practice. Descriptions of rural 
classes in China at the time of Communist land reform show a spectrum of imper-
ceptible gradations in many parts of the country -
from households that owned 
a great deal of land and did no manual work themselves, to "rich peasants" who did 
a little work but hired out most of it, to those that balanced household labor and 
capital (the unit that best matched the purposes of the TMP), to those who owned 
insufficient land and so rented a little additional land, to families farming tenanted 
land, to hired laborers with no means of production at all (Crook and Crook 1959; 
Hinton 1966: chap. 3 and app. C). Similar ranges could be found outside agricul-
ture, from the wealthiest of merchants through artisan households that sold their 
own products to jobbers who peddled others' goods on city streets. 
When land, labor, or commodity markets were volatile, individual persons 
and households are difficult to pigeonhole. (The Marxist concept of class is less a 
sorting system for persons than an image of political-economic forces in mo-
tion.) Empirically intermediate cases need not obscure the distinctions that, in 
our different ways, Huang and I see as characteristic of Chinese commoners. It 
should be noted too that the sharp distinction between agricultural and nonagri-
cultural enterprise as the basis for family fortunes characteristically made by the 
Chinese themselves turns out, in the light of much recent scholarship, to be illu-
sory (e.g. Rowe 1984:119; Mann 1987a:21-23). 
Petty capitalism's economic free-for-all held a promise of stability in the small 
owner-operator household. This political-economic unit owed its institutional 
strength and its culturally perceived desirability to two sources. First, in the 
petty-capitalist competition for resources, such a household achieved the relative 
certainty of controlling both its own labor and its own means of production, and 
hence its own subsistence. Although having more property than family labor to 
work it might seem desirable -
it was unattainable for most people -
those 
who hired outsiders or rented resources to them risked losses from incompetent 
or absconding workers, tenants, or managers, a frequent source of anxiety. On 
the other hand, those with nothing to sell but their labor faced both constant 
competition for subsistence earnings and the dreadful reality that when they were 
36 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
too weak to work they would not eat. Running a small farm or business did not 
entirely exempt a family from economic competition, but it provided a haven 
from some of its worst features. The relative safety of family proprietorship ver-
sus the risks to which other petty-capitalist classes were liable strongly motivated 
people to make whatever economic and kinship choices necessary to achieve it. 
The second source of strength for the owner-operator class was the official fix-
ation (necessary to the TMP) on patricorporations as society's most significant 
units. The accumulation of resources in patricorporations was limited by the law 
of equal inheritance, by officials' exactions, and by the general insecurity of prop-
erty not held by kinship entities recognized by the state. At the same time, Chi-
nese states gave kin seniors powerful claims to the labor and persons of their 
juniors, especially women and girls. These claims, in commoditized contexts, 
provided a universally available source of primitive accumulation to every house-
hold head. The gender/kinship system that has formed around these claims is 
discussed in detail in subsequent chapters. 
To the degree the late-imperial economy was stable- that is, did not experi-
ence capitalist-like technical innovation and a resulting sharp expansion-
landlords and merchants were essentially the recipients of the benefits of in-
equalities deriving from market competition combined with family-cycle varia-
tion. Where there were few market opportunities or where the influence of the 
TMP was especially strong, such potential capitalists appear often to have acted 
in most uncapitalist fashion, consuming their surpluses in the support of ever-
larger households and (relatively) luxurious living rather than frugally accumu-
lating and reinvesting. Many of them also invested money and potential family 
labor in the expensive and painful process of traditional education, hoping 
through success in official examinations to tap into not only the glory and power 
but also into the wealth that came from membership in the class of scholar-offi-
cials that dominated the TMP. The intense competition for places in this class as-
sured that most would fail. Abandoning the core PCMP values of frugality and 
manual work for the leisured life of a would-be scholar-official before one gained 
access to TMP resources was a likely road to loss of all. Downward mobility of 
such families was one of the important sources of motion within the PCMP. 
Where in this dually driven class analysis are the "gentry"? The term has been 
used to describe local wealthy powerholders on whom the state depended to 
maintain control in the countryside and who were in return permitted to extract 
surplus through both political and economic means. Although sometimes a con-
venient descriptive term, like "commercialization" or "market economy," it car-
ries no theoretical implications, leads to no further questions. Why did these 
"gentry" espouse an anticommercial ideology of agrarian stability while main-
taining their position in the world through vigorous economic competition? 
Why did they believe themselves to be obliged to sink capital into relatively low-
profit land and into very chancy investment in sons' educations when commod-
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production : 
37 
ity production promised greater profit? Just as it is worthwhile to ask "what does 
the ruling class do when it rules?" we may inquire what the gentry did when it 
gentrified pawnbrokers and brickmakers into scholars. 
Many of the oddities and variations of this portmanteau category are better 
understood when we see the gentry as those unusual petty capitalists who accu-
mulated resources beyond their capacity to expand their households or lineages, 
and thus beyond the protection afforded to property properly subordinated to 
kin relationships. Such men converted wealth (via the subjection of young men 
to a harsh educational regime) into officeholding and hence into the right to be-
nefit from TMP economic relations rather than to be exploited by them. Para-
doxically, because wealth could not be privatized beyond the family, the rich had 
to find a public role to safeguard private property. Without degrees, the merely 
rich, half-escaped from the control of kinship, existed uneasily in an unac-
counted-for social space between the molecular producer patricorporations and 
the ruling officials responsible for their responsiveness. Thus the odor of im-
morality, of illegitimacy, hung about merchants, whose wealth was so easily hid-
den, privatized, from state and family alike. 
THE PCMP VERSUS CAPITALISM 
Marx defined capitalism in two ways: by its characteristic relations of produc-
tion and by its historical tendency to expand both its productive capacity and its 
hegemony. Capitalist relations of production are those of the marketplace. All 
major factors of production -
and most especially labor power -
can be freely 
bought and sold in an impersonal market so that the relationships between per-
sons engaged in production become impersonal money transactions. Those who 
own the means of production confront those who have only labor power to sell 
from a position of power which enables the former to set the terms of the ex-
change. By paying in wages only what is required to maintain and reproduce the 
average worker, while selling the product for more than that amount, the owner 
of the means of production extracts surplus value from, technically exploits (see 
Littlefield 1978), the worker. Owners then reinvest at least a part of that surplus in 
expanding their firms. 
Did late-imperial China have a free market in the factors of production which 
produced class inequality, exploitation, and capital accumulation? Whether most 
agricultural labor was freely sold as a commodity -
as in the relations among 
owner-employers, owner-operators, and tenant/hired hands -
or was tied to 
class superiors in some form of bondage -
as in serfdom and slavery -
is ex-
tremely significant. Many analysts have made the transition from serf or bonded 
to "free" status the primary criterion for detecting sprouts of an indigenous Chi-
nese capitalism (e.g. So 1986; Wang Fangzhong 1987; Ke Changji 1987; Kamachi 
1990). According to Mark Elvin, serfdom on large private estates or manors en-
38: CHINA's 
MOTOR 
compassed most of the peasant population during the Song (1973: chap. 6), and 
large but generally decreasing proportions of that population until the eighteenth 
century. Agricultural labor was increasingly subject to the market from the eigh-
teenth century on, a trend on which "sprouts" scholars of the People's Republic 
of China base their judgment as to the beginnings of indigenous capitalism. 
Chao Kang has argued, however, that servile or indentured labor was a relatively 
minor part of China's agricultural system. Chao insists that relatively small 
farms, including a large proportion of owner-operated ones, have been the most 
characteristic agrarian form, especially since the Song (1987:222). Farms, both 
would agree, ranged from large manors to independent smallholders, using labor 
obtainable through the noneconomic "feudal" power of servile and filial obliga-
tion as well as through the market. The determination of the timing of a shift to 
wage labor, whether in the Song or during the Ming/Qing expansion, cannot yet 
be made. Even if wage labor was not common before the eighteenth century, 
however, recurrent pressure for its commoditization may have been a powerful 
source of tension and dynamism in earlier centuries. 
Too sharp a focus on this issue may be misleading, however. A brief compari-
son with the Euro-American case shows us why. Whether New World slavery was 
a precursor to capitalism or a part of it has been much debated (Banaji 1979). As 
Sidney Mintz so precisely argues, if investors in American plantations "were not 
capitalists, if the slaves were not proletarians, if mercantilism rather than a free 
economy prevailed, if the rate of accumulation of profit was low and the organic 
composition of capital static -
if all of these things were true, it also remains 
true that these curious agroindustrial enterprises nourished certain capitalist 
classes at home as they were becoming more capitalistic" (1985:61). Parallel argu-
ments cannot be made for China, which was not connected until much more re-
cently to the world capitalist system, and where the ruling class was not a 
reinvesting bourgeoisie. Free, or wage, labor helps define capitalism, but so does 
the character of the dominant class. In China, no matter what the labor regime, 
most surpluses beyond the ambit oflimited patricorporate expansion were chan-
neled to officials, not to capitalists. 
If capitalist-like tendencies are both indigenous and deeply rooted, the further 
question arises of whether today's China can reject its lingering late-imperial 
"feudal" elements and move directly to a version of socialism or whether it must 
and should pass through a period of capitalist development. The argument ceases 
to be a battle if China's commodity production, now accepted by all as early and 
important (see, for example, Fu Yiling 1986 and Chao Kang 1987) is distinguished 
from capitalism and seen in its own terms. 
If China had a labor market, it follows that exploitation in a formal sense oc-
curred. But whether surplus value was extracted by owners from nonowners has 
been obscured by a perhaps dogmatic unwillingness to perceive that ownership 
had both a market and a tributary meaning. Exploitation, the extraction of sur-
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production 
: 
39 
plus value from a worker's unpaid work, was a normal part of Chinese life, where 
landlessness was common and many earned their livelihood through labor alone. 
Exploitation occurred too in households, where women were legally and cus-
tomarily excluded from ownership in the agnatic corporation but obliged to 
work for that corporation as long as they remained members of it. 
Whether this exploitation resulted in the accumulation of capital as in capi-
talism proper, however, is problematic. Here, we must consider Marx's concern 
for the historical tendencies of the capitalist mode. If capital accumulates 
through the exploitation of labor and is reinvested, reaps additional surplus 
value, and thus accumulates further, we may expect to see an expansionary thrust 
to the entire economy. In the West, capitalism triggered revolutions in science, 
technology, and economic growth with the industrial revolution. From there, it 
became the dominant mode of production in Europe and in most of the rest of 
the world. Capitalism enabled favored classes and countries to amass capital, 
power, and knowledge at an unprecedented rate. In China, something rather di-
fferent occurred. 
Although China surely failed to develop an expansionary hegemonic capital-
ism like that of the West, it did not fail to expand; the Qing especially was an era 
of extraordinary absolute growth. Per-capita interprovincial trade may have been 
larger than Europe's internal trade at the beginning of the nineteenth century 
(Murphey 1970:23). Though the population expanded more than fourfold from 
the Northern Song (ca. 1080) to the time foreigners forced an entry for capitalism 
in the mid-nineteenth century, rice production per capita remained stable 
throughout the period (Feuerwerker 1984:300 ), and the general standard of living 
does not seem to have fallen significantly until the impact of the West was felt. 
Chinese productivity came close to keeping up with population growth, even 
though the amount of arable land did not increase by much. As we know from 
Elvin (1973), this balance was accomplished largely through labor intensification 
rather than through the technical innovation or greater use of capital character-
istic of capitalism. 
Economic development is defined as per-capita increase in productivity and, 
by implication, as the private accumulation of capital. With inherently expan-
sionary tendencies, the PCMP did generate increases in productivity, but private 
accumulation was sharply limited. Apart from making a scattering of merchants 
rich, China's wealth accumulated in the hands of the ruling class of officials, who 
spent it in building a state strong enough to maintain its tax-collecting power, to 
defend itself from internal and external enemies, and to create a sophisticated 
ideological apparatus sufficiently powerful to convince most people to submit 
voluntarily (and inexpensively) to its demands. That state, for all its failings by 
our and others' lights, excluded Western imperialism more effectively than did 
any other part of the world but Japan, and it regained its independence from that 
system after only a century of partial penetration. China was not (or only very 
40: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
briefly) politically partitioned, unlike southeast Asia, Africa, and South America, 
and thus not made permanently vulnerable to the mercies of the world system 
that created Bangladesh, Zaire, Brazil, and Haiti. China's economic expansion 
was moved by the motor of petty capitalism but guided by state-minded rulers 
who were as engaged with making productivity serve the state as with repelling 
barbarians. 
Rowe summarizes the very considerable scholarship on state-merchant rela-
tions as supporting four possible, and not necessarily exclusive, stances by officials 
toward commodity production: repression, neglect, collusion, and stimulation 
(1984:177). Out of this complex, I would stress the two most apparently contradic-
tory: repression and stimulation. That is, officials saw no harm in encouraging the 
petty productive pursuits of small people -
of tiny firms that could be perceived 
as kin groups. Such activity produced several outcomes of value to the state: tax 
revenues larger than those obtainable from subsistence farming, the small daily 
comforts (for themselves as well as for commoners) invented by a population of 
energetic perfectors of low-technology techniques, and an outlet for the aspira-
tions to social mobility inspired, but never satisfied, by the educational route to 
power and wealth. 
The Tributary and Petty-Capitalist Modes of Production 
41 
Motion in 
the System 
A bolt of silk for each clear toned song. 
Still these beauties do not think it is enough. 
Little do they know of a weaving girl, 
Sitting cold by her window, 
Endlessly throwing her shuttle to and fro. 
-
Chien Tao, Song (woman) poet 
Chinese people structure their lives following the logic of two 
often contradictory modes of production. But there is nothing static about this 
structure. Its motion derives, I believe, from three aspects of petty capitalism: the 
competition between the two modes of production for hegemony; the intricate 
tradeoff between gender and class inequalities that gave the PCMP its sources for 
accumulation; and the extraordinary demographic expansiveness that laboring 
under multiple forms of exploitation created. 
COMPETITION BETWEEN THE MODES OF PRODUCTION 
In certain times and places, Chinese people emphasized petty-capitalist 
choices; in others, they clung to the eternal verities of the IMP. One imagines a 
pubescent girl overhearing her parents plan her fate. Would she be sold to a 
brothel in a distant city next week or remain at home a few more years, to be sent 
off with dowry and firecrackers as a wife? Such decisions remind us that while 
markets offer a certain freedom of action they also assign prices to everything; a 
person can become a commodity. It reminds us too that while people are ex-
Lines from Chien Tao's poem are from Kenneth Rexroth and Ling Chung, eds. and trans., The Or-
chid Boat: Women Poets of China. Copyright © 1972 by Kenneth Rexroth and Ling Chung. Reprinted 
by permission of New Directions Pub. Corp. 
42 
plaited (by definition) in tributary relationships, those relationships also contain 
some customary limits to exploitation. Who you are, what your person, labor, or 
•product is worth on a nearby market, whether there is a nearby market for any of 
these, how active officials might be in supporting and imposing tributary ideals 
of conduct -
from such data people calculate chances and choices, strengthen-
ing by their participation either tributary or petty-capitalist hegemony in a 
household, a village, a class, a region, an era. 
For the last thousand years, petty capitalism offered an additional, non-
tributary sphere of economic action to many, probably most, Chinese people. 
The scale of China's commerce has been vast, its persistence in the face of po-
litical upheaval remarkable. The impact on Chinese daily life of commoditiza-
tion may be greater than the impact of capitalism proper has been on the 
culture of its Euro-American heartland. Chinese commoners sought economic 
niches left vacant by the TMP, acting with clever dishonesty toward its princi-
ples and practices, ingeniously recycling for their own uses the sanctity ac-
corded to such key institutions as patrilineal kinship. Petty-capitalist practice in 
China began and remains secondary, subversive, contorted, dangerous -
and 
liberating. 
Petty-capitalist expansion, and the people who enacted it, forced the class 
beneficiaries of the TMP to grapple with its disorderly tendencies, to find ways to 
control it, and to use it for state ends. Like partners in a bad marriage, the two 
modes polarized each other: extremes of authoritarianism came to characterize 
Chinese officials, exaggerated commoditization the general populace. Confucian 
humanism sometimes softened and countered that authoritarianism, while high 
business ethics kept honor among merchants. More and more, late-imperial cul-
ture was crafted by both the tightening fist of hierarchy and the invisible hand of 
the market. Paul Cohen, discussing the work of the historian J. H. Hexter, notes 
that socially contradictory tendencies "although polar to one another, could, both 
at once, rise to higher levels of intensity" (1984:93). Such a pattern is clearly dis-
cernible in Chinese history. 
Evidence for a secular tendency during late-imperial China toward extremes 
of autocracy are readily found. Thomas Metzger has analyzed the increasingly 
stylized role of officials, whose behavior was controlled by elaborate sanctions 
(1973:347-57). Gary Hamilton argues that in kinship regulation the "terminology 
of patriarchalism was used increasingly to establish role relationships, but the 
fact of patriarchalism receded" in the face of ever-growing state control of family 
matters (1984:418). Derk Bodde and Clarence Morris discuss the enormous ex-
pansion of legally punishable offenses during the Qing, including a rise in capital 
offenses from 282 in the Ming to 813 by mid-Qing (1967: 102-4). The Chinese 
state grew strong in the Song, and stronger yet thereafter, as it invented mecha-
nisms for more reliable and efficient extraction of resources. This increase does 
not mean that officials constantly raised tax rates; much evidence suggests that 
Motion in the System 
: 
43 
this was not so. But both logic and evidence argue that, from the Song forward, 
officials were better able to enforce the collection of land taxes, partly by encour-
aging owner-operation of private property; to greatly increase their revenue by 
taxing commerce (Shiba 1970; Mann 1987a); and to limit resistance, rebellion, 
and warfare that both directly inhibit tax collection and have in China histori-
cally tended toward the refeudalization of landlord-peasant relations. 
Commodity production also shows long-term growth in Chinese history. 
The terms most Western scholars use to describe this petty capitalism -
"commercialization" and "market economy" -
are simply too blunt for the 
purpose. "Markets" and "commerce" have flourished in west African chief-
doms, under the classic Maya, in colonial Indonesia, in precapitalist Europe, 
and in the contemporary United States: terms that must accommodate all 
these can have very little edge. They get at few of the qualities that China's 
PCMP shared with European capitalism and at none of the qualities that diff-
erentiated the two. 
Song expansion rested on the green revolution of triple cropping and of new 
rice varieties imported from southeast Asia (Elvin 1973: chap. 9 ). China's was not 
merely a "natural economy," however. Regional markets were extensive, and large 
proportions of the population lived by producing for profit. The level of com-
moditization from the Song on marked a radical departure from the past and 
clearly distinguish late-imperial China from social formations in which the fac-
tors of production were not, or not freely, bought and sold privately. Before the 
industrial revolution, it is probable that more Chinese depended on the market 
for food, clothing, fuel, and other daily needs, and for money with which to buy 
them, than any other people had ever done. In the words of a prominent Japan-
ese Song scholar: 
It is generally recognized that the period of transition from the later part of 
the T'ang dynasty to the Sung dynasty (in other words, the tenth to the thir-
teenth centuries) constituted a watershed in Chinese history .... The state-
controlled land tenure system ... gave way to private property ... ; and there 
were corresponding alterations in the structure of taxation. An upsurge in 
agricultural productivity took place, connected in part with the intensified de-
velopment of the Kiang nan [south of the Yangzi River] region .... there was 
an increase in internal and overseas trade, while the volume of money in cir-
culation rose and credit instruments enjoyed a much wider use than previ-
ously. (Shiba 1970:1) 
Farming for a market offered an alternative to tribute-paying peasantry, a new 
class of government bureaucrats replaced landed aristocrats, the Neo-Confucians 
emerged to synthesize family, polity, and metaphysics, the wealthy created lin-
eages as a new and powerful patriarchal form, and cities grew spectacularly on a 
complex division of labor. Elements of all these changes predated Song times, but 
44: CHINA 
S 
MOTOR 
by the late years of the period they were essential to Chinese culture. The later 
Ming expansion, emphasized by "sprouts" authors as the point of emergence of 
capitalist tendencies, was also an important but, I believe, secondary develop-
mental phase in the PCMP. 
Given an economy that already contained important capitalist-like elements, 
the Song agricultural spurt set in train a political economic complex the main 
outlines of which shaped the Ming -
and later Chinas. New opportunities in 
Ming times did not alter political, economic, kinship, or other patterns greatly. 
They merely engendered another turn of the screw of state power to contain an 
increasingly flexible and sophisticated petty capitalism. 
Exchange relations are not simple matters of the transfer of goods and ser-
vices. In all human cultures, they have an organizing, even a moral, character in 
which the exchange of things- even of money- comes to symbolize and val-
idate social relations (Parry and Bloch 1989). Market exchanges are easily under-
stood by contemporary Euro-Americans. They are "negative reciprocity;' the 
attempt to get more than one gives, the heart of capitalism. Commodity relations 
are competitive, short-term, impersonal, and both productive and expressive of 
feelings of opposing interests. Feelings of opposition of interest, Marx argued, are 
damped by the occult nature of capitalist exploitation, especially in wage work, 
where surplus value accrues to the owner of capital without its ever being directly 
taken from the worker's hand. But the goal of getting the better of the other, of 
exploitation, is often readily apparent to participants. 
Tributary exchanges are also cryptic. The exploitation inherent in a system of 
one-way "gifts" made under coercion in societies such as China's is veiled in ide-
ology and promises of reciprocation in some "higher," nonmaterial sphere. Chi-
nese officials offered commoners the implicit bargain of surrendering taxes and 
labor services for the assurance that the hierarchy under which they suffered was 
imposed by a cosmic categorical imperative and thus, all evidence to the contrary 
notwithstanding, was good. The key Confucian values of zhang, loyalty, and xiao, 
filial submission, both enjoined inferiors to keep giving to superiors even when 
no reciprocation was possible -
as when a loyal minister gave his life for a dead 
sovereign or extinct dynasty, or a son continued to support a dead parent 
through ritual. Even among the living, the tributary, or feudal, virtues were seen 
as essentially unbalanced and incapable of being balanced. The parent who gave 
life could be given nothing equivalent in return; so also for the ruler who made 
social existence possible. Such debts are absolute, unrepayable. Tribute ex-
changes, unlike those in commodities, are not competitive, for neither party le-
gitimately strives to outdo the other. Who is supposed to gain in terms of the 
world's goods is already settled by the nature of the relationship. 
These relationships are neither impersonal nor psychologically simple. Unlike 
those of capitalism, their unequal claims are not concealed in the wage relation-
ship: grain is seized from the bin, and yarn from the spindle. Yet though produc-
Motion in the System : 
45 
ers suffer material loss, they are expected to respond with emotions of gratitude, 
or at least of humble submission. Elite culture teaches subordinates that they 
should want to give tribute, whether taxes to sacred rulers or earnings to beloved 
parents. Ideology often fails, and superiors take their due by force. Such ideolog-
ical double-binds create perverse emotions in tributary relationships. In dis-
cussing Mexican peasants, Eric Wolf interprets the way experience of family 
authority "provide[s] the fuel for adult institutions which manage to counterfeit 
the character of the original situation that first produced them. The hacienda 
achieved this end by elevating the hacienda owner to the role of a stern and iras-
cible father, prepared to guide the steps of his worker-children, ready to unleash 
his temper and anger upon them when provoked." His protector/punisher role 
"bound men not only through debts or through force but also through ties of 
love and hate" (1959:208). 
Chinese people were often forced by the slenderness of their resources to 
choose between exchanging something, or someone, as a tributary "gift" or as a 
money-making commodity. To make their choice was to situate one's self in al-
ternative social and moral worlds and to experience very different emotional 
consequences. 
Much of the motion in China's political economy derives from the multiple 
contradictions between the patterns I have summed up as its two modes of pro-
duction. Over the centuries, petty-capitalist competition drove people to pro-
duce more to keep what they had; official power found better ways to take its cut 
from every source of production. If, within a single set of economic parameters, 
two Chinese classes had struggled for dominance, as capitalists and proletarians 
struggled under the brief reign of English laissez-faire capitalism, the situation 
would explain itself, and there would be fewer arguments about Chinese history. 
If, however, the Chinese had two coherent visions of the world, based on two di-
rectly conflicting imperatives for production and exchange in which most peo-
ple participated simultaneously, the motion in that structure was not the 
win-or-lose of formal battle but the absorption and transformation of guerrilla 
war. That, perhaps, is why ordinary Chinese, in their temples, universally pray 
for peace. 
GENDER IN THE ORIGINS OF THE PCMP 
Polarization between the two modes could begin to have its long-term inten-
sifying effects on Chinese belief and institutions only after the PCMP had co-
hered in the form described in Chapter 2, when the TMP had reached its 
bureaucratized late-imperial form.' This coherence occurred in the Song dynasty 
as a newly dearistocratized ruling class, whose members depended greatly on 
1. Some of the arguments in this section are included in Gates 1989. 
46: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
commercial wealth for their power (McKnight 1971:6), began to react against the 
freedom that commodity production offered to other classes, to young workers, 
and to women. 
Although we know that gender hierarchy characterized the "medieval" or 
early-imperial China of the first millennium of the present era, much evidence 
suggests that the secular tendency in Chinese gender relationships has been to-
ward greater female subordination over time. The "paradigmatic markers" of 
women's status- footbinding, concubinage, prostitution, and widow chastity 
and suicide -
were strongest in the Qing and endured well into the twentieth 
century (Ropp 1976:5). The late-imperial gender system took shape in a highly 
visible struggle over the subordination of women that occurred during the Song. 
In this era, the relative equality of preceding centuries came under vigorous at-
tack. This coincided with the emergence of petty-capitalist production as a major 
element in Chinese economy. 
The seemingly "overdetermined" inferiority of women in China was not 
something timeless and inherent in Chinese culture any more than its class rela-
tions were fixed structures. Even with the relatively scanty data available on 
women in Chinese history, and even with our limited understanding of the eco-
nomic aspects of that history, it seems possible to sketch an outline of the events 
that may have led both to women's characteristic position in late-imperial China 
and to the shape of the PCMP itself. Critical in this process was women's classic 
role as producers of textiles. As these women's products (along with so much 
else) became widely commoditized during the Song, women themselves became 
the subject of a Neo-Confucian counterattack. 
Although aristocratic Chinese have practiced patrilineality for four thousand 
years, patrilineality in and of itself does not necessarily produce strongly patriar-
chal institutions and marked female subordination. In societies in which men de-
scribe themselves as completely culturally dominant, women, when they are 
asked, may have other (and supportable) interpretations of their political econ-
omy and of women's place in it (Goodale 1971; Fei11987). Even Chinese patriarchy 
was not always so exclusive a tradition as to preclude the exercise of social power 
by women (Chang Kuang-chih 1980:89-90, 182). 
The Song is a paradoxical period during which women's property rights may 
have been higher than at any other time (Ebrey 1993:6), but during which their 
autonomy came under the severest attacks. The ever more widely distributed 
custom of footbinding is the most vivid and the most material of the disabilities 
that increasingly constrained women; distance, familiarity, or exoticism should 
not disguise the horror of that custom or the degree of psychic and physical vi-
olence it brought into the supposed security of home life. Women were also the 
objects of a Nco-Confucian reassertion of the importance of female chastity (in-
cluding lifelong monogamy even after widowhood) and a renewed emphasis on 
patrilineal inheritance. The severity of the attack, summed up in the Neo-Con-
Motion in the System 
: 
47 
fucianist synthesis that articulated the resurgent forces of a patriarchal political 
economy, is indicative of the degree to which women's independence threatened 
"order." 
The most notable aspect of Song culture was its economic expansiveness. It 
was highly urbanized: about one-fifth of the population- close to 25,ooo,ooo 
people -
lived in cities and towns during the eleventh century (Chao Kang 
1987:56). Commerce, handicraft, large-scale industry, and service trades flour-
ished in cities and market towns over vast areas. The economy monetized as taxes 
largely ceased to be paid in kind; paper money was experimented with, along 
with other financial mechanisms and the beginnings of banking. Newly rich 
merchants vied openly for power and prestige with officials (Chao and Chen 
1986:406). A money-oriented popular culture with capitalist elements expressed 
itself in folk religion (Hou 1975). Everywhere, signs of a sprouting capitalism 
spread through key regions (e.g. Shiba 1975). The self-sufficiency of natural econ-
omy disappeared in many regions, and commoditization permitted labor costs to 
be included in the determination of value (Haeger 1975:5). Song cities exhibited 
sharp class differentiation, housing the flamboyant rich but also "thousands 
upon thousands of men without settled occupations" (quoted in deBary et al. 
1960:455)·2 
Progress in industry, one scholar notes, was exemplified in the silk trade, 
the result of the impressive advances made in agricultural productivity. There 
grew up both a long-distance trade serving the expanding urban market and 
the .manufacture of specialized goods in the cities. Certain areas began to spe-
ciaiize in the rearing of silkworms, speculative transactions in mulberry leaves 
made their appearance, merchants served the rural textile areas as middlemen 
and collectors of output, and merchant capital gradually extended its control 
over the villages. (Shiba 1970: m) 
Production was organized into a putting-out system and a complex network of 
rural and urban producers, retail shops, small local markets, storehouse propri-
etors, brokers, contractors, merchants, and peddlers. Finished silk was absorbed 
as tax payments, by overseas markets, and by consumers (168-69, 121).3 
Anthropologists have observed the often-contradictory effects of similar re-
lations of production on precapitalist societies encountering capitalism. Wealth 
is concentrated, and already-existing inequalities deepen. Land, labor, and cap-
2. These are the words of Cheng Hao, a famous Song Nco-Confucian, written as a memorial to 
the Shenzong Emperor ( r. 1068-85) in criticism of the evils of his time. 
3. The role the Song state played in stimulating silk production should not be ignored; taxes in 
silk products were heavy as Song officials paid off northern invaders. A treaty in 1004 required pay-
ment of 2oo,ooo bolts of tribute silk (2,400 kilometers) to Liao princes to keep them at bay (D. Kuhn 
1988:385, 409). 
48 
: 
C H I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
ita! become commodities, a rough equality of the marketplace erodes the pres-
tige or lowliness of hereditary status. Kinship ties are restructured as the young 
find jobs away from their families. Some women achieve greater equality. Peo-
ple gain new insight into the basis of class -
either one owns means of pro-
duction or one does not -
so that class consciousness may begin to grow in 
those it disadvantages. Existing states and ruling classes are threatened, espe-
cially when, like those of the Song, they still depend on unfree labor and house-
hold patriarchy. 
Unlike the emergence of capitalism in Europe, however, emergent capitalism 
in the Song, I contend, was met by a determined TMP counterrevolution whose 
misogynist values are epitomized in Neo-Confucian politico-familial philosophy 
(Chu and Lu 1967:272, 243, 179, 181, 188, 202). The Confucian revival was not 
merely a "cultural revolution" of values and style. It was aimed at containing the 
fundamental changes that capitalist-like economic activity were beginning to 
work on society. While Song officials emphasized the rectification of kinship and 
political systems, we must remember that these were economic systems at their 
foundation. 
The Neo-Confucians drew on a reading of the Confucian classics colored by 
Buddhist ascetic rejection of pleasure to remodel a present they saw as decadent 
and luxurious after the upright virtues of a distant past. Neo-Confucianism, ap-
plied to contemporary life, or "things at hand;' spoke directly about relations of 
production, envisioned as hierarchies within lineages constructed like miniature 
feudal states: "In order to control the minds of the people, unify one's kin, and 
enrich social customs so that people will not forget their origin, it is necessary to 
clarify genealogy, group members of the clan together, and institute a system of 
heads of descent." "Ancestral property must not be divided, but must be put in 
charge of one person." The ties among agnates must be maintained by ritual and 
the sharing of food (Chu and Lu 1967:228-29). Household kinship and property 
were as closely linked for Song Neo-Confucian thinkers as they are now for most 
Chinese: property relations are implicit in their discussions of kinship because 
kinship is largely defined and realized through the sharing of commonly held re-
sources. Song writers in fact devoted considerable attention to such subjects as 
proper household management (e.g. Chang Ying in Beattie 1979:140-51; Ebrey 
1984). 
Late-imperial China's increasingly brutal and restrictive treatment of women 
in all classes undercut the growing potential for power that commodity produc-
tion gave women. Women entered the Song from a position of strength based on 
their work in textiles. Earnings from weaving in highly commercialized seven-
teenth-century Suzhou suggest that this strength might have been considerable. 
A woman weaver could earn annually almost as much as her husband who was 
growing cash crops; silk weaving was four times as profitable as rice production 
(Rawski 1972:54-55). Although in earlier periods the production of textiles as tax-
Motion in the System 
: 
49 
in-kind gave official value to women's work (Bai 1982:253;4 Sacks 1979:105), yarn 
and cloth production for market privatized their labor for a commodity market 
involving millions of people (D. Kuhn 1988:287-89, 314). 
That Song fabrics were mass produced, even for commoners (Miyakawa 
1969:7), is supported by the widespread use by the early 1300s of watermill-driven 
spinning machinery for hemp and ramie and of sophisticated multiple-spindle 
spinning wheels, bobbin winders, and silk-reeling machines during the Song 
(Needham 1965, 4 (2):404, 103-8, 269; D. Kuhn 1988). Private handicraft produc-
tion reached its height then, when China had the biggest markets it would sup-
port till the twentieth century. Both state and private textile production were very 
great; city people could afford to waste cloth, and 70 percent of the remaining 
state in-kind tribute was in silks and cottons (Chao Kang and Chen Zhengyl 
1986:500, 502, 503). 
Textile makers labored under a variety of production regimes. Large govern-
ment workshops produced textiles for the court; 2,214 people at one time worked 
in the city of Kaifeng in such factories, many of them involuntarily as part of the 
TMP. But these workshops supplied the government and its officials, not the 
huge working-class populations of China's many cities and towns (Chao and 
Chen 1986:137). Some women joined convents that specialized in weaving very 
fine silks; one of these held its own market every five days, selling its embroidered 
products throughout the country (Shiba 1970:113). Evidence for wage-labor 
workshops for this period is scarce and controversial, and may apply more to 
men than to women. 5 By the Southern Song, silk was raised in the countryside, 
but reeled and woven mostly in cities. Of the many textile producers, some were 
"loom households" -
family industries passed on from father to son -
while 
others were privately owned factories (Chao and Chen 1986: 503, 504) such as the 
one described in "The Weaver" (Peng Zheyi 1987:489-90). It seems likely that 
most Song women textile workers worked at home. The nature of that "home;' 
then, might well have been a matter of dispute between productive textile work-
ers and other family members. 
Who was to control the labor of women textile producers -
the multitude of 
spinners and weavers themselves or their male relatives? For later expansionary 
periods, we have some hints. In the sixteenth century, the cotton industry offered 
more work opportunities for women, and textile-related occupations broke 
down sex stereotyping. These changes provoked one official to "teach townspeo-
ple to differentiate their occupations according to sex." Forbidding women to go 
4· Denis Twitchell, in an older interpretation, explains that although this division oflabor repre-
sented the ideal of ancient practice, during the Tang (618-906 PE) women did not pay taxes (1963:26). 
I do not know how to resolve this disagreement. 
5· For a rare and controversial Yuan-dynasty text describing weaving as wage work in which at 
least some workers are male, see Peng Zheyi 1987. 
50 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
onto the streets, he insisted that only men be allowed to go to and fro among the 
houses or undertake capitalistic (tzu-sheng) enterprises: women, he instructed, 
should work only within the home (Handlin 1975:25-26). In the nineteenth cen-
tury, when the opening of silk filatures in Guangzhou and of cotton mills in Zhe-
jiang brought opportunities for independence to women, they quickly invented 
or borrowed social forms to meet their needs for security and sociability (Top ley 
1975; Sankar 1978, 1984; Honig 1986: chap. 8). Although these forms achieved con-
siderable local acceptance, officials attempted to suppress them (Stockard 
1989:110). One regional official wanted to force all women to live with their hus-
bands (Sankar 1978:46). 
A woman making textiles that could clothe the family, pay the taxes, and earn 
money on a commodity market had the possibility, at least, of bargaining power 
in her household. The literature on Song women still depends so largely on elite 
discourse that we do not know how the shift to textile commercialization affected 
women. The literati did not notice (Ebrey 1993:149). That a product so basic, so 
necessary, so endowed with cultural value, and so labor intensive should have 
been produced for an expanded market without that change affecting its primary 
producers, however, cannot be credited. Commercialization of textiles has been 
accomplished on the backs of young women everywhere it has occurred, and typ-
ically has resulted both in harsh controls on them and in their attempts to resist 
those controls (e.g. Hane 1982:170-205; Tsurumi 1994). 
But an argument that the Song economic revolution affected women's eco-
nomic integration into society need not depend only on speculation about 
women textile workers, whose labors and efforts at resistance were not accorded 
attention in contemporary chronicles. We may consider as well the probable 
effects of Song agricultural development, fundamental to the period's economic 
expansion, on gender relations. Here, we are guided by the incisive analyses of 
Ester Boserup, who has carefully examined the effects on women of commercial-
ized agriculture in our own time. 
Under such political-economic conditions, the introduction of complex mul-
ticrop agriculture intensifies the value of male-held land, making men more, and 
women less, important. Sophisticated agricultural techniques and cash cropping 
typically raise men's labor productivity, income, and status and lowers those of 
women. These tendencies are exacerbated as schooling for boys increases: a lim-
ited literacy spreads information from agricultural manuals and other such tech-
nical materials, but mostly to males. Additionally, as labor needs increase with 
agricultural intensification, women's role as reproducer, especially of sons, may 
be emphasized (Boserup 1970:56). Double and even triple cropping of grains, 
multiple cropping of foods and fibers, cash cropping, sophistication and intensi-
fication of land and labor use, and the spread of schooling and literacy were all 
notable features of the Song. That similar causes produced similar effects on 
Song gender relations in the Song capitalist-like setting is extremely likely. In 
Motion in the System : 
51 
consequence, the potential advantages for women of their role in textile produc-
tion may have been substantially lessened. 
Chao Kang's description oflandlord-tenant relations in the context of a com-
moditizing economy exemplify this possibility: "The high degree of mobility and 
freedom enjoyed by tenants in the early Sung triggered ... the attempt by land-
lords to justify control over tenants and other types of farm labor supplies on 
ethical grounds. The landlord-tenant relationship was interpreted as a type of 
family kinship that was to be subject to the same set of familial ethics strongly ad-
vocated by the neo-Confucians of the Sung." He cites a twelfth-century author 
urging "vigorous punishment" for tenants who "perversely" refuse to "recognize 
the distinction between superior and inferior;' who leave their master to set up an 
independent household, and who "are practicing commerce and not working 
hard at farming and sericulture" (1987:181-82). 
A growing market for commodities offered women not just the chance to spin 
and weave to support nuclear families of their own choosing but the opportunity 
to set up noodle stands and wineshops and to enter the "water trades" as well-
paid independent courtesans- as both Tang and Song women did (Schafer 
1963:51; Yao 1983:86). How frequently did they do so? Women performed many 
kinds of work in the large and busy city of Hangzhou in the late Song, including 
embroidery, music, petty trading, accounting, and serving in and managing 
restaurants. One observer noted the relative equality of men and women in such 
small family businesses (Gernet 1962:148, 165), as it can be observed today in any 
Chinese setting. A Song traveler noted that women were frequently in charge of 
bringing goods to market: 
When I saw the women of the back-country of Kuang-nan I wondered how 
they came to be so numerous and enjoy such well-being. The men have 
scrawny little bodies, and dark complexions and sad expressions. The mar-
ried women are swarthy-skinned and plump, mostly in good health and 
very robust. Those who carry goods on their backs to peddle in search of 
profit in the cities and suburbs and in the periodic markets are all married 
women. Polygamy is general among the ordinary people [in this part of 
Guangdong], and all the wives take goods on their backs to sell in the mar-
kets in order to support their single husband. (Shiba 1970:152, quoting Zhou 
Chufei) 
Sprouting capitalism in the Song must have affected men as well as women, of 
course. Young Chinese men, in the presence of even limited extrafamilial job op-
portunities, have sometimes successfully opposed their elders' wills in important 
matters. In one vivid example from Taiwan, the beginnings of Japanese industri-
alism early in this century enabled young men to rebel against parental enforce-
ment of the entrenched custom of marrying adoptive sisters (A. Wolf and Huang 
1980:193-201). In a tantalizing Song parallel, 
52: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries the splitting up of families and the 
reduction of their numbers was particularly pronounced among the common 
people because economic conditions were not in their favor [italics mine]. Al-
though it was something frowned upon as contrary to custom (and in these 
matters, it was the upper class families that set the tone), it was nevertheless 
common, in the countryside of Chekiang [a center of textile production], to 
find sons setting up on their own while parents were still alive. ( Gernet 
1962:148) 
I suggest that it was not bad, but rather good, economic conditions that made it 
possible for young men to achieve early independence from their parents, as was 
the case in Europe under similar "protoindustrial" conditions. Both gender and 
age hierarchies are threatened by an expanding economy, with kinship relations 
assuming new forms as they respond to new opportunities and decreased pres-
sures of scarcity. 
We do not know exactly what the many Song people engaged in protoindus-
trial cash cropping, commerce, services, and the handicraft industry chose to do 
with their new abundance. But we know what commoners were officially in-
structed to do as the Neo-Confucian synthesis emerged. Zhu Xi and his fellow 
Neo-Confucians restated patriarchal values as if they were attempting to reestab-
lish the ideal TMP economy. This was a kin-based, agrarian system whose people 
-
their property consolidated under responsible heads and well disciplined by 
the experience of family and lineage hierarchy -
would respond obediently to 
state demands for taxes and labor service as in the preimperial good old days. 
They would do this, by implication, instead of running about building busi-
nesses, seeking profits, and acting independently of central authority and their 
parents. 
A further speculation about the history of women, textiles, and Chinese po-
litical economy deserves consideration, though our current knowledge can gen-
erate no conclusions. Cotton began to replace hemp, ramie, silk, and lesser 
fibers as the textile staple during the Yuan. Its use spread rapidly, though it could 
not be cultivated everywhere. For daily use, cotton is much superior to the 
coarser forms of hemp and ramie, though skilled artisans produced some splen-
did hemp fabric for mosquito netting, and fine ramie "grasscloth" captivated 
Europeans as well as Chinese. Rough silks are hard-wearing but more costly 
than the hemps. By the nineteenth century, homespun and handwoven cottons 
were worn even in minority highlands, and by most Chinese commoners. Some 
bought finished cloth; some, yarn, weaving it locally; some, raw cotton, spinning 
and weaving at home. 
The distribution of these commodities depended not only on the suitability of 
natural conditions for cotton cultivation. People also had to be willing to commit 
extraordinary labor resources to cotton cultivation and processing. As Philip 
Motion in the System : 
53 
Huang has shown, indigenous cotton production transforms social relations, es-
pecially those of gender (1985, 1990 ). In areas where ramie and hemp are alterna-
tives to cotton, cotton textile production may require considerably larger total 
labor inputs, elderly women tell me. Ramie and hemp processing and twisting 
into thread are substantially less labor intensive than the spinning of cotton yarn, 
even after it is ginned. In some regions, women could clothe their families more 
speedily (if less comfortably) by persisting with the older fibers. But if women's 
labor time was of no great value, as in heavily populated areas with few alterna-
tive jobs for women, cotton might be exported very cheaply. It was preferred to 
locally produced hemp cloth in such areas West Fujian, where women could earn 
better returns as porters and so afford cotton. 
Cotton became the standard Chinese fabric as people thought through com-
plex calculations of the costs of growing and processing, transport, regional 
returns to female labor, and the combination of both tributary and petty-capi-
talist pressures on households. The events set in train by the Song commoditi-
zation of textiles surely have important sequelae for gender relations as cotton 
spread during the Yuan. But here speculation must stop in favor of continued 
research. 
The PCMP is not capitalism, although it is capitalist-like. Its differences from 
capitalism result from the fact that it arose in a large and strong state in which the 
ruling class was capable of setting bounds to its expansionary tendencies. This 
idea is at least as old as Max Weber. But how that containment was effected must 
be related to the wide variety of Song cultural changes in women's status as well 
as to kinship, to ideology, and to many other social institutions. Although the 
TMP and the PCMP continued to "struggle" (in the persons of officials and petty 
capitalists) over who would control surpluses, the economic practices of each re-
mained firmly based on the subordination of women. 
THE CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF POPULATION GROWTH 
Taken as a whole, the class and gender relations described above did not lead 
to economic transformation: over the long run, population grew as fast as pro-
ductivity. Yet population growth that keeps up with or outstrips rising productive 
capacity must itself be explained; and the dialectical growth of both on a Chinese 
scale has significant consequences. 
The people of late-imperial China began to reproduce themselves at ever-
higher rates in two distinct spurts: during the Song and again during the late 
Ming. Major additions to the food-crop and agricultural-technique repertories 
occurred during these periods; it is generally agreed that, without these new 
styles of agriculture, the population growth rates that accompanied them could 
not have been sustained (Ho Ping-ti 1954:183-89 ). Yet the availability of new and 
demanding techniques of agriculture does not oblige people to use them; the 
54 
: 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
possibility of new lands or new niches in settled country does not force people to 
populate them thickly. To understand the human potential for explosive popula-
tion growth, we must know how people organize themselves for production and 
exchange. To assume that an abundance of food will automatically result in the 
rearing of large families and a rapid rise in population is plainly wrong as Marvin 
Harris and Eric Ross have shown (1987). 
Just such an assumption is commonly made in Chinese studies, however (e.g. 
Philip Huang 198p7). Mark Elvin pictures an ever-tightening trap of intensifica-
tion brought about through population pressure leading to more need for labor-
ers who in turn must work more intensely to wring a living out of a fixed land base 
(1973). Chao Kang has made population growth the prime mover of his interpre-
tation of Chinese history. He contends that by Ming times, the population reached 
a potential for growth sufficient to compensate rapidly for the ravages of late-im-
perial invasions, wars, rebellions, plagues, famines, and disasters (1987:41-42). 
Elvin's argument shows its greater sophistication in his assumption that some-
thing must prompt rapid population growth, Chao's in its insight that the pattern 
of population growth affects the political-economic unit, the empire, or guojia, as 
a unit. Neither takes sufficient account of the effect on population growth of TMP 
demands; both assume too easily that human populations have a natural, and 
high, rate of growth. 
Much recent anthropological research indicates that this assumption is not so. 
Studies among !Kung foragers (Howell1979 ), New Guinea horticulturalists (Hei-
der 1991:84-87), and Indian peasants (Mamdani 1972), to cite only a few, show 
that societies make very different choices about the size and spacing of their fam-
ilies, sometimes producing few children even without modern contraception, 
and many children even when it is easily available. 
Thomas C. Smith shows that in Japan, with technology, crop inventory, and 
cultural institutions not markedly different from those of the Chinese, popula-
tion growth rates at some times and places were the lowest known for preindus-
trial, complex societies, and birth spacing was long -
2.6 years from marriage to 
first child, and 4·4 years from first to second, followed by periods from 3.2 to 4.2 
years. Later Tokugawa Japan (1700 to 1867) was a period of virtual stagnation in 
population growth despite considerable economic growth, much of the control 
apparently resulting from infanticide (1977:7-10, 6o, So). 
Between 100 BPE and about the year Boo, there were about so to 6o million 
Chinese. The population then grew to a high of about 120 million by uoo, fell 
back to 6o million by the late fourteenth century, returned to a possible high of 
200 million by 1592, 300 million at 18oo, 427 million in 1848 (from Chao 
1987:41) and onward ever more rapidly thereafter to over 1.2 billion in 1994. The 
fourteenth-century drop reflects the violence and disruption of the eighty-
eight-year Yuan (Mongol) dynasty and its overthrow by the Chinese. The later 
population growth should not obscure the earlier stability. It stands as impor-
Motion in the System 
: 
55 
tant evidence of a culture that was significantly different from the one that took 
shape in the Song. 
What is the meaning of this difference? Chao Kang interprets it -
mistakenly, 
I believe -
as follows: 
The crucial turning point finally occurred when, after steady growth for 150 
years during the Northern Sung, the population surpassed previous peaks by 
a sizeable margin so that major wars and natural disasters became relatively 
less destructive. The only reason China survived the onslaught of the Mongols 
in the thirteenth century was, as Perkins points out, that the Mongol armies 
were too small and the Chinese population too large. Consequently, demo-
graphic development began to show cyclical movements upward around a ris-
ing trend line. (1987:42; and see Perkins 1969:197) 
That is, he claims, China finally reached a population base level capable of ab-
sorbing even very large demographic insults. This unconvincing hypothesis as-
sumes that while the post-Song population would grow, its capacity for military 
and Malthusian self-destructiveness would remain limited. Certainly it takes less 
time and effort to kill people, or for them to die of the diseases of poverty and 
crowding, than it does to rear reproducing adults, as was proved during the Yuan; 
civil wars are notoriously more destructive than invasions. Indeed, just such be-
havior is responsible, Chao argues, for the pre-Song stability at 50 to 6o million. 
The high growth rate sustained from the Song forward was more likely to have 
been the consequence of the invention of a more demanding political economy 
than of having crossed some demographic Rubicon. In the tributary mode, the 
Song ruling class created organizational forms sufficiently powerful that most ex-
ternal enemies could be excluded, most internal war could be contained, and at 
least some of the losses from famine averted. These strong governments were also 
more even-handed extractors of taxes; more households contributed to state 
coffers. In the petty-capitalist mode, markets for commodities and the labor 
power that produced them made it reasonable for people to rear more children 
than the household needed to work its means of production. Not scale but struc-
ture was crucial in giving China's demographic trajectory a new form. 
High fertility (the bearing of large numbers of infants) does not necessarily re-
sult in large families and/or rapid population growth; intentional or accidental 
mortality may be high as well, resulting in small families and slow population 
growth. Although birth and death are conceptual opposites, they are intimately 
linked by human decision-making. Social circumstances shape a range of choices 
in the care of newborns from fierce protectiveness and parental self-sacrifice to 
pragmatic and even eager infanticide. In low-technology societies, little can be 
done to help the naturally infertile or low-fertile to bear more children, but sex-
ual abstinence, sexual distaste (A. Wolf and Huang Chieh-shan 1980), long post-
partum sexual taboos, and the underfeeding and overworking of women readily 
56 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
reduce fertility through cultural means. In low-technology societies as in high-
tech ones, we all die, but mortality can be easily increased as the lives of the very 
young are extinguished by infanticide or by a host of practices not intentionally 
aimed at causing death. Little girls reared as foster daughters-in-law in Taiwan 
died at almost twice the rate of home-reared daughters (A. Wolf 1995:305); delib-
erate infanticide was common in many parts of China (Dickemann 1979, 1984). 
When a population remains stable over a long period, as did the pre-Song 
Chinese, high mortality may be the cause. If, however, each woman reared only 
half a dozen out of the dozen or more she might "naturally" bear, population 
growth rates would soar. When they do not, we must suspect that people -
probably women -
are choosing smaller families. Limits to population growth 
lie within the capabilities of all cultures. 
When a population increases rapidly under low-technology conditions, as 
China's did after the Song, we may be seeing the results of one or several kinds of 
change. The increase may have been made possible by higher fertility caused by 
earlier menarche and childbearing and by later menopause (better nutrition?), or 
by changes in sexual habits. It may have been due to a decrease in mortality 
brought about, perhaps, by improved nutrition or changes in public health. Pop-
ulation growth may be the consequence of such changes. But it may also result 
from the conscious strategy to keep and care for, rather than to abandon, more 
children. Population growth requires that women both bear and rear more ba-
bies. Unwillingness to rear many children is a common phenomenon among 
hard-pressed peoples, described in painful detail for poverty-stricken Brazilians 
(Scheper-Hughes 1992); in almost identical fashion (for girls) in south China 
(Fielde 1894:24; quoted in A. Wolf and Huang Chieh-shan 1980:230 ); and strongly 
hinted at in the Shandongnese locution "children are the oppressors of the fam-
ily:'In that dirt-poor province, "during all the time that children are 'in arms; the 
treadmill of absolutely necessary work is interrupted, and with the interruption 
the small but indispensable family income diminishes or disappears" (A. Smith 
1965:300). 
Changes in fertility in the strict demographer's sense cannot account for 
changes in population growth rate which began to occur in China during the 
Song. The careful debates about China's late-imperial-period fertility patterns (see 
Coale 1985; A. Wolf 1985a) are of great importance for our grasping the dimensions 
of China's current population problem. This problem is exacerbated by the actions 
of a state powerful enough to interfere with women's and their families' choices 
about whether to rear newborns; infanticide is a crime in China today. But late-
imperial rulers did not have tllis power. For most of history, when conscious action 
as well as "natural" mortality easily set limits to the number of children reared, 
variations in fertility per se do not, I think, explain population surges. Whether 
one agrees witll a group of Princeton demographers that early-twentieth-century 
Chinese farm families had "very low" fertility (for an agrarian society) of between 
Motion in the System : 
57 
about four and six and one-half births for each woman (Barclay et al. 1976:625), or 
with Arthur Wolf, who on the basis of more accurate records argues for rates 5 to 
15 percent higher, averaging six births for each woman (1985a:168, 185), does not 
help greatly in unraveling the reasons for the rise in population beginning in the 
Song. That rise may have resulted as much from choices to keep more of the babies 
born as from a decline in natural deaths and/or an increase in natural fertility. Al-
though we will never be able to recover sufficient evidence to demonstrate the role 
human decision making played in these thousand-year-old events, we should at 
least attempt to understand the political-economic pressures that may have moti-
vated them, and the particular role of women in realizing them. 
Whatever the cultural pressures to rear more children, behavior that encour-
ages higher fertility always comes at a biological price paid by women alone. Al-
though women in many cultures take pride in bearing six, nine, a dozen children, 
I doubt that there exists a woman anywhere for whom maternal joy obscures en-
tirely the enormous demands that bearing and rearing such a family makes on 
her body, her time, and her spirit. A widespread distaste for what Chinese women 
are taught to see as their highest good -
fecundity -
is contradictorily codified 
in folk beliefs about the pollution of intercourse and childbirth (Ahern 1975) and 
the purity and pleasure of the celibate life (Sankar 1978:256-57). 
It may be argued -
many Chinese women would so argue -
that women es-
pecially need children for emotional and economic support and are thus moti-
vated to rear as many as they can. A woman's own interests depended heavily on 
her establishing a "uterine family" (M. Wolf 1972) of children, especially sons, 
who would be her emotional and material supports throughout life. Chinese 
mothers are often very direct about the utility of having children. For many and 
obvious reasons, women wanted children in spite of the burdens they entailed. 
The real question for an understanding of population growth, however, is 
"How many children?" do families, and women themselves, think are enough? 
For late-imperial China, Arthur P. Wolf stands with the majority in answering, 
"As many as possible:' "Where Japanese peasants made the family fit the farm, the 
Chinese assumed they would somehow make the farm fit the family" 
(1985a:177-78). Yet Arthur Wolf and Huang Chieh-shan have also shown how Tai-
wan women radically reshaped their households by allocating newborns to make 
the family fit both present and future material needs, especially through adoption 
(1980). How, in the Song, did women shift from a level of childrearing at which 
the population did not rise sharply to one at which it did? Commoditization, 
agricultural intensification, and the resulting increased demand for labor -
all 
must have increased pressure on women for early and unremitting maternity, 
defined womanly virtue as dependency, rewarded passivity with prestige, and un-
dermined women's capacities to support themselves. Because, during the Song, 
these pressures occurred in a context of relative opportunity and freedom for 
women, the "persuasion" must have been intense. 
58 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Official and Neo-Confucian sources, eager to instruct on the minutiae of rit-
ual, on how much interest to charge for loans, on the education of the young, and 
on moral and practical matters of innumerable kinds, are profoundly silent on 
sex. By comparison with Chinese high literati texts, the Old Testament or the 
Qur' an is a veritable Kinsey Report of what to do and not do sexually. On the re-
lation between wife and husband, as on every other social subject, Neo-Confu-
cianists had but a single idea: harmony comes when inferiors obey superiors. 
This imperative must have translated, in the behavior of the bedroom, into sex-
ual obedience. Women were not to refuse or delay marriage or to deny their hus-
bands intercourse in order to postpone or to space pregnancies. That a life-long 
sacrifice of adult sexuality was expected of widows, even those who were teenage 
virgins, is proof enough of both the desire and the power of official culture to an-
nihilate women's choices about sexuality. 
What explains such ferocity against human desires that, like hunger, arise 
from biochemical springs and are strong in both sexes? Part of the answer, no 
doubt, lies in the need to assure that women will not bear the wrong babies: chil-
dren without fathers from whom to learn skills and inherit resources, children 
who, in a patrilineal context, will rob legitimate children of their patrimony. But 
in China (and other highly commoditized "peasant" societies such as those of the 
Mediterranean, Islamic, and Hindu worlds), there was pressure to devalue and 
detach a woman's sexuality from herself as an active agent. This pressure arose, I 
believe, in the interests of maximizing her reproductive capacity for her hus-
band's family, and to oblige a woman to bear more children than her own imme-
diate interests might dictate. 
Chinese households were under constant pressure to meet their own subsis-
tence, replacement, and ceremonial needs along with state demands for tribute, 
as peasants must (E. Wolf 1966:9-10 ). In addition, however, they were obliged to 
compete in a market for the factors of production. The more commercialized the 
economy, the more active the market, the easier it was to lose or gain land, ani-
mals, and other means of production. Labor power was a poor family's last re-
sort, its only hope of retaining or gaining property. Such a strategy is effective, 
however, only when adult children are firmly bound to their parents, as by the 
Confucian state. The production of laborers was a woman's job. From children 
came the labor to pay rent and taxes, and, if a market existed for their labor, to 
accumulate the tiny capital from which the family might eventually grow rich. A 
truncated, "petty" capitalism enabled reproductively lucky and economically 
agile households to expand and prosper. Under conditions of low technology, 
households were forced by the market to define prosperity in terms of multipli-
cation of family members as well as of expansion of capital. Such a set of condi-
tions implies that a secular or temporary or regional growth in the market 
brought corresponding pressure to bear on women to submit themselves to sex-
ual and childbearing routines governed more and more by patricorporate needs 
Motion in the System 
: 
59 
and less and less by personal choice. Where petty capitalism flourished, we 
should expect to see special efforts exerted by patricorporations and their ally, the 
state, to enforce women's submission to extreme pronatalism as well as to labor 
discipline. 
In some historical circumstances, population pressure may have forced inten-
sification and hence the rise of a market for labor power. In others, the expansion 
of market exchange encouraged parents to rear more of the children they bore so 
as to benefit from their wages. For China, we are not likely to find data that re-
duce the dialectic of population growth and market expansion to a clear-cut 
causal relationship. But for China, as for other agrarian societies with strong 
states, a third factor may be of considerable significance as a prime mover. That 
factor was state demand. 
STATE INTENSIFICATION OF PRODUCTION 
The TMP vision of the Chinese ruling class is not expansionary in the way a 
capitalist or PCMP vision is. Chinese officials did have standards of efficiency, 
however, which they saw as ideals to be impressed upon the populace. Where 
triple cropping was possible, rural folk should triple crop or be condemned as 
lazy and disloyal. Where land lay uncultivated, it should be worked so as to sup-
ply state revenues. Where people were thin on the ground, they should multiply 
into a dense and docile labor force. 
Peter Perdue's impressive account of land:people relationships in Ming and 
Qing Hunan is a vivid example of this process (1987). In the l~te Ming, with 
abundant food and land, Hunanese families saw no need to engage in the back-
breaking labor of double cropping or to rear the large families necessary to do so. 
Although an active market in grain created inequities among commoners, they 
had other options. Through work in forests, mines, and frontiers, they could es-
cape state demands and petty-capitalist competition by taking up a subsistence 
life. The state, unable to force the intensification of double cropping on an un-
willing population, clearly had weak regional influence; tributary demands were 
relatively easy to evade. In consequence, the double pressures that account for 
surges of population and of economic intensification were absent- and popu-
lation remained low. 
The creation of a balance between land and people, between means of pro-
duction and labor, was a constant preoccupation of officials. Hong Liangji, a 
Qing scholar-official, described the means available to this end: "To have all land 
utilized and the people exert themselves to the utmost; to move people into newly 
opened fields in the border lands; to reduce taxes, where they have increased in 
weight and number, so as to bring them into line with former levels; to prohibit 
extravagance and stop the monopolizing of land; to open the government gra-
naries in times of flood, drought, and pestilence and give the people food" (de-
60 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Bary et al. 1960:625). Hong's list omits one method officials had long used to fill 
up available lands with cultivators and to pressure them into intensified produc-
tion of food and fibers, the practice of granting arable land to soldier-settlers (de-
Bary 1960:596; Philip Huang 1985:85-86; Perdue 1987:94-95). 
Whether military or civilian, immigrants received instructions (sometimes ig-
nored) on many matters from officials bent on expanding the tax base. A fif-
teenth-century official "intended to have tenants as well as landlords pay tax or 
contribute labor according to their ability, and he ordered single men and women 
to marry according to their local customs, bringing in spouses from Jiangxi. His 
goal was to encourage the increase of population in Huguang and to open up un-
cultivated land, while maintaining careful registration of the population and en-
suring tax revenues for the government" (Perdue 1987:102). 
Chinese rulers had at least two important motives for attempting to standard-
ize production (and social life) by filling up sparsely settled regions. Dense-
but not too dense -
populations produced more revenue. Lands fully settled en-
abled imperial methods of social control to work more effectively. The expenses 
of governance could be paid out of local revenues, and mutual surveillance by 
commoners was more likely to work well. Chinese officials may well have taken 
seriously their mission of expanding a civilizing sense of hierarchy and cosmic 
order among the unpolished commoners. Even if they had not, however, revenue 
enhancement and administrative convenience would have engendered similar 
policies. 
By filling up their landscapes with labor-intensive styles of farming and by 
pressuring their people for higher production, Chinese officials pushed agricul-
turalists onto a narrow survival base. Striving to survive through protoindustrial 
efforts, people constantly reinvented petty capitalism. The prime mover of the 
intimately linked pulses of population and market expansion which mark the 
Song and Ming lay not in some natural law of demography but in household pro-
duction firmly harnessed by the rigid and demanding policies of a strong tribu-
tary system. 
Motion in the System 
61 
Cities and Space 
Heaven high, clouds light 
watching wild geese 
fly south and disappear. 
Only heroes will reach the Great Wall. 
Counting up, we have walked twenty thousand li. 
-
Mao Zedong, in southern Gansu, 
near the end of the Long March in 1935 
Thus far, I have described the dynamic of late-imperial Chinese 
society as arising from several sources of motion: the struggle between people, 
and sometimes classes, to maintain the TMP or to expand the sphere of the 
PCMP; the contest for control of women's labor; and the expansion of popula-
tion, itself a response to political-economic and gender inequalities. Another, less 
abstract form of motion played an important role in the making of Chinese cul-
ture: the physical dispersal and settlement of people in space. The pattern of 
urban settlement owes most, I would argue, to the choices of China's ruling class 
in its attempts to maintain the TMP. Such a conclusion meets Arthur P. Wolf's 
challenge "to account for the fact that Chinese culture remained heterogeneous 
despite creating and supporting a hierarchical system in which the behavior of 
those at each level served as compelling models for those at the next lower level" 
(1989b:318). Emphasis on the persistent hegemony of the TMP should supplant 
the focus on a naturalistic market model which has dominated Chinese studies 
for some decades. 
It is a truism that the larger and more complex things become, the more pos-
sibilities there are that a thread will snap, an edge unravel. Class societies are del-
icate. their breaks occur, rarely, as the result of natural disaster, more often from 
humanly instigated calamity. A network of canals is built wrong, or in the wrong 
place, or is wrongly maintained: floods come, people starve, new migrants re-
place them. The population is pressured into extremes of intensification: hills are 
deforested, drought follows floods, pandemics and starvation decimate the re-
62 
gion. Hungry, angry, and outrageously exploited people rise, kill officials, burn 
cities, and are slaughtered by imperial soldiers. The government builds a new 
city, settles it forcibly with troops, trades with tribals; the region is sinicized, 
canalized, deforested, overpopulated, hungry, angry. The government piles up 
part of a Great Wall, killing uncounted workers; it digs a Grand Canal, wreaking 
ecological disaster on its downwater side, drawing migrants, and seeding com-
mercial centers. 
The Chinese that many Westerners think of as home-bound, stuck in great-
great-grandfather's mud, must have been rare. People in vast numbers were con-
stantly on the move to survive the consequences of a system that constantly was 
disequilibriated by its inherent inequalities. Ordinary folk moved, when they 
could, to seize land poorly defended by local tribal people, depopulated by flood, 
plague, and famine, or laid waste through imperial vengeance after an uprising. 
Sometimes they simply came to town, looking for work. 
The movements of state populations as they responded to natural events and 
to the workings of their unequal and thus poorly balanced political economies 
were important both in themselves and as they revealed the motion in such ab-
stractions as classes and modes of production. Regionally, in the short run, such 
movement was chaotic, sometimes telling us little but that some periods were 
"peaceful" or "turbulent:' In China, however, there have been two secular trends 
in the dispersion of people: a southward movement of Han people into more and 
more corners of east Asia, and the clustering of people into urban hierarchies. 
The southward movement of Han people, but especially of Han culture, has 
been heavily overemphasized in the past, mainly for ideological reasons. Archae-
ology and logic increasingly combine to reveal the age and complexity of non-
Han settlement in what is now China. China's "march to the tropics" was a 
movement partly of people but much more of a particular social formation, the 
rulers of which absorbed, reorganized, and learned from indigenes as they sub-
jugated them. A great deal of China's territory, even that of the old "eighteen 
provinces" -
excluding the vast, sparsely populated, and feebly held west -
was not truly drawn into the main currents of empire. If there was nothing much 
for officials either to take or to defend, a region might remain for centuries part 
of China in only a very nominal sense. This is true of many of China's hilly re-
gions, especially in the south. 
The movement of people into cities, however, has been essential to the opera-
tion of China's political economy and hence its culture. China's late-imperial ur-
banization has been the subject of very considerable scholarly attention, most 
particularly by G. William Skinner, whose 1964-65 model of Chinese marketing 
leads directly into his several essays on urbanization in a 1977 volume, and to more 
recent restatement (1985). Skinner's investigations of urbanization and marketing 
-which at first he viewed as nearly identical -
drew together a mass of infor-
mation about the spatial distribution of cities, along with illuminating analyses of 
Cities and Space : 63 
what that distribution might imply. His argument was based on central-place the-
ory, which implies that Chinese cities functioned primarily as market centers in an 
economy in which the profit-seeking distribution of commodities was the main 
motive and in which transport networks based on profit-loss considerations were 
limited by natural topographies. These central assumptions about Chinese politi-
cal economy are shared by many other Western China scholars and are thus wor-
thy of special scrutiny. They introduce classically bourgeois and thus 
inappropriate distortions into our understanding of the movements of Chinese 
people in space. 
In his essays in The City in Late Imperial China, Skinner, building on his ear-
lier articles on marketing and social structure (1964, 1965a, 1965b ), sets out to 
demonstrate that Chinese cities have been spaced across the landscape primarily 
because of their role as commercial centers. Reasons of state for the building of 
cities were secondary to those of commerce because "it was efficient for political 
institutions to focus on commercial centers in their efforts to control and regu-
late the means of exchange and (indirectly) of production, and to tap ... wealth" 
(1977a:276). Even "the formal administrative attributes of capital cities stemmed 
in large part from their place in the relevant regional system of economic central 
places" (1977C:254). These economic central places formed "the 'natural' structure 
of Chinese society- a world of marketing and trading systems, informal poli-
tics, and nested subcultures dominated by officials-out-of-office, nonofficial gen-
try, and important merchants" (1977a:275). 
Skinner begins his analysis with central-place theory, which "in the strict sense 
is concerned solely with retailing." To this emphasis he adds concerns for urban 
positioning in "the structure of distribution channels connecting economic cen-
ters [and places] in the transport network." "Retailing" is specified for us as in-
cluding "consumer demand [enabling] the supplier to earn normal profits" 
(1977a:276-77). For Skinner, cities are principally markets for exchanges that gen-
erate "normal profits:' He assumes that virtually everyone was in the market, ar-
guing that even villages are located vis-a-vis one another and nearby towns to 
maximize the ease of transporting goods for trade. 
Skinner's insistence that sinologists should take market relations seriously is 
extremely important for our understanding of Chinese cities and spatial rela-
tions. That the power of commodity production transforms society is an argu-
ment of great significance for theory, for our understanding of history, and for 
predictions about China's future. As a proof that the Chinese created cities pri-
marily because of profit-seeking exchange relations, however, Skinner's book-
within-a-book fails. Its central assumption, that "the market" in China behaved 
as it does in the capitalist mode of production, shaping and dominating all other 
systems, is untenable. It fails too because Skinner, who is well aware of the polit-
ical implications of the economics of commerce, virtually ignores the economic 
power of the political processes he subsumes as administration. The functional-
64 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
ist dichotomy he draws between the economic and the political incapacitates his 
analysis. Only a political-economic approach can capture the complexities of 
even simple social formations. Even in times when the Chinese state was weak, it 
often acted powerfully and acted in disregard of notions of profit, or even of 
human life. 
Skinner's 1964-65 work on marketing systems in the Sichuan Basin applies the 
work of Walter Christaller' to that region and hypothesizes its implications for all 
of China. Perhaps in response to criticisms such as those by Lawrence W. Criss-
man (1973) (which Skinner does not cite), in his 1977 essays (especially 1977a), 
Skinner moves from the hypothetical unbounded plain of Christallerian central-
place theory to an accommodation to China's rugged and varied geography. He 
divides the country into nine physiographic macroregions structured around 
natural rivers as the primary means of transport. This modification brings the 
data into closer alignment with the predictions of pure central-place theory. It 
ties his work too to the important study "China's Key Economic Regions" by Ch'i 
Ch'ao-ting (1936). 
We may apply G. K. Zipf's rank/size rule- another test of the relative devel-
opment of marketing systems (1949)- to show that Chinese cities as a group 
are anomalously patterned. Their arrangement indicates that China as a whole 
did not form an integrated marketing hierarchy -
as much other evidence also 
indicates. The nine macroregions, Skinner argues, were just such integrated sys-
tems, although the degree of integration varied from region to region. Division 
into macroregions thus appears to solve the question of why the overall place-
ment of cities did not conform to Christallerian geometries: there was no unified, 
all-China hierarchy, and regional hierarchies were sharply modified by the avail-
ability of water transport. 
These two factors (pure central-place logic modified by the profit-seeking use 
of water transport) still fall short as predictors of Chinese urban locations. So 
Skinner ingeniously adds another variable (drawn perhaps from Immanuel 
Wallerstein's world-systems approach): Each macroregion has a core and ape-
riphery; cores begin with natural advantages that are strengthened through the 
familiar process of underdeveloping their peripheries, or hinterlands. This 
process affects city placement in a variety of ways. 
Underdevelopment occurs through unequal transfers between core and pe-
riphery. Skinner gives an interestingly chosen example: the soil fertility (and 
hence agrarian output) in cores increases as hinterland products, notably timber, 
are concentrated in central places and as human wastes from hinterland food-
stuffs are retained for use on fields in the close vicinity of cores. He ignores the 
more general insights about the social inequality that the core/periphery trope 
implies. We know that wealth of all kinds was transferred from Chinese periph-
1. And many others; see Skinner's list of references on page 717n7 (1964). 
Cities and Space 
65 
eries to Chinese cores, usually through the actions either of officials or of petty 
capitalists. Unless China was very unlike other class societies, we know that these 
humans were more efficient and interesting creators of inequality than the un-
motivated drift of wood and sewage. As the Chinese proverb puts it, "Water flows 
down to lower places, but people flow up to richer places" (in Goldstein 1987:915). 
Skinner's acute perception of the humanly constructed nature of an appar-
ently "natural" and extremely important factor of production -
rich soils -
points our attention to a significant weakness in his analysis of physiographic 
macroregions. His explanation of the patterning of Chinese cities depends on the 
transport costs of goods; these are substantially lessened near natural waterways 
suitable for transport. Certainly, in preindustrial society, the latter point is true. 
But Skinner virtually ignores the artificial patterning of such transport found in 
all ancient agrarian states and dramatically exemplified in China. Although he in-
serts some qualifications of this naturalism, referring briefly to draining swampy 
lowlands and a sophisticated technology applied to water transport (1977d:12-13), 
the tenor of argument and the preponderance of data ignore the extreme artifi-
ciality of the Chinese transport system. For thousands of years, powerful ruling 
officials designed, extracted the resources to construct, and ordered built exten-
sive communications networks in their realms. They reshaped rivers, imposed 
canalization on unlikely topographies, and cut roads. There is probably nowhere 
on earth that serves less well than China as an example of the shaping of human 
life by raw nature. 
Lyman P. Van Slyke reminds us of the importance in Chinese water transport 
of official engineering on a grand scale. The Ling Qu, or Miracle Canal, was the 
world's earliest contour transport canal. It linked the Xiang River, via the Yangzi 
to the north, with the Gui River, which flows to Guangzhou, China's southern-
most port. Begun in the third century BPE, it was most effectively managed dur-
ing the Tang and Song. Built first for military use, it became mainly an artery for 
tax grain, which during the Tang crept north in thirty-five-ton barges (1988:60). 
An early-seventeenth-century Dutch map (Vertente et al. 1991:61), dense along its 
route with settlement names, reveals what a major highway this remained at the 
end of the Ming. 
The better-known Grand Canal was the result of Sui (581-618 PE) and later 
official efforts to draw tax grain directly from the Yangzi Valley, first to medieval 
capitals on difficult-to-navigate stretches of the Yellow River and, after the four-
teenth century, to Beijing. Its initial portion, the Bian Canal, ran from the head 
of the Yangzi estuary to Xi'an. The five-hundred-mile Yongqi Canal connected 
the Yellow River with the frontier area of what later became Beijing; a second 
major feeder, 215 miles long, joined the city of Hangzhou to the Yangzi. VanSlyke 
describes how, between the years 6oo and 610, Sui rulers mobilized two to three 
million workers for this construction, including women, "males having been 
used up by the combined demands of agriculture, war, and corvee labor:' The 
66 
: 
C H 
I 
N A ' S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
completely new Yongqi Canal, on which women labored, "was designed to radi-
ate political and military power outward from the capital districts, rather than to 
transport resources inward to the capital area:' In the fourteenth century, the Yel-
low River having shifted its course, and the Yuan dynasty rulers their capital, a 
new version of the northern feeder was cut through the North China Plain. As in 
the Bian Canal, stretches of natural river were incorporated wherever possible, 
but even these often required substantial improvement and management. This 
"new" Grand Canal ran one thousand miles, from Hangzhou to Beijing, crossing 
two major rivers and many lesser ones and running athwart the generally east-
west grain of the natural terrain (1988:69-73). 
The heaviest use of old and new Grand canal was for the one-way shipment of 
tax grain by officials in charge of government revenues and by merchants fran-
chised by them. The quantities were vast, with storage facilities along the way 
such as a Sui granary with a capacity of over thirty million bushels. And, Van 
Slyke tells us, it was "inordinately expensive; in the early nineteenth century, the 
Ch'ing authorities may have been spending 15 million ounces of silver, nearly a 
quarter of their total income, for [the transport and management of tribute 
grain" (74-75). In the Yellow River conservancy, immense sums were expended to 
keep the water level deep enough in season so that tribute grain barges could 
pass. This expense made the grain extremely costly, but the costs fell on those 
who did corvee on the dikes or provided staggering quantities of grain stalks for 
their revetments (Dodgen 1991:42, 41). Although Beijing officials objected to the 
price of such transport, tribute grain was not a commodity on the market. The 
obstacles of market conditions, transport costs, and the natural lay of the land 
were overridden in the interests of the TMP. 
The use of sea transport for such shipments on the northern half of China's 
east coast was not seriously attempted in large part because, according to Van 
Slyke, "the Grand Canal had become a morass of vested interests. The bureau-
cracy in charge, one of the three great superintendencies (along with the Yellow 
River Conservancy and the Salt Administration, had become a Byzantine maze of 
corruption, patronage, and theft, harder to clean out than the silt that continu-
ally clogged the canal. The sea route -
to which there might be, of course, legit-
imate objections -
challenged these vested interests, and was thus strenuously 
opposed" (1988:76). Because a central goal of those who managed the TMP was 
the pumping of surplus from nonofficial to official pockets, the only real problem 
here was in the eyes of the highest officials, who thought their cut should be big-
ger and used for different purposes. 
The centrality of natural waterways on which much of Skinner's argument 
rests is also called into question by the history of Ningbo. By late-imperial times, 
Ningbo was an extremely important commercial city in Zhejiang province, with 
what appears to be an ideal location in the Hangzhou estuary. The city achieved 
its importance only after it became the effective southern terminus of the Grand 
Cities and Space : 67 
Canal, which stimulated economic development throughout the lower Yangzi 
(Shiba 1977:392). This is not a Europe, a continent of small, separate states, but an 
empire in which tributary unity shaped other forms of integration. When water-
ways were constructed on a large scale, the decision makers were not private en-
trepreneurs concerned for profit and loss but Chinese officials interested in the 
transport of troops and taxes and in the manufacture of lucrative official posts. 
The same can be said about land routes. Although water transport was un-
questionably more efficient, where it was important for official communications 
to go overland, overland they went. Officials could send important messages by 
road at the rate of from 100 to 175 miles a day (Skinner 1977c:270 ), far faster than 
water transport. Skinner's work on Sichuan cities also underscores the impor-
tance of roads. He concludes that "the structure of the river system virtually de-
termined the siting of the region's higher-level economic centers and that major 
roads had the effect of compensating for deficiencies of the river system in link-
ing those cities" (1977a:291-93). 
But it is not as apparent as all that. As Skinner himself points out, Chengdu, 
without important water links, was "unequivocally the central metropolis, and 
Chungking [on the Yangzi- H.G.] merely a regional metropolis" (1977a:290). 
Only the radical shift in Yangzi trade brought about by its mechanization and in-
ternationalization, combined with warlord politics, resulted in the reversing of 
commercial roles for these two cities in the 1920s. Chengdu remained, and re-
mains, the capital, quite probably for the reason it has been so for most the last 
two thousand years. Hard to reach by water, it is the agricultural beneficiary of 
the remarkable flood-control-and-irrigation works at Du Jiang Yan, built in the 
third century BPE. Through Chengdu are channeled the almost geomantic be-
nefits of a magnificent piece of Han-dynasty engineering, still in use after nearly 
two thousand years, as pointed an example of tributary-mode shaping of human 
settlement as one might hope to find. James Lee documents the elaborate efforts 
Chinese states, especially during the Qing, made to expand the road network in 
Sichuan (1990, chap. 3). 
Over time, the emerging data have moved Skinner away from his initial em-
phasis on commerce as the primary factor in urban placement. Much of "Cities 
and the Hierarchy of Local Systems" is an extended interpretation of what Skin-
ner sees as a separate hierarchy of capital cities. Finding Chinese officials canny in 
their adaptation to shifts in commerce, he also gives considerable attention to the 
differing official concerns for revenue collection and defense as these influenced 
the size and hierarchical ratings of administrative areas. By the end of his series 
of papers in The City in Late Imperial China, Skinner writes of class relations be-
tween merchants and gentry as very nearly the key to understanding the spatial 
relationships of urbanites within their cities and of "class and occupation (com-
plexly interrelated)" and regional hierarchy as coequal determinants of China's 
"basic cultural cleavages" (1977e:269). He goes further yet in the direction I urge 
68: CHINA's 
MOTOR 
in this book in a 1985 paper on changes in marketing structures since the 1949 
revolution in China, noting that both "market" and "redistributive" tendencies 
are at work in contemporary China. 
In "Cities and the Hierarchy of Local Systems;' Skinner confronts the state more 
directly: "I am led to conclude that Ch'ing field administration was marvelously 
adapted to the realities of regional structure within the empire .... These findings 
effectively dispose of the notion that cities in imperial China were but microcosms 
of empire, more or less uniform creations of an omnipotent state. Rather, they give 
evidence of skilled husbanding and deployment of the limited bureaucratic power 
that a premodern court could effectively control (1977a:344-45). 
But Skinner sees administration where we might better see tributary political 
economy. If it is useful to see the Chinese social formation as two articulated 
modes of production, the economic functions of most central places included 
both those of petty capitalism and those of tribute. We can separate central places 
into capitals and noncapitals, as Skinner does, but in doing so we will have sepa-
rated neither economy nor administration. Material resources, including labor 
power, moved in two separable circuits (PCMP and TMP) in every administra-
tive unit from the household up to the empire. So too did the control of persons, 
accomplished both by easily visible administrative actors (from household heads 
to magistrates to the big brass of Beijing) and by the more subtle mechanisms 
that added their increment to the maintenance of class hegemony. These ranged 
from the ties of common interest Skinner emphasizes between merchants and 
gentry (1977e) to the complexities of folk ideology, such as the bureaucratic or-
ganization of even villagers' gods. 
Painstaking empirical attempts to weigh the importance of commerce versus 
administration based on the distinction between capitals and noncapitals run 
into difficulties. In analyzing 1,549 central places with yamens as evidence for the 
dominance of commerce, Skinner omits eighty county-level units from ex-
tremely peripheral areas, thus skewing his data in the direction of his hypothesis 
(1977a:3o2n). These presumably had some form of administration, but doubtless 
very little commerce. He also omits an "arguably ... still lower level of adminis-
tration [which] existed in embryonic form." Certain county-level units contained 
subdistricts ( ssu) whose "capitals" were towns where a special category of deputy 
magistrate (hsun-chien) served. This may be an important omission. Rowe 
(1984:32) informs us that Hubei had sixty-eight xun-jian (hsun-chien) during the 
Qing. Because such towns typically ranked "among the most important within 
their counties" (Skinner 1977a:303n), it would appear that their inclusion too 
would weaken the case for commercial primacy which Skinner is attempting to 
establish. Table 20 in "Cities and the Hierarchy of Local Systems" (1977a:340 ), 
which purportedly demonstrates that administrative centers were distributed by 
their importance in an "economic" hierarchy, is a far less clear-cut demonstration 
of his point than Skinner takes it to be. 
Cities and Space 
69 
But the problem of proof lies not in a few details of analytical technique, a few 
percentage points here and there. It lies in the fact that it is extremely difficult, 
probably impossible, to separate the urbanizing effects of the quite different 
movements of surplus value and of tribute with the data at hand. Yue Zumou, 
using historical and archaeological evidence, has demonstrated the priority of 
defense in locating China's cities up through the Han (1994). We might explore a 
large number of Song and post-Song cities in this fashion to learn whether they 
were founded on a state commitment to waterworks (like Chengdu), or defense, 
or ethnic preference for a familiar home region. We might then see whether, and 
when, commerce developed in them. By contrast, we might also find cities 
founded, or expanded, on new commerce, like Chongqing (Chungking), which 
then attracted a seat of government for the better extraction of its new wealth, or 
Hankou (Hankow), which mushroomed into existence in the mid-Ming and ap-
pears to have kept government at arm's length throughout its prime (Rowe 1984). 
Surely we would find both kinds of developments; and we would find still 
more cities in which, as in Ningbo, both happened nearly simultaneously. The 
goal of research on this subject should not be to determine primacy for com-
merce versus administration, economic versus political, for every scholar realizes 
-
now, and partly in response to Skinner's work- that both matter very much. 
The goal should be to find a way to think dearly and usefully about the nature of 
the relationship between these two factors and among the many others that also 
play a part. 
Essential to such a project -
and here I quarrel with Skinner's imagery about 
cities as "the 'command posts' that serve to articulate and integrate human activ-
ity in space and time" (1977b:216)- is a clear focus on human agents. Reifica-
tion is treacherous: cities do not act. People do thus-and-so, and, in response, 
other people submit, concur, remain passive, invent imagery of resistance, throw 
rocks at tanks. The Chinese people's two political-economic logics impede the 
conceptualization of a class structure congruent with the details of their history 
and ethnography. Some lumping of people into larger units is needed for the dis-
course that links individuals with various relations to means of production. But 
cities are not those units. Historical-materialist approaches, not functionalist 
ones modified by social-psychological "cycles;' seem more likely to produce 
workable categories of human relations. Not rivers or cities, but humans with 
similar and differing relations as producers, settled China. 
Having set forth the outline of an alternative theory, I should sketch how that 
theory might better account for spatial aspects of Chinese settlement. Skinner's 
research unearths two important questions. He asks why urbanization fell off 
after its peak during the Song and assumed different forms, and he interrogates 
the differential distribution of capital and noncapital cities. 
Although landscapes continued to fill in with central places after the Song, 
"the levels of urbanization achieved in the most advanced regions were higher in 
70 
: 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
the medieval era than in late imperial times" (Skinner 1977d:28). Skinner attrib-
utes this decline to the placing of later (post -Song) capitals further from the cores 
of their macroregions than were medieval ones, for defense against the now-
powerful central Asians. While this idea is reasonable in tributary terms, it runs 
counter to Skinner's general argument. 
In the TMP/PCMP approach, however, Song capitals may have remained in 
production cores in the interests of the unusually powerful petty-capitalist classes 
among Song elites. In class terms, Song officials represented petty-capitalist in-
terests better, perhaps, than did officials of any succeeding Chinese state until the 
Republic. The late empires, with their major northern capitals, grew in power; 
and the system gained its final form and consolidated a ruling class on successful 
tribute extraction. By the Qing, many peasants were direct tenants of the imper-
ial household or of bannermen -
Manzhu aristocrats (Naquin and Rawski 
1987:146). Twenty-nine percent of the total arable land of the capital province be-
longed to early-Qing banners, and, according to Philip Huang, "some 2o,ooo,ooo 
of China's 740,ooo,ooo mu of arable land was doled out by the court" (1985:87). 
Tributary elites may have strengthened their mode by retreating, moving their 
capital to the North China Plain. With road-connected plains their supporting 
appanages, they competed from strength with petty capitalists. On that well-
policed, flat region, where troops could travel quickly even if goods moved 
slowly, the state could squeeze the last drops from tiny producers rather than di-
rectly confront the complexities and strengths of the merchants to the south. The 
tiny accumulations of northern commoners sublimated invisibly in icy tributary 
air; capitalism's sprouts froze. We see a monstrous parallel of the household that, 
having got rich from salt or pawnshops, sinks some of its wealth into land for its 
security, but still keeps its profit-making shops in town. 
The puzzle that later great cities became smaller, or at least no bigger than, 
those of the Song also yields to this logic. Though the TMP was weak during the 
Song, its supporters regained their power during Yuan, Ming, and early Qing. 
The tendency to build big commercial cities located for the convenience of capi-
tal should, therefore, have diminished as petty capitalists presented lower 
profiles. What might have become capitalism became "petty;' retreating to small 
scale and small towns. 
How does the TMP/PCMP model contrast with Skinner's for an interpreta-
tion of the overall distribution of China's cities? The interested reader may wish 
to consult, as I did, the endpaper maps for The City in Late Imperial China. These 
locate all Chinese cities with populations of four thousand or more in late Qing 
(or fifty thousand or more in 1953) which were: county- or higher-level capitals; 
officially designated as cities between 1893 and 1953; or in other ways displayed 
clear evidence of urbanness (see Skinner 1977b:221 for details). The maps are an 
invaluable reference, especially useful for their graphic representation of county 
capitals. They do, however, overestimate the effects of European trade and un-
Cities and Space : 71 
derestimate those of the indigenous trade from the southeast coast to Taiwan and 
southeast Asia. 
Three peculiarities of the distribution of these county capitals draw attention. 
One is a tripartite division of the patterning of cities across China as a whole. The 
second is the unevenness of the distribution of central places in the North China 
Plain (and, less impressively, in the Sichuan Basin), including the near-absence of 
cities on the northern coast. The third is the curious layout of county capitals 
across Guizhou and Yunnan. 
We may look first at the three patterns of city distribution which Skinner's 
map reveals. First, the North China Plain, dominated by Beijing, is dense with 
county capitals that are of no great commercial importance and has virtually no 
cities that are economically important but are not capitals. The Sichuan Basin re-
peats this pattern. Second, the Lower Yangzi carries the majority of truly large 
cities. There are so many that not all serve as capitals, even of their own counties. 
The Pearl River delta is a miniature Yangzi, as would the southeast coast (includ-
ing Taiwan) have been during its heyday of overseas trade. The third pattern oc-
cupies a huge crescent, sweeping south of Hangzhou and the Yangzi cities, inland 
from the narrow citified coast of Fujian, and westward and northward through 
western Sichuan and to the north. In this large, mountainous, and relatively 
sparsely settled region, virtually all cities are capitals; there is not enough business 
to generate a surplus of urban places beyond the needs of officials for centers of 
authority.2 
Along with urban placement, the distribution of TMP expenditures, of upper-
level degree holders, of lineages, and of dominant relations of production can be 
used to estimate differential effects of TMP and PCMP vigor. The simplest possi-
ble graphic representation of such variation is a four-square model in which we 
play off a strong and a weak TMP against a strong and a weak PCMP (see Figure 
4.1 and Map, facing p. 1). 
The great crescent stretch of territory (LR, weak TMP/weak PCMP) in which 
commodity production was not developed by either intensive trade or marked 
state attention is the least "Chinese" part of the empire. This was true in many 
2. Susan Naquin and Evelyn S. Rawski, using an only slightly modified version of Skinner's 
macroregions, have compiled extremely interesting summaries of the macroregional societies as they 
existed during the eighteenth century (1987). Their descriptions of each region are extensive, cover-
ing a wide range of topics drawn from more recent social history. Their work has been useful to me 
in many ways, but most especially as a check on my own formulation of the main outlines of region-
ality (which follows this note in the main text). It is not surprising that Naquin and Rawski, follow-
ing Skinner's lead, find many differences among the macroregions; a dead uniformity would be far 
more surprising. With few exceptions, however, I am satisfied that my broader categorization, which 
combines some macroregions on the basis of eighteenth- and early-nineteenth-century urban pat-
terning, is not in conflict with theirs. 
72: CHINAS 
MOTOR 
F I G u R E 
4 . 1. 
Differential effects of TMP and PCMP vigor on the three 
urban patterns 
UL: 
Lower and middle Yangzi, Pearl River delta (urban pattern two, above) 
LL: 
North China Plain, broadly defined, Chengdu Basin (urban pattern one, above) 
UR: Southeast coast, Taiwan (urban pattern two, above) 
LR: 
Southeast to northwest interior crescent (only partially sinified, urban pattern three, 
above) 
senses. Its towns lacked all but rudimentary state and petty-capitalist institutions; 
its people, not pressured by the double burden of such extractive institutions, did 
not populate the land thickly or garden it intensively; the many variations of kin-
ship, local political organization, custom, and costume that we subsume as eth-
nicity were widely present, not yet crushed out of existence by the Han culture 
that precipitated from the interaction of the two modes. Naquin and Rawski con-
trast the countryside of Skinner's Lingnan (Guangdong and Guangxi) with its 
nearby Pearl River delta core: "The culture of the mountains, oblivious to 
macroregional boundaries, resembled that in other highland peripheries, espe-
cially the adjacent Middle Yangtze" (1987:180 ). 
We know little about either the minorities3 or the Han (visibly highly interde-
pendent, if uncomfortably so) in such regions. It is clear, however, that they har-
bored considerable cultural variability. This is as one would expect from people 
whose choices were not sharply constricted by official control or the discipline of 
the market. Government expenditures there were limited to those for minimal 
social control. They were regions in which neither lineages nor upper-level de-
3· Such studies as exist generally ignore the well-established findings of anthropologists who have 
studied similar stretches of cultural variability within state societies (e.g. Leach 1965; Barth 1969). 
These make it plain that "minorities" (like peasants) can be understood only in the context of the 
wider cultural patterns that generate their continued reproduction. 
Cities and Space 
73 
gree holders were significantly represented and where the relations of production 
appear to have been relatively egalitarian, based on widespread access to means 
of production. 
In the quarter of the diagram representing the North China Plain (and 
Sichuan Basin) (strong TMP/weak PCMP), we find another political-economic 
balance. State ownership and disbursements were great; private commodities 
were produced primarily for very local use and exchanged largely at periodic 
markets. Periodic markets were not a sign of well-capitalized commodity pro-
duction, but rather the reverse. Mao Zedong, after a 1930 field study, concluded 
that "the business in periodic markets represents the natural economy and the 
business [done by] shops and carts represents the commercial economy" (Mao 
1990:109). 
In the North China Plain, the only cities were capitals, but these were thickly 
strewn. The state was strong, commerce was weak; in Naquin and Rawski's 
phrase, it was an area "of strong government supervision." These historians of the 
eighteenth century also note that North China "appears to have received more 
than its share of government funds -
for price stabilization, waterway and road 
maintenance, and local defense, not to mention the regular salaries paid to ban-
nermen [during the Qing- H.G.] and government employees." The govern-
ment was especially willing to spend on the Yellow River water conservancy and 
on management of the Grand Canal (1987:144). The money spent by the state did 
not remain with its populace, however. 
The North China Plain is a region from which it has long been relatively easy 
for the state to extract nearly all surplus, both of labor and of products. Naquin 
and Rawski note the importance of that plain (along with tlle lower Yangzi Val-
ley) as late as the Qing in supplying tribute grain to Beijing to feed those "who 
depended on the throne for their livelihood." This remained one of the few Qing 
taxes to be paid largely in kind (22). Here, Skinner sees city rank/size distribution 
for north China as one of the two "clear-cut cases of primacy" (along with 
Guangzhou) (1977b:237-38), a pattern associated with intensive extraction in 
favor of whatever class dominated the primate city. 
Small owner-operator agriculturalists and tenants with fairly secure tenancy 
from nearby small rural landlords dominated this region. By early Qing, Philip 
Huang says, officials limited large landholders and encouraged a smallholder 
economy because smallholders "were a more accessible source of tax revenue 
than the powerful big estate owners. From the point of view of the central gov-
ernment, they were also far less politically threatening" (1985:86). 
For commoners, tlle North China Plain was a poor place and thus produced 
few of the social organizations characteristic of strong petty-capitalist produc-
tion, notably the lineage. Northerners organized only small and weak lineages, 
emphasizing welfare and pooled educational advantages rather than corporate 
activity in the market. Shandong's Kong (Confucius) lineage, "virtually enfeoffed 
74 
: 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
in Qufu county, was a rare exception, thriving on its unusual connections with 
official life;' according to Naquin and Rawski (1987:146-47). 
With little hope of wealth from private commodity production, and with 
many sources for disbursement of TMP benefits, north China commoners took 
education as the wisest -
almost the only -
strategy for class climbing. In the 
eighteenth century, when competition from richer regions was intense, only the 
lower Yangzi produced more scholars than did north China (Naquin and Rawski 
1987:143). 
If the undeveloped low TMP/low PCMP crescent was the least Chinese part of 
China, the North China Plain, where tributary circuits thoroughly dominated 
those of petty capitalism, conforms most closely to cultural orthodoxy. Private 
marketing was common and adequate to meet the needs of poor and frugal cus-
tomers, but commodity production created neither wealth nor many goods that 
traveled far. Officials were effectively positioned to enforce demands for taxes, 
military service, corvee, and other forms of tribute. One recalls the resort to 
women's labor in building the "new" Grand Canal by a dynasty that had "used 
up" too many men. 
The Sichuan Basin resembles the North China plain in many particulars. 
Chengdu, before the late-nineteenth-century expansion of Chongqing, was a city 
of very high primacy -
far larger than the next-ranked city -
and hence high 
extractive ability. For strategic reasons, officials had to control the Sichuan Basin, 
though local people time and again showed a preference for autonomy. Once its 
people had constructed the necessary water- and roadworks, the basin became a 
rice bowl for pre-Song capitals on the upper Yellow River, a unique inland source 
of salt for the interior provinces and an early exporter of state-produced silks. Ac-
cording to Naquin and Rawski, although the region was on the edge of empire, it 
was "better integrated into the national economy than any other peripheral re-
gion" (1987=194). 
Its main products moved in tributary circuits, not in the market. They moved 
under the control of Chengdu's officials, linked to the capital by enormously 
labor-intensive roads, and by boats that men dragged up the Yangzi. By the mid-
nineteenth century, all cities of any consequence in the basin were capitals, with 
sitting officials immediately present to ensure the dominance of tributary over 
petty-capitalist transfers. 
Sichuan's distance from the capital may have allowed its petty capitalists more 
leeway than those of the North China plain. After its devastation and repopula-
tion of the last four centuries, the area was notable neither for complex lineages 
(as my hypothesis predicts) nor for production of upper-level degree holders (a 
situation that runs counter to my argument) (Naquin and Rawski 1987:198). 
Officials governing populations among whom petty capitalism had gained 
a strong foothold faced two very different sets of problems, so that there were 
significant differences between the two areas in which petty capitalism was 
Cities and Space : 75 
strongest: the Yangzi Valley and the Pearl River delta (centering on 
Guangzhou) regions (strong TMP/strong PCMP) and the southeast coast 
(primarily of Fujian) and Taiwan (weak TMP/strong PCMP). The pattern of 
city distribution in all areas was similar during the centuries leading up to the 
intrusion of European steamships, with their associated expansion of Yangzi 
Valley cities. All these regions were heavily urbanized, and their cities and 
towns noted more for production and commerce than for their roles as capi-
tals. Wenzhou (Zhejiang), Fuzhou, Quanzhou, Zhangzhou, Xiamen (Fujian), 
and Chaozhou ( Guangdong) on the southeast coast, and Lugang, Beigang, 
and Anping in Taiwan were all important and vigorous ports in the seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries. 
Although people in all these areas were strongly responsive to the logic of 
the PCMP, they can be distinguished, as in the four-square diagram, into two 
sets on the basis of other organizational and cultural tendencies. Tributary in-
fluence was strong over the lower Yangzi and the Pearl River delta, weak over 
the Fujian coast and Taiwan. The reasons are apparent: river/canal transport, 
essential to extraction of resources in the Yangzi Valley and Pearl Delta, was far 
different from coastal transport in two ways. First, inland water transport was 
much more dependent on human intervention for the creation of appropriate 
infrastructure, so that the users of that transport were more directly control-
lable by the state. Second, not only was the hinterland of the Fujian cities their 
own provincial interior (which was, indeed, relatively undeveloped), but so 
also was their overseas commercial empire, over which the Chinese imperium 
did not extend. 
Chinese river traffic was always heavily biased toward imperial capitals. But 
over seven thousand Fujianese ships carried silk, porcelain, and tea to Manila 
every year in the late sixteenth century to await New World galleons (Naquin and 
Rawski 1987:168). To a far greater extent than in the Yangzi Valley or the Pearl 
Delta, Fujianese petty capitalists could ignore the demands of the state and do 
business on petty-capitalist principles -
practices officials habitually described 
as smuggling, piracy, or worse. The extraction of tribute from that coast was so 
difficult that under Qing rulers, who ran a rather short fuse, the coast was simply 
cleared of population for ten miles or so inland in the 166os. Although this move 
was disruptive, the disruption did not last. In the most expansive years for this re-
gion, Fujianese traded virtually everywhere in coastal Asia, setting up permanent 
colonies in many parts of "the southern ocean." At home, they built cities dense 
with the lineage halls that were corporate headquarters to such merchant empires 
as "the Amoy network" (Ng 1983). Imperial concern for the defense and the cus-
toms revenues of Fujian appear not to have resulted in consistent, long-term ex-
penditures there, as they did on river conservancies. 
By contrast, Yangzi Valley people and those of Guangdong, until foreign trade 
with Europe was licensed to local merchants, relied far more on the land than on 
76 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
the sea for wealth. Even the Guangdongnese, now well known as sojourners, 
formed no overseas colonies until the middle of the nineteenth century. The 
coastal trading of Yangzi Valley people was sharply limited by the official action 
and construction described below. 
The number of upper-level degrees acquired in particular times and places 
was influenced not oniy by wealth but by whether merchant ties to scholar-
officials were necessary to the successful conduct of business. In the Yangzi Valley 
and Pearl Delta, the state-franchised merchants, along with landlords and other 
major commodity producers, had real need of such links to the ruling class. 
These areas have long and consistently produced large numbers of upper-level 
degree holders. With commercial prosperity abroad, the Fujianese needed them 
less. During the Ming, prior to their overseas-generated independence, the Fu-
jianese had ranked first in per-capita production of jin shi (upper scholars); at the 
height of their prosperity in the eighteenth century it stood at eighth place 
(Naquin and Rawski 1987:173). 
As will be seen in Chapter 8, differences in the capacity of the TMP to influ-
ence petty capitalists also encouraged subtle but important distinctions between 
the lineages of the Yangzi/Pearl on the one hand and the southeast coast on the 
other. 
The Yangzi Valley and Guangdong regions were far more dependent on the 
logic of the tributary mode, and were also -
perhaps in consequence? -
more 
productive. The Yangzi Valley- what Skinner would divide into lower and mid-
dle Yangzi -
is the clearest example of the importance of natural river transport 
in shaping Chinese destinies. Even here, a significant anomaly exists: the impov-
erished and unurbanized coastal plain north of the river. I shall return to the 
Jiangbei below. 
It took centuries to drain, canalize, and otherwise improve much of the Yangzi 
basin, including the economically key portions to the east and south (Shiba 
1977:391-401). But from the Han on, keeping it in the empire and exploiting its 
variety and riches became a permanent goal of ruling classes. Earlier discussion 
of official canal construction to link the river to other significant regions gives an 
indication of the willingness of officials to turn the tributary system to the ac-
complishment of such goals. 
The Pearl Delta emerged into significance as early as the Han, first as a 
strategic locale against powerful southeast Asian states (the "Miracle Canal" 
was built to assist troop transfers there). It also became a producer of tribute 
grain and textile fibers and an important participant in the kind of overseas 
Asian trade that the Fujianese enjoyed. It became a truly great commercial cen-
ter, however, only when it was permitted by the state to act as entrepot for bur-
geoning European trade in the eighteenth century. Although wealth flowed into 
the cities of the delta from their exchanges with the mountainous outback re-
gions of Guangdong and Guangxi, large parts of those regions were not any-
Cities and Space : 
77 
body's hinterland but simply autonomous tribal territory host to an occasional 
Chinese peddler.4 
Increasingly from the Song forward, both TMP and PCMP logics were power-
ful in these areas. The Yangzi especially was the central arena of China's historic 
struggle between a hegemonic TMP and a structurally more dynamic PCMP. The 
Yangzi Valley became rich not only because of natural endowments, or even be-
cause, as Skinner says, it enjoyed "imperial favor" (1977d:13). After the withdrawal 
of the capital city to the far north, it gained strength from its distance from the po-
litical center. Neither protected by remoteness nor right in the emperor's door-
yard, the Yangzi area achieved a critical balance: between official power to channel 
social wealth into social construction and petty-capitalist power to accumulate ex-
pansionary kin-group capital. 
At the same time, the Yangzi Valley became an appallingly poor region, peo-
pled not only by rich merchants and prosperous independent farmers but by 
hard-pressed tenants and rootless agricultural laborers, exhausted textile work-
ers, slaves and bondservants by the millions, hideously exploited trackers and 
porters who moved the region's commodities to yamen and to market. Inequali-
ties appear to have been greater here than anywhere else in China (Naquin and 
Rawski 1987:63-64), except, perhaps, in Guangzhou. In the elaborate hierarchy of 
urban central places summarized by Skinner's rank/size distribution graphs for 
the middle and lower Yangzi and Guangzhou (1977b:238-39), participation in the 
market was not an option. It was a given, and there were, inevitably, far more 
losers than winners. 
Here more than anywhere, people had to make hard decisions about their use 
of resources. Those who had surpluses -
landlords living from rents, producers 
of commodity crops, capitalizers of putting-out systems, moneylenders, mer-
chants with no ties to production -
could use their means of production in 
hopes of gaining profits. But they must then protect them against the depre-
dations of a state ever eager to rebuild the city wall or the local Confucius temple 
or to pay the cost of a war, a tomb, or a serious mistake in ecological calculation. 
Or, petty-capitalist surplus could be spent on the great educational lottery, 
grooming an agnate for the bureaucracy and hence access to the economic be-
nefits, protection, and prestige of ruling-class status. Sometimes a bribe would do 
just as well. In the meantime, however, another merchant or landlord or money-
4· A man who peddled in central Guangxi in the 1930s, backpacking six months' inventory of nee-
dles, silk thread, and fancy cloth, revealed the casualness of the commercial dealings of many of these 
hill folk compared with his experiences with fellow Han: "Within the mountains was an inner plain, 
a hilly area. Rivers ran through, so with transportation better, people were able to buy goods from 
other sources. They were richer, too, planting corn, sweet potatoes, and taro, but no rice. We'd visit 
them too, and they fed and housed us free because they said we only came once a year, and they did-
n't need our money" (Gates 1987b:134). 
78: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
lender would have expanded his capital, putting him ever closer to the possibility 
of outcompeting his class equals. 
To an outsider such as myself for whom the TMP view of the world seems little 
more than a ruling-class tool, it is these central regions, not the northern plains, 
that seem most clearly to express the uniqueness of Chinese culture. Tyrannical 
feudalisms that see peasants as trees to shake for fruit, that make gods of their em-
perors and near-deities of tax collectors and lictors were common enough, at one 
time, on the earth. A sophisticated bureaucracy in which poets were also expected 
to be engineers, and essayists jurisprudents, which was locked in an endless, cruel, 
yet fertile embrace with the world's best businesspeople, however, is a cultural cre-
ation second to none. Peasants -
in those regions where commodity production 
was minimal -
and farmers -
where people produced much for market, buying 
the products of others for daily needs -
are contenders in this struggle. That con-
test is seen most clearly in cities, especially those of the Yangzi Valley. 
That has been true for a millennium, since urban life began to flourish with 
the emergence of the PCMP. It is also true today, when Shanghai, Wuhan, and the 
rest (certainly including Guangzhou), heirs of an implicitly counter hegemonic 
petty-capitalist tradition, have captured most of China's industry and, during the 
198os reforms, a great deal of its private commerce. The balance between central-
ism and privatism, between planned infrastructure and an effervescent market, 
seems better, for economic expansion, in these regions than elsewhere. This bal-
ance hints at what to aim for, as China finds its future. 
A second peculiarity of the urban landscape to which Skinner's map draws 
our attention was the near-absence of cities on the nineteenth-century northern 
coast. Except for Tianjin and Qingdao, much expanded by steam and capitalism, 
there were few ports; river deltas appeared unpopulated; marshy lowlands lay 
undrained. Curiously, the Gulf of Bohai, not as large or warm as the Mediter-
ranean but far more hospitable to human use than the Baltic and dangerous 
North Atlantic near Britain, was nobody's central sea. 
Particularly interesting were the regions known as the Jiangbei, the land north 
of the Yangzi, and the Huaibei, north of the Huai. With both ocean- and river-
transport potential, with flat land and temperate climate, we might expect to see 
an urban distribution similar to that of the Yangzi Valley or the southeast coast. 
Instead, for hundreds of miles up the Jiangsu and Shandong coasts, and in much 
of the interior of Anhui, Skinner's map shows little but minor capitals, and few 
enough of those. Although other well-watered, flat regions have been built over 
the centuries into productive and densely populated centers of Chinese life, the 
Huaibei was the home of rebels and bandits (Perry 1980 ), and the Jiangbei of des-
titute women who traveled to the Yangzi as prostitutes and, eventually, Shanghai 
textile workers (Honig 1986). 
Indigenous traders certainly sailed this coast, but they skipped from the lower 
Yangzi or Fujian to Shandong, then on to Korea and Japan. They did not stop 
Cities and Space : 
79 
along the way because the Jiangbei was poor, its people constantly in rebellion, 
and its potentially good land salted and ruined. The region's ecologically based 
unproductiveness was the direct consequence of the interruption of natural east-
ward drainage by the Grand Canal, and of the resulting soil salination of a band 
seventy-five to one hundred miles wide along the coast (Van Slyke 1988:77). 
Building the Grand Canal modified this landscape on such a scale as to reveal its 
patterns on today's satellite photos and in a distribution of cities which is com-
parable with China's most remote and unpopulated regions. Lesser official ma-
nipulation of waterways in uncountable places and times had similar, if more 
local, effects. R. Keith Schoppa describes a locally "momentous" water control 
project near Hangzhou, successfully completed in 1465. The ensuing ecological 
disasters created a tiny Jiangbei of recurrent drought and trouble (1989:43-44). 
A final example of what urban patterns reveal about the armature of TMP 
structure which underlies the development of commerce and administration in 
China can be seen on Skinner's map in the region he calls Yun-Kwei. Skinner 
himself recognizes this region as residual: "As of the 184o's, in fact, Yun-Kwei 
might best be seen as a congeries of five small, fairly autonomous central-place 
systems whose centers were widely dispersed in terms of travel time and only very 
tenuously interrelated" (1977b:241). But this statement ignores what is interesting 
about the far southwest. 
Across almost a thousand miles of the most rugged mountains imaginable 
stretches an almost neat line of county capitals, stations of a post road running 
from the headwaters of Yangzi tributaries southward to the Burma border. Per-
haps the goods that traveled in backpacks and mule trains over these narrow 
trails attracted a revenue-seeking administration. But control more than re-
sources must have motivated generations of officials to maintain this link to an 
important frontier. 
Attempts to account for the spatial distribution of the Chinese lead necessar-
ily to inquiries into regularities in the timing of events. Skinner has capped his 
spatial model building with an encompassing vision of cycles of regional devel-
opment. An understanding of these, he argues, must precede a proper apprehen-
sion of the wider trajectory of China as a whole (1985: 288-90 ). 
Between Skinner's early statement of his interest in cycles (1971) and his more 
complete development of the idea (1985), Robert M. Hartwell launched his syn-
thesis in "Demographic, Political, and Social Transformations of China, 
750-1550" (1982). This much-cited essay was intended as a test of some of the hy-
potheses of a regional-systems approach to Chinese history. It thus represents 
one of the few extended empirical explorations of Skinner's widely disseminated 
views. Yet it supports Skinner's conclusions only very weakly, standing closer to 
traditional history and further from Skinner's nomothetically inclined social sci-
ence. Lacking neat conclusions, Hartwell's work also seems to grow more au-
thentically from Chinese experience. 
80 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
To get on with his task, Hartwell expands the ground included in the concept 
of regional cycles to include three causes: 
(1) unique historical events that either inaugurated or terminated periods of 
development in specific regions, (2) the varying costs of interregional trans-
fers of technology, productive factors, and surpluses, and (3) the different in-
stitutional responses that shaped the course of intraregional development as 
well as interregional exchanges. In other words, an understanding of the his-
torical process requires a systematic analysis of the internal dynamics of eco-
logically diverse physiocratic regions which were at different stages of 
development and a careful inquiry into the cumulative impact of the interre-
lationships between these major areas on the nature of Chinese society at var-
ious points in time. (1982:367) 
In his section on intraregional development, Hartwell begins with a modified ver-
sion of Skinner's macroregions, subdividing the seven that lay at least in part 
within Song territory into cores and peripheries and sometimes as well into subre-
gions, for a total of nineteen physiographic units (368 ). This starting point removes 
us at once from the insistent logic of river-basin transport networks so fundamen-
tal to Skinner's macroregions. It also raises a slight uneasiness for this reader at 
least that, if one divides the data often and ingeniously enough, major tendencies 
will be lost in a host of minor correlations. Skinner's model, for all its flaws, is at 
least consistent -
he writes of the rivers, and lets the exceptions sink or swim. 
But more important, Hartwell radically modifies the theoretical nature of the 
inquiry. In a section on interregional settlement (comparative population densi-
ties), he chooses a strong example, the eastern subregion of north China from the 
turn of the present era to the mid-sixteenth century. Central to his argument is 
the location of the national capital over these centuries, which "almost always 
generated a period of intraregional development, and its removal, an era of sys-
temic decline .... Development was the result of interregional integration 
brought about by a fiscal system which artificially reduced freight costs by subsi-
dizing the transport of tax revenues and state purchases, frequently in the form 
of grain, from distant areas" (1982:386). Hartwell has shifted- quite correctly, in 
my view- from Skinner's retail-marketing-driven model to one in which offi-
cial action not based on profit-seeking triggers other kinds of growth, and in 
which interregional influences from the center are key to "regional cycles." 
Hartwell's conclusions constitute a valuable summary of a key era by a knowl-
edgeable sinologue (425-26). But they are not tests of a hypothesis, for none is 
presented, and the potentially focusing lens developed by Skinner is jettisoned 
early on. No longer anchored in natural rivers and to profitable marketing along 
them, the macro region concept is set adrift. A macro region can be anything one 
likes to draw a boundary around, and a regional cycle can be touched off by any-
thing from plague to imperial whimsy. 
Cities and Space 
81 
Scholarly emphasis on commerce as an ultimately determining factor in Chi-
nese life has a free-standing quality both as regards secular change and as regards 
other aspects of the social formation. What are the concomitants of the for-profit 
exchange at the core of this argument? Is this capitalism? If not, what is it? Do we 
ignore the state's economic role, but if not, how do we conceptualize it? How does 
a marketing-centered vision of China relate to the much-asked questions of 
whether China developed an indigenous capitalism, or industrial revolution, or 
modernity? These are overly Eurocentric questions, but they have been the big 
questions of the China field at least since Weber, and are more than tangential to 
Skinner's project. One can pass lightly over such questions in work on Europe, the 
Americas, Africa, southeast Asia, where the effects of a well-theorized, well-un-
derstood capitalist mode of production are givens in academic discourse. A 
Braudelian insouciance toward the nature of "the market" disappoints for China. 
Capitalism did not and has not become hegemonic there. Its past, present, and fu-
ture are marked by the workings of a commodity production that, for a millen-
nium or longer, did not turn into capitalism. What, in China, do markets mean? 
In 1985, Skinner reasserted his long-held assumptions about the prime movers 
of the Chinese political economy: "A key fact is that each macroregional economy 
took shape in and was wholly contained within a physiographic macro region that 
can be defined in terms of drainage basins" (280). He draws attention 
(1985:2801120) to his papers in The City in Late Imperial China in which these ideas 
are developed. He argues that Chinese history has "a hierarchical structure that 
parallels and expresses the on-the-ground hierarchy of local and regional systems. 
At every level from the standard marketing community to the macroregional 
economy, these nodal systems have characteristic rhythms and distinctive histo-
ries." He goes on to claim that marketing systems are "at once social communities, 
para political systems, and culture-bearing units. The constraints on human inter-
action that economic geographers quantify as cost-distance are, when transport is 
unmechanized, pervasive in human affairs: they channel administrative and social 
interaction no less than economic transactions." And in a rare comparison with 
the nonsinic world, he at last clarifies the nature of the economic system he has 
anatomized, bracketing preindustrial Europe with China as examples of "agrarian 
economies dominated by commercial capitalism" (287, 288, 286). 
It is in "regional cycles" that Skinner finds "the structure of Chinese history." 
What does he mean by cycles? His 1985 essay refers to the work of "long-waves" 
theorists, discussing briefly the possible consequences of such indisputably ex-
ogenous, nonhumanly caused events as variations in solar radiation and the al-
ways contentious issue of minor climatic fluctuations (284-86). 5 Neither 
s. The latter, of course, are far more responsive to human action than vulgar materialists like to 
think them. Over centuries, Chinese agriculturalists have made heroic efforts to create favorable mi-
croclimates for crops by tree planting, the building of reservoirs, and other well-known means. Per-
82 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Skinner's nor Hartwell's cycle is based on such exogenous triggering events as cli-
mate change, however. Instead, Skinner refers repeatedly to political decisions 
such as the moving of a capital or the attempt to limit coastwise trade -
moves 
in the tributary mode (271-72, 276). 
Ultimately, his cycles, like his macroregions and his analysis, are agentless: 
"We let the data themselves -
the rise and fall of economic activities -
speak" 
(288 ). The treating of things as agents, of people as things, and of theories as ide-
ologically innocent offspring of "the data" are precisely the errors that Marxists 
most strongly deplore in bourgeois scholarship. 
Although Skinner's theoretical premises are ill founded, his work is important 
because it has focused attention on commodity production as integral to Chinese 
culture and on the necessity to view China not only as a single entity, or yet as a 
million villages to study, ten thousand counties to annalize, a thousand lineages 
to interpret. His work relates the great and the small, it is historical, and it is ma-
terialist. It thus provides China studies with a desirably old-fashioned anchor in 
a discipline in which many believe that not only their own worlds but everybody 
else's are constructed of a frothy mix of words and volition. 
It is easy to criticize, harder to build a better mousetrap. What are the advan-
tages of seeing the spatial distribution of China's population more as the out-
come of the interplay of two modes of production rather than of commerce and 
administration? There are several: in theory, in the fit of that theory with empir-
ical findings, and in prediction. Such predictions as I dare offer is found in Chap-
ters 10 and n; an empirical test is found in Chapter 7. 
haps unintentionally, and often much more swiftly, they have ruined many environments (see 
Schoppa 1989; Perdue 1987). 
Cities and Space 
83 
Patricorporations: 
The State and the Household 
"Look!" and she pointed a trembling finger at the widow, "there's my 
son, the best fisherman in Anping. He has been taken away from me: he 
used to earn money and bring me anything I wanted. He has left behind 
him his useless widow and those two girls there: what can they do but 
eat rice?" -
A Taiwanese woman, late 186os 
I wouldn't let myself be angry with the children. It was not their fault. If 
I had been angry with them, I would have sold them long ago. It was my 
responsibility to bring them up into adults. My own mother and my 
adopted mother had died, leaving me to grow up by myself. I would not 
leave my daughters. -
LoA Lan, a Taiwanese woman, 1980 
The Chinese family system, icon of Chinese life and Chinese stud-
ies, is often cited as an elementary structure, an irreducible given, a cause of be-
havior (e.g. Chao Kang 1987:9, 29-30, 226). That this particularly well-studied 
pattern of belief and practice might be itself the consequence of yet more ele-
mentary causes has not been much considered. Under the influence of a Marxist-
feminist perspective, some anthropologists have begun to see kinship as a set of 
practices that are not fundamental, irreducible, but rather a mediating mecha-
nism through which the gendered division of labor in society is made to seem bi-
ological, natural, and right (e.g. Fernandez-Kelly 1981; Friedman 1986). 
Anthropologists have repeatedly demonstrated the plasticity of kinship in re-
sponse to political-economic change (e.g. Leacock 1971; Gailey 1980, 1987; 
J. Goody 1983). Such an approach to Chinese kinship increases our understand-
ing of several as-yet-unsolved puzzles. 
The first of these puzzles is whether Chinese kinship is singular or multiple? 
Is there something we may call a Chinese kinship system, or should we be look-
ing at one system in Taiwan in the early 1930s, another in the environs of 
Hangzhou in late Southern Song, a mid-Ming northwestern version, and so 
forth: one for every political-economic context that has displayed significant di-
fference over the long stretch of history? Kinship variations over time and place 
abounded, evidenced by magistrates' decisions, local histories, and persisting 
contemporary custom. Strong commonalities over time and space also existed, 
however. These commonalities have convinced the Chinese themselves and 
most Western scholars that it is worthwhile to talk of a Chinese kinship system. 
I try here to account for that convincing but difficult-to-prove sense of unity, 
while finding more than idiosyncratic, eclectic explanations for the all-too-ap-
parent variation. 
Two other questions point to a solution. What is a jia, the "family" or house-
hold? Why do the Chinese organize themselves into lineages? That these are 
very considerable puzzles is more apparent, perhaps, to anthropologists with a 
comparative perspective than to sinologists. Uncertainty about how to define 
the jia (which may contain both kin and nonkin, and coresident and noncores-
ident members) continues to bedevil analysts (e.g. Hsieh Jih-chang 1981; Wang 
Sung-hsing 1985). Lineages, which are nearly universal in kin-corporate 
(loosely, "tribal") societies, are generally absent in class societies ("states"), ex-
cept among aristocrats. Commoner lineages such as those of ordinary villagers 
in many parts of China are unknown in other class societies: emerging states 
typically undermined such potential rivals for political power (Fried 1967). As-
tonishingly, lineages are being reinvented in China in the 1980s and 1990s. Bur-
ton Pasternak has called the phenomenon "the disquieting Chinese lineage" 
(1985a). 
Whatever China's pre-Song kinship system may have been, it has been re-
shaped by at least three powerful factors from that time on. One of these was the 
substrate of behaviors diffusing from non-Han to Han people in regions of recent 
Han settlement. Another was the law as enforced by officials and their unsalaried 
local subalterns, kin seniors charged with maintaining kin orthodoxy. The third 
was political-economic consistency in property relations combined with flexibil-
ity in labor use, functions of differing tributary and petty-capitalist choices. 
NON-HAN INFLUENCES 
In some regions, non-Han kinship influences on recent Han immigrants were 
clearly important, as in southern Taiwan (Pan Yinghai 1988; Shepherd 1993), 
where high rates of uxorilocal marriages perhaps were indications of an Aborig-
inal tradition of female power (A. Wolf 1989a). With different sexual divisions of 
labor, systems of land tenure, and distributions of social power, indigenous peo-
ple may have influenced the expectations about women and the marriage prac-
tices of immigrant Han, especially when these came as small numbers of men 
needing land, the protection of numbers, and wives. 
Patricorporations: State and Household 
85 
When either or both the tributary and the petty-capitalist modes became ac-
tive in a region, however, as they did in northern Taiwan in the tea boom of the 
186os, different patterns of Han settlement quickly erased Aboriginal influence 
(along with many of the Aborigines themselves). Although we should not ignore 
China's complex cultural heritage in assessing the causes of kinship variation, I 
suggest that underlying non-Han substrates are likely to have engendered kinship 
variation only briefly, or in regions that long remained backwaters to official and 
merchant concern. 
LEGAL CONTROL AND POPULAR PERCEPTIONS 
A stronger influence on kinship was found in official ideology as it was given 
social expression through courts. According to Tang Mei-chun, "In China the ju-
diciary has interfered with the family system ever since the early imperial era" 
(1985:61). Although the centerpiece of Western or, at least, of anglophone law of 
the past several centuries has been the protection of property rights of persons, 
real or fictitious, the focus of Chinese law since the Song has been the specifica-
tion and preservation of political hierarchies, especially those of kinship. The 
Qing law code is dense with detailed references to the adjudication of cases in-
volving agnatic kin and wives (affinal relatives are rarely mentioned). 
When the relationship between contesting parties was one of kinship, that 
fact was absolutely central to a resolution. Derk Bodde and Clarence Morris 
point out that in homicide cases, for example, "the necessity to uphold parental 
authority seemingly [overrode] all other considerations." Criminal punishment 
for theft was elaborately calibrated to the kinship status of the parties. Children 
were liable to extreme punishments for behavior that resulted from double 
binds: the Qing code set a penalty of life exile at a distance of 3,000 li for sons 
whose parents, "having instructed a son to commit an act of moral turpitude or 
theft, then become fearful that this may be discovered and so commit suicide." 
At the same time, filial disobedience was also a grave crime. Under such logic, 
women suffered particular disabilities. Although a son was legally obliged to 
obey both his senior relatives and the law, a married woman could incur legal 
punishment if her behavior brought trouble on her natal family as well as on 
her in-laws. Qing law formalized this added burden on women (Bodde and 
Morris 1967: 196, 301, 411-12, 360-62). Married and unmarried daughters' legal 
responsibilities to their parents were symbolized -
and taught -
in popular 
tradition by the precise delineation of their respective roles at parents' funerals, 
at which they (and all important kin) wore distinguishing mourning costumes 
(A. Wolf1970). 
Kinship rituals, including those of marriage, were another important area of 
legal concern. A marriage entered into without a contract, a go-between, and the 
appropriate nuptial ceremonies was not a marriage under the Qing code, but 
86: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
prostitution or a clandestine marriage, which was punished as fornication, and 
the couple were separated (Hoang 1898:13). In a case of this sort observed by a 
foreign resident in Guangzhou in the mid-nineteenth century, parents had an 
eloping couple imprisoned for some time for disobedience and breach of 
promise (because the woman was engaged to another man). We do not learn 
their judicial fate (Gray 1878, 1:191). 
While the actions of high-ranking households were particularly carefully su-
pervised as to the forms of their marriages, funerals, and other rituals, heterodox 
kinship practices growing up among commoners were subject to censure, official 
exhortation, and punishment as well. A late-Ming literatus, Qing Yong, wrote a 
series of moralizing work songs to stem the increased frequency of uxorilocal 
marriages, which he saw as a perversion of nature. One reads: 
It's unreal, like a puppet show. 
Flesh and blood are reversed. 
Oh, sorrowful are the parents 
To see their son depart. 
Money is as heavy as the mountains 
While bone and flesh are light as feathers. 
Adoption of the son-in-law 
Is turning the whole world mad. 
What is needed is a return 
To the good customs of yore. (quoted in Ching 1988:191-92) 
Another form of marriage in which brides remained in their parents' homes, 
sometimes for years, became notorious in parts of the Pearl River Delta in the 
late 18oos. John Gray remarks that "with a view of suppressing it, the magistrates 
of the district ... not unfrequently issue proclamations calling upon parents to 
compel their daughters to reside at once with their husbands" (Gray 1878, 1:208); 
fathers who permitted such marriages to continue sometimes were punished and 
humiliated by Confucianizing officials (Stockard 1989:105-16). 
Parents used both the threat and the reality of the law to control rebellious 
children. Shiga Shuzo says that under Qing law, when parents or grandparents 
requested a magistrate to punish their juniors' defiance, "the authorities, without 
investigation and acting solely on the parents' complaint;' could pronounce a 
sentence of banishment, revokable if the parents withdrew the complaint 
(1978:141). Gray remarks that "sometimes parents cast their disobedient children 
into a public prison. Prisoners of this class are commonly bound by chains to 
large stones, and exposed daily, together with other offenders, at the principal 
gates of the prison." In two cases known personally to him, the son of a "re-
spectable tradesman" and disobedient young men were imprisoned for several 
months (1878, 1:236-37). In 186os Taiwan, W. A. Pickering saw a mother take her 
Patricorporations: State and Household : 87 
son to the magistrate to support parental authority (1898:61-63). R. F. Johnston, 
a sitting magistrate in Shandong, heard many cases of family disputes, sometimes 
with "representatives of four generations in the court at the same time." He notes 
the difficulty of a man's obtaining a divorce from a woman whose agnates could 
and would support her. They would "probably drag him before the magistrate on 
a charge of brutal treatment ... to extract from the husband substantial pecu-
niary compensation" (1910:107, 209). That Johnston was an Englishman who 
conducted his courtroom very differently from traditionally punitive Chinese 
magistrates is beside the point: local people brought cases, we must assume, 
which they believed would be properly settled by law, when less formal methods 
had failed. 
Other references to the enforcement of official kin norms through the courts 
are abundant in "outsider" observations and in Chinese legal documents (see 
Macgowan 1909:115-16 [family land case]; Hue 1970, 2:271 [failure to honor a 
marriage agreement]; Boxer 1953=150, [man punished by court for not prosecut-
ing his wife for adultery]; Coltman 1891:168 [execution procession for an adulter-
ous couple]; Gray 1878, 1:225 [husband both punished and rewarded for 
presenting a magistrate with his wife's and her lover's heads). Johnston (1910) 
heard many such cases: brothers, or men and their sisters-in-law, dispute over the 
use of graveyard trees (121, 160 ); man asks agnates to pay their share of an ancient 
debt (139); man claims mortgaged land from agnate (140); man complains 
against his lineage elders (159); sons are accused of nonsupport (199); one branch 
of lineage brings action over land rotation against another branch (258 ). In addi-
tion to cases he cited to illustrate particular points, Johnston notes that agnatic 
mortgage litigation was frequent (147); that either idiosyncratically (159) or 
through lineage-written rulings, kinfolk were threatened with being turned over 
to magistrates for punishment (160-62); that fathers-in-law were particularly 
likely to bring trumped-up charges of unfiliality against young childless widows 
in their households, to oblige them to remarry ( 218); and that some women often 
went "hobbling off to the magistrate with some ... accusation against a relation 
or a neighbor" (202). 
An example from Guomindang Taiwan suggests how seriously people still 
take the legal status of their kinship relationship, which even there have signifi-
cant social and economic consequences. Arthur Wolf notes that "one of the most 
vociferous quarrels I witnessed during my first field trip [to Taiwan in 1957-59 -
H.G.] occurred when a family discovered that their uxorilocally married son-in-
law had bribed the police to register all of his sons as his descendants" (1995: 
chap. 3, 6-7). 
The great mass of Chinese, of course, did not undertake filial responsibilities, 
marry, or transfer property according to and because of government regulation. 
Indeed, as I argue below, they often followed quite other imperatives in their 
kinship lives. But officials strongly and consistently supported the elements of 
88 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Chinese kinship which upheld tributary production and distribution of society's 
resources. 
Officials combined bureaucratic consistency with outbursts of state terrorism, 
sometimes merely in gruesome words and pictures, sometimes in horrific reality. 
An eager-beaver provincial judge displayed a poster of "the five punishments" he 
had made to "overawe the commoners"; the Qian Long emperor thought it in-
delicate and was not amused (Kuhn 1990:204). The casual cruelty that accompa-
nied formal punishments was remarkable. A nineteenth-century traveler saw 
prisoners nailed through the hands to a cart because their captors happened not 
to have chains (Hue 1970 [1855], 2:269), and prison deaths from appalling condi-
tions had to be controlled by a system of bureaucratic demerits (Gray 1875:52). 
Persons accused of treason or lese majeste were hunted down and subjected to 
horrifying treatment (P. Kuhn 1990 ). In our own times, fear of the violent and al-
most supernatural randomness of official ire continues as the most powerful tool 
of Chinese polities. 
Were official punishments sufficiently visible to influence popular behavior? 
Evidence that they were comes especially from foreign visitors, more likely than 
the Chinese to comment on their frequency and social context. Such foreigners 
should not be thought of as especially tender-minded, and hence particularly 
sensitive to brutality, familiar as they were with such Western horrors as prisons 
and workhouses, naval justice by flogging and keelhauling, slavery, and the un-
speakable conduct of convict settlements (Hughes 1987). 
Magistrates' yamens -
headquarters for county government -
contained 
prisons. Sometimes prisoners were confined in the outermost courtyard of the 
yamen itself, where all who had business in the more honorable inner courts 
would see them. M. Hue, traveling in Sichuan in the mid-nineteenth century, 
saw "a crowd of unfortunate criminals, with livid faces and wasted limbs, 
scarcely covered by a few rags. They were crouching in the sunshine; some had 
on their shoulders an enormous cangue, a sort of moveable pillory; others 
were loaded with chains and some had only fetters on their hands and feet" 
(1970, 1:41). 
If prisons were ubiquitous, punishments were even more so. Victims were 
often cangued at the city gates, large temples, or in other public places, where 
their sufferings and humiliations would be widely observed, as Gray remembers: 
"I noticed in my travels through the central provinces that cangues [and cangued 
criminals] were placed at the gates of cities, and at the doors of yamuns or pub-
lic offices as a warning to evil-doers:' Passing through Jiangsu in 1866, he saw over 
a dozen farmers in towns along the way, cangued in the market for nonpayment 
of taxes. Cangued prisoners were often compelled to beg their food from door to 
door to avoid expense to the state, and flogging through the streets accompanied 
by synchronous blows on a gong was a common punishment for petty theft 
(1875:54-57). Public executions attracted great crowds, and Hue notes that popu-
Patricorporations: State and Household : 
89 
lar pamphlets about the lives and trials of insubordinate bandits were "widely 
and cheaply available, and eagerly read" (1970, 2:252). Traveling in Shandong in 
the mid 188os, Robert Coltman was told by wheelbarrow men that in a recent 
famine year "every road leading from Chinanfu had [criminals' heads exposed in 
baskets] along them, and some right close to the city-wall, too."" 'Pu ts'woa' 
('Ain't it the truth!'] chimed in the second man" (1891:63-64). Gray observes that 
such cruel punishment as public exposure in cages designed to contort the body 
were more frequent in "district and prefectoral cities than in provincial capitals"; 
he saw several examples in what was then the small commercial town of Manka 
(present-dayWanhua, Taibei) (1878, 1:56, 58). 
Did the message that the law must be obeyed reach the villages? Hsiao Kung-
chuan sums up the case for administrative penetration of commoners' lives by 
describing such local autonomy as existed as being "a result of incomplete cen-
tralization; the government never hesitated to interfere with village life when-
ever it deemed it necessary or desirable" (1960:263). Studies of village life and 
the popular culture of commoners suggest the power of state control there. 
Usually unable to impose direct rule on rural commoners, the state relied more 
on parental authority and religious intimidation than on magistrates. Tributary 
hierarchy stood firmly on a base of indirect, involuntary, unpaid lineage and 
household heads: village elders. Legally deputed to solve their agnates' prob-
lems or bring them to courts, male kin seniors were the NCOs in the state's 
chain of command. 
When kin or village elders punished kinship faults, as they often did, it was in 
large part to avoid the dangers of the courts. That punishment in itself conveyed 
the message that the law might reach the offenders. Gray relates that after the 
Guangzhou rebellion of 1854-55 village elders in the districts of Namhoi and 
Shunde enabled many of the rebels to suicide: "These unfortunate offenders pre-
ferred capital punishment at the hands of the elders of their respective villages, 
and in the presence of their families, to falling into the hands of the mandarins by 
whom they would have been first tortured, and then decapitated" (1878, 1:72-73). 
The idea that kinship elders operated independently of the state, in a political and 
legal vacuum, ignores all we know about the inconsistent but lethal and terroris-
tic legal practices of the late empire. Such men, down to individual household 
heads, were, willy-nilly, agents of the state whom officials might hold responsible 
for any bad conduct among those they supervised. 
The best evidence for the penetration of the fear of law into every heart, how-
ever, may be found in the parallels drawn in folk religion between mundane and 
otherworldly punishments meted out to the dead. Over the centuries, specifically 
Buddhist evils were increasingly supplanted by Confucian and political misdeeds 
in the moral universe implied by supernatural punishments (Eberhard 
1967:60-75, esp. 67). Gray has a fascinating list of malefactions (which include not 
paying taxes and house rents) and their appropriate retribution in the courts of 
90 : 
C H I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
the underworld (1878, 1:150-56; also Eberhard 1967:24-59). In Taiwan in 1986 a 
mortuary establishment displayed a handsome color lithograph of the dead 
being judged by a series of eight "rulers;' each wearing Ming official dress and 
seated behind desks laden with brushes, seals, and documents. The unfortunate 
souls are not only beaten, cangued, caged, crucified, and beheaded but also sawed 
limb from limb, impaled, burned, drowned, raped by tigers and wild buffalo 
(women only), and deep fried. 
Such iconography is widely distributed in Chinese space and time. Common-
ers knew its imagery and arguments through popular books, ballads, folk operas, 
shadow plays, and depictions in temples and on funeral paintings. Wolfram 
Eberhard claims that "there can be no doubt that every common man and 
woman in some way was exposed to these doctrines (1967:59). As David Faure 
states for the New Territories, a region notorious for localism, "The authority of 
Ch'ing law did not always prevail, but it was invoked in local disputes even by the 
illiterate and low status" (1984:52). 
CONSISTENT PROPERTY RELATIONS, FLEXIBLE LABOR USE 
Political-economic pressures of two kinds can be seen as the most significant 
factors in the creation and reproduction of Chinese kinship: the tributary pres-
sure for unequal distribution of surplus throughout the encompassing hierarchy 
of the state, with patricorporations at its base; and the petty-capitalist pressures 
for competitive market exchange among those same patricorporations. These did 
not develop into two fully autonomous, completely differentiated systems, as if 
scholar-officials and commoners had created differing class cultures. Caught be-
tween conflicting tendencies, households and lineages made compromises that 
differed according to the relative strength of those tendencies. 
In the TMP, "feudal;' or "traditional" Chinese kinship system, patricorpora-
tions paralleled the state because they employed similar forms of exchange. The 
"order," "loyalty;' "obedience;' and other apparently nonmaterial expectations 
rulers had of their subjects were inextricably bound up with the economic ex-
pectations that enable power. "Loyalty" means paying taxes without making a 
fuss about it, along with other things; "filiality" means supporting one's parents 
materially, as well as submitting to their wishes. Small children were taught to 
obey, but as they became adults and could do productive work they learned the 
full meaning of filiality. 
The aspect of kinship practice which remained constant across all Chinese 
classes and regions was the patrilineal inheritance of means of production, in-
heritance equally divided among sons (A. Wolf 1989a). Of all aspects of kinship, 
the relationship between people and property has the greatest significance to the 
state. States always claim eminent domain over the land and resources they rule, 
and the ways in which they manage other forms of property rights (as fiefs, as 
Patricorporations: State and Household 
: 
91 
private property, as communes, etc.) necessarily involve them in the kinship be-
havior of their subjects. Kin groups that accumulated large properties through 
strategic marriages worried both European kings and Chinese emperors. Equal 
inheritance among sons was well suited to reproducing the TMP ideal of an em-
pire of small, predictable, kin-based owner-operator production units. 
Although most forms of property were inherited equally by brothers, in the 
ruling class, hereditary ranks and titles descended in patrilineal primogeniture, 
with sons of the principal wife outranking sons of other wives. In a household 
lacking such an heir, these goods were transmitted to the deceased head's younger 
brother; adoption of nonagnatic heirs was punishable and resulted in the loss of 
the emoluments to which the kin group might have otherwise been entitled 
(Staunton 1810: 49-50). 
Although among commoners the code required that family headship also de-
scend through primogeniture, it required the equal division of inherited prop-
erty among brothers. Staunton states that "an unjust or partial division of the 
patrimony betweenthe elder and younger branches of a family, upon separa-
tion, shall ... be punished:' Kin seniors, "provided such parents and grand-par-
ents personally prosecute," could have sons and grandsons punished for 
deserting them or dividing the inheritance without parental permission. Com-
moner adoption of nonagnate boys was permitted, though they could not be-
come heirs (1810:526, 92). 
Magistrates could and did interpret this law, as well as the precedents that de-
veloped from it. Their interpretations were apparently consistent, however, with 
equal partible patrilineal inheritance. (This remains an outstandingly uniform 
kinship practice throughout China, although some leeway for variation in cus-
toms -
giving a larger share to the eldest son's son to support worship of distant 
ancestors, for example- is permitted.) A man might eject a son from the house-
hold, sell him, or kill him for cause, but not disinherit him. Shiga Shuzo points 
out that paternal attempts at unequal distribution were frustrated, in north 
China at least, because "the third parties present will refuse to take responsibil-
ity" for an uncustomary and illegal act (1978: 136-38, 139). Liabilities were inher-
ited along with assets (Johnston 1910:138-39; Davidson 1967:609-10 ). Men could 
not sell land to outsiders without offering it to closely related agnates, although 
this limitation does not appear to have held for other means of production. 1 
Many cases were settled before kin seniors; patrilineality and partible inheri-
tance among brothers were the key judicial principles. The egalitarian strain of 
low-technology production -
in which labor input counts heavily- sup-
ported the equality of brothers in these matters; it was rarely necessary to call in 
the law to enforce partible inheritance. 
1. Except for sons, if we may consider them a means of production. Out-adoption of boys typi-
cally required that they too first be offered to agnates before the parents could dispose of them. 
92 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
To the administrative simplicity of equal-patrilineal-partible inheritance must 
be added one minor complexity. Property acquired during a person's lifetime -
not inherited -
might be used at its owner's pleasure, as Sung Lung-sheng has 
shown (1981). Land, perhaps land that had once slipped away from agnatic con-
trol as a commodity- was thus more easily alienable by its purchaser- but 
only for one generation. Once it had been transmitted by inheritance, it was sub-
ject to equal division among sons. Children who contributed to such new wealth 
were likely to make pro-rata claims on it, based on their varied roles in its acqui-
sition. But these claims had to be negotiated. A father's right to dispose of prop-
erty he acquired himself increased his power to manipulate his children, 
especially in expansionary times (see Greenhalgh 1994). That power was always 
open to dispute when it was founded, however narrowly, on his own original in-
heritance;2 reasonably filial sons might have reliably expected the law to back 
their claims to an equal share of their father's inherited estate. 
A household without a son sometimes considered uxorilocal marriage for a 
daughter. The frequency and acceptability of this marriage form varies greatly 
throughout China. In a survey of seven regions focused on the 1920s and 1930s, 
Arthur Wolf found uxorilocal marriage to have been nearly impossible in some 
areas, commonplace in others (1980, fieldnotes). Uxorilocality appears to be most 
common where the tributary system was weak -
on the fringes of Han society 
(e.g. Pasternak 1972, 1983, 1985b) or in circumstances in which petty capitalism 
offered a strong alternative to the tributary expectations of "traditional" kinship. 
Uniform Chinese practice in the patrilineal transmission of property deter-
mined the relationship between both males and females and the means of pro-
duction. Women had no property rights as sisters and daughters, though their 
agnates might protect them against abuse.3 The loophole for disposal of individ-
ually acquired property discussed above may have justified occasional inheri-
tances by women, as it does in contemporary Taiwan. Claims to lifelong and 
after-death maintenance, though not to ownership of patricorporate property, 
were valid for wives married by appropriate contract, symbolized by the promise 
of an ancestral tablet on the altar after death. For the many women who made 
legally inferior alliances -
as concubines or whatever -
even motherhood gave 
no such claim. Dowry was not a "pre-mortem inheritance" right for women-
activated before the parents' death -
as discussed in Chapter 6. 
State support of equal-patrilineal-partible inheritance among agnatic heirs 
ensured relatively orderly transmission of property over the generations and 
permitted, indeed almost enjoined, the fractioning of households into two or 
more new ones at the death of the parents. The creation of joint families of 
2. Examples of inheritance and succession in substantial contemporary Taiwan family firms are 
given in Mark (1972), Numazaki Ichiro (1991:250-54); Oxfeld (1992). 
3. -
or not (Staunton 1810:566-67). 
Patricorporations: State and Household 
93 
brothers remaining together past the deaths of their parents was given no insti-
tutional encouragement, though this arrangement might have been esteemed as 
a moral example. The TMP model assumes a world of working adults, their de-
pendent children and elders -
living on what they can earn from their inher-
ited property. It does not take into account the possibility -
often a reality-
that that property may no longer be feasibly divided, that it will no longer sup-
port family expansion. Apart from vague injunctions to work hard and be fru-
gal, the TMP vision of kinship offers no solution to population increase on fixed 
resources. 
Land, buildings, and equipment are important means of production; in low-
technology systems, labor power is equally important. Labor under a purely TMP 
regime is not a commodity, for in such a system there is no labor market. All 
work is performed as tributary duty to superiors and rewarded on the basis of the 
worker's position in the nation-to-kinship hierarchy. When labor power becomes 
a commodity, change follows. Commoditization of labor in late-imperial China 
was stimulated by many forces: the discovery of a new resource or of a new mar-
ket for an old resource; a state construction project or a newly built seat of gov-
ernment which intensified extractive pressures and drove up population growth; 
transport improvements; foreign capitalism. 
Labor commoditization affects kinship in powerful ways. In the industrializ-
ing Taiwan of the early 1970s, kinfolk who had formerly exchanged agricultural 
labor -
one day's work for another -
began to rationalize their accounts. As 
opportunities for wage labor increase, one investigator points out, "Exchange is 
not considered balanced until the cash value of each man's work is the same," 
even, or indeed especially, among kin. Kinfolk did not even ask for labor ex-
change with a relative who had a chance to earn cash elsewhere (Chen Chung-
min 1977:112-13). And in the nineteenth century, as silk making employed more 
women in the Pearl River delta and tea production employed both boys and girls 
in north Taiwan, extremely unorthodox marriage patterns enjoyed coincident 
blooms (A. Wolf and Chieh-shan Huang 1980; Stockard 1989). Under the impact 
of capitalist production for export, the scale and rapidity of change has doubtless 
been greater than that experienced under indigenous petty capitalism, but simi-
lar effects may have resulted. Commoditization of a regional economy may gen-
erate differential demand for female or male, older or younger labor, thus 
differentially affecting kinship practice. The market also offers new or alternative 
goals for patricorporations. 
Although the market often affected the use of kin-as-labor in China, it did 
not undermine the tributary protections built around agnatic property trans-
mission. Officials continued to stress hierarchy, patrilineality, and male cultural 
dominance. To TMP imperatives were added those of the PCMP: patricorpo-
rate expansion, with property accumulation and the rearing of many sons re-
placing the cautious transmission of inheritances and the securing of ancestral 
94 
: 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
successors; households and lineages shaped by contracts and market transac-
tions, not only by "blood and bone." Women, whose connections to means of 
production were indirect and who were thus less insulated than men from the 
market, were especially likely to be commoditized. Marriages took many forms, 
and brideprices may have come wholly to outweigh dowries. Those seeking 
heirs bought sons when agnatic nephews were not available, and sometimes 
when they were. Men transformed kin ties into great landowning and trading 
corporations or, lacking the appropriate kinsmen, constructed lineages by 
agreeing to be coparceners in a joint estate. The Qing law code set forth consis-
tent guidelines governing the rights and duties of kinsmen in respect to their 
joint property. 
For vast numbers of people, by no means all of them poor, the real choices of 
life included the PCMP variations on kinship, seen as moral and customary. 
Delta Guangdongnese and northern Taiwanese believed their heterodox mar-
riage forms to be perfectly legitimate, honorable ones. "Everybody gave away 
their daughters [as simpua, baby daughters-in-law] when I was young;' an elderly 
informant told me in 1980. "We were rich, but Father gave one little sister to the 
wet nurse, and another to a poor carpenter, because they asked for them. It was 
just that way." For commoners, their local kinship practices were not reprehensi-
ble approximations of propriety but means to the specifically PCMP goals of 
household expansion and property accumulation, in which people as well as 
things could be both acquired and disposed of. Only those aspects of the TMP 
which were privileged by their connection to property and law universally re-
tained prestige. Through them, the patrilineal center held. Readers steeped in 
Western assumptions that class oppression is likely to be worse than oppression 
by kinsmen are reminded that the Chinese ruling class, through the state, sup-
ported the latter in ways Western states have rarely dared to do. The collusion of 
state and kin seniors both to exploit and to control commoditized labor is central 
to understanding Chinese kinship. 
SHAPING THE ]IA THROUGH CONTRACTS 
One of the puzzles of Chinese kinship, as I suggested at the beginning of this 
chapter, is how best to conceptualize the unit known as the jia. The difficulty 
arises because jia are ideally units of both people and property, entities defined 
from the point of view of resource-extracting rulers. Anthropologists often de-
pend on Daniel Kulp's emphasis on the jia as the "economic family;' variously 
connected by ties of blood and marriage (1923:148-50 ). Although it is over-
whelmingly common for the members of a jia to be thus related, it is not neces-
sary that they be so. Like the hu (unambiguously "household") with which it is 
often used interchangeably, it is an administrative unit including relatives, slaves, 
servants, and other nonkin, defined ultimately by common administrative con-
Patricorporations: State and Household : 
95 
nection and by the pooling of resources of its members which this connection 
connotes. Taiwan's household registers are hukou; their heads are not huzhang, 
but jiazhang. In common speech there and in contemporary China, one can 
specify purely kin relations by using "jia," but people casually refer to households 
made up of family and apprentices and workers as "jia:' At least in rural Fujian 
and Sichuan, "jiazhang'' can also refer to lineage heads. "Jia" is polysemic, but its 
core meaning, I would argue, is an orthodoxly constituted production unit at the 
lowest level of social hierarchy, or the smallest state accounting unit that in an 
ideal TMP world would be a patrilineal family. Chinese states still require resi-
dents to be registered as members of the household, and they formerly forbade 
household heads to harbor strangers or persons constituting a separate jia 
(Staunton 1810:79-82). Bodde and Morris clarify the official identification of jia 
in late-imperial times as accounting units in a revealing Qing legal case: mer-
chants traveling together were treated as members of a jia because they pooled 
money and goods (1967:193). 
Folk ritual expresses the same idea clearly. In the nineteenth century, as now, 
the major celebratory meals eaten at New Year's were shared not by kinfolk per 
se but by the residents of the household (e.g. Gray 1878, 1:250). Ancestors who 
failed to provide property for their descendants were not worshiped, nor was 
the last of the line obliged to try to find an heir for them, as Johnstone re-
marked in 1910: "The fact is, the possession of property -
especially landed 
property- is regarded in practice as an inseparable condition of the continu-
ation of the ancestral rites .... mei-yu ch' an-yeh mei-yu shen-chu -
'no ances-
tral property, no ancestral tablets' " (285). Shiga Shuzo underlines the 
inseparability of "human beings and property" as the heart of the matter in 
definingjia (1978:121). 
The people and things that made up a jia were bound indissolubly by the Chi-
nese state. A man could not will ancestral property away from its proper heirs -
his sons (and, residually, other close agnates). Nor could he easily alienate his 
sons from their birthright of property; male out-adoptions were a far graver mat-
ter than the disposal of daughters. 
In some "pure" TMP world, the people who share means of production would 
be male agnates and their wives and unmarried daughters: the political-eco-
nomic molecule and the patrilineal family would overlap neatly. In contact with 
the PCMP, which offers a market for its products, its means of production, its 
labor power, and its members, the jia seethes with possibilities. It becomes an im-
mensely plastic entity characterized by great freedom to add or delete members, 
using a wide variety of mechanisms. Most of these mechanisms are strongly rem-
iniscent of market exchanges, protected by contracts. 
When markets quantify the value of labor, exchanges among kinfolk increas-
ingly can be seen to have market values rather than as the absolutes of TMP ex-
change. Relationships within the jia move toward becoming negotiated contracts 
96 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
among parties who, if they are not equal in the household, do have an equality 
before the market. This equality -
far from perfect -
may form a significant 
part of their identities as well as give them bargaining power. 
When jia (and lineages) are embedded in commodity markets, they can 
maintain and expand production by various transactions -
purchase, pawn, 
mortgage. Agreements to transfer factors of production usually took the form of 
written documents: land deeds, partnership agreements, slavery and indenture 
contracts, marriage agreements, adoption papers, genealogies. Such documents 
could be produced in court to attest to the nature of the original contract, while 
their very existence helped to discourage the necessity for resort to the law. Chi-
nese law codes did not distinguish sharply between transactions in things and in 
people. 
Petty capitalists could, of course, acquire property through methods other 
than inheritance. And it was customary for them to shape the memberships of 
their patricorporations by means other than patrilineal filiation, major marriage, 
and close-agnate adoption, the only mechanisms that had the full sanction of 
TMP validity. Households and lineages were formed by the addition and sub-
traction of members through contractual agreements of many kinds. Such con-
tracts universally specified a relationship between the parties in terms of 
economic exchange. 
An astute analysis of Chinese child-parent relationships by Susan Greenhalgh 
invokes the idea of implicit family contracts in contemporary settings. Green-
halgh summarizes research on women industrial laborers to show that parents 
expect a greater proportion of earnings -
all, in principle -
of an unmarried 
daughter's than they do of an unmarried son's. The morality of this arrangement 
is based, she argues, not on the lesser worth or greater exploitability of daughters 
but on an implicit contract between parents and children. Parents owe children 
the expenses of rearing them; children owe parents at least an equivalent return, 
on which parents may sustain themselves in old age. The difference between 
daughters and sons (in the implicit contract) is that sons have a lifetime to repay, 
and so can be cut some slack in their younger years. Daughters will transfer their 
membership to another family at marriage; they have only their premarital years 
to make good their filial debt (1985a). 
Conversations about Chinese family life produce many examples of such im-
plicit contracts, in which an economic logic very different from that of the TMP 
reveals a high degree of precision about the worth of jia members and their con-
tributions to one another. A Taiwanese college graduate in Chinese literature, 
having chosen to have no children, spoke to me of fulfilling her marital duty to 
her mother-in-law: "Mother-in-law would like grandchildren. But I give her 
twenty or thirty thousand Taiwan dollars every new year, so what can she say?" 
That kin relations have been the outcomes of negotiations, exchanges, and legal 
contract is also well attested to for Guangzhou a hundred years ago (Gray 1878, 
Patricorporations: State and Household : 
97 
1:220-21, 233). Earlier, and in a region of China less likely to have been contami-
nated by foreign capitalism, Hue heard the kin of a sick man weighing the worth 
of his life against the cost of the medicine that might save him. He describes an-
other occasion, in which a man takes out his fury on his wife by breaking a pot, 
which, he explains to Hue, is cheaper than replacing the wife, should he kill her 
by striking her (1970, 2:10-11, 235). 
Girls and women were more easily alienated than boys and men from the 
households to which they belonged. Disposing of them in ways other than or-
thodox major marriage could help a household solve a property/labor balance, 
thus contributing to household stability. Did daughters figure in the expansion 
of family resources as well? Were they obliged by tributary values to repay par-
ents more than was spent on her; as were sons? The obvious answer is "no" -
for women married out, and their offspring and adult earnings belonged to 
other people. But it is useful to peer into the logic behind changes in family ex-
pectations of daughters under conditions, such as those of present-day Taibei 
and Chengdu, in which many women earn respectable incomes and own pro-
ductive wealth. Here, tributary gender identity matters less than the market 
value of money and labor. Among Taiwan's educated women (see Tsui 1987) and 
among laborer/artisan/small-business families I have studied there (and in 
Sichuan), "daughters are now treated like sons." Traditionally, a daughter's 
obligation to repay her filial debt ceased at marriage, as the popular phrase 
"Married daughters are spilled water" attests. As economic opportunities for 
women have expanded, however, mothers in such families more and more claim 
with pride that their married daughters too now are very filial, that is, the 
daughters continue to give them money. Such gifts are often cited in discussions 
of how it is now probably better (for mothers, at least) to have daughters than 
sons. Sons are overly attached to their wives, live separately, and often give less 
to parents than parents expect. Daughters like to come for visits, even persuad-
ing their husbands to live in or near Mother's apartment, and prefer their own 
mother's influence over their children to that of a mother-in-law. Husbands 
worry that wives are slipping money to their own mothers out of household or 
patriline funds. 
Daughters may not give as much money as sons, but that they do give is em-
phasized and seen with great satisfaction as a proper economic response to better 
times and as a proof of genuine affection. A daughter could easily cite Confucian 
principle, in-law or husbandly pressure, or her own children's needs as excuses 
for following past practice and ceasing to contribute to her parent's family (re-
ferred to correctly in Chinese as a woman's niang jia, mother's family) after mar-
riage, and some doubtless do. But many do not, and contemporary parents glow 
when they can boast of such a daughter. 
It appears that a daughter's duty to repay the actual expenses of rearing her 
may have been conditioned more by women's limited economic opportunities 
98 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
than by her differential duties as a female child. In the past, few married women 
had cash incomes, and what they had was needed for the nuclear families they 
were building. The postmarital economic future of the young female factory 
workers on whose actions Greenhalgh's analysis is largely based is not likely to be 
bright. Many of them will have little to give their mothers, as their parents can 
easily estimate. But given sufficient, relatively equal resources and opportunities, 
a daughter's "contract," viewed in strictly economic terms, is not unlike that of a 
son, when both are equal, or relatively so, before the market. 
A jia was shaped in its creation and its dissolution by kinship law, insistently 
reasserted in the most forceful terms by Chinese rulers; it was sometimes as in-
sistently reinterpreted by Chinese people attempting to survive and prosper 
under the PCMP. Where petty capitalism was strong, a household balance be-
tween labor power and means of production may have been redressed through 
more flexible mechanisms than those with which the state endowed Chinese pa-
triliny. Consequently, jia became the principal units of commodity production 
by groups representing themselves as kin. 
ANCESTRAL PROPERTY, "cAPITAL," AND 
PETTY-CAPITALIST ACCUMULATION 
Thus far I have avoided characterizing the means of production inherited, 
bought, and otherwise accumulated by Chinese households as "capital." Capital, 
strictly speaking, exists only where the capitalist mode of production dominates 
all other forms- although Marx's use of "merchant capital" allows a loophole 
here. Petty capitalism can be distinguished from capitalism partly by the exami-
nation of the nature of the "ancestral property" that formed the bulk of privately 
owned means of production. 
Capital according to Marx "is not a thing, it is a definite social relation of 
production, pertaining to a particular historical social formation .... Capital is 
not the sum of the material and produced means of production .... It is the 
means of production ... monopolized by a particular section of society [vis-a-
vis] living labour power" (1981:953). In James Wessman's felicitous phrase, 
"Wage labor and capital reciprocally cause and condition each other" 
(1981:243). In consequence, as another scholar notes, "The individual is objec-
tified in private property and therefore in thought and social life ... [and] both 
labor and means of production (capital) are 'free' and therefore capable of self-
expansion" (Hart 1992:46). Although means of production exist outside of cap-
italism, capital becomes its historically powerful, significant "true self" only in 
historical contexts in which, as another scholar defines it, "the production of 
capital predominates, and dominates every other sort of production" (Botto-
more 1983:60 ). It "concretizes" the unpaid portion of the human labor power 
which has gone into making it and stands as a monument less to the entrepre-
Patricorporations: State and Household : 99 
neurial skill of the capitalist than to the exploitation of workers paid less than 
the value of their work. 
Chinese people also see their ancestral property as concretized labor, created 
by the sweat and toil of real work by real people in the past. The accumulations 
in the hands of men and kin seniors taken from women and kin juniors do not 
fit Marx's definition of capital, developed to describe European conditions in-
cluding very different gender and kinship relationships. But the definition illu-
minates the way household means of production are expanded through the 
unrewarded work of kinfolk, through their commoditization, or through their 
elimination. People do not voice this aspect of capital accumulation; the ances-
tors are envisioned as self-directed adult men, righteously benefiting from their 
own hard work. People do not describe family estates as the material result of 
exploitation. Just as the bourgeois prefers to see capital as the material conse-
quence of entrepreneurial skill rather than of the workers' exploitation, so do 
Chinese prefer to see ancestral property as the product of virtuous frugality, 
rather than- at least in part- of babies killed, children sold, daughters mar-
ried for brideprices, sons sent to sojourn in alien lands, women and children 
hungrier and colder than grown men. Ancestral property both represents and 
reproduces the living social relations of inequality within the household, just as 
capital in the strict sense represents and reproduces the relations of production 
between propertied and propertyless classes. Ancestral property is sacred, pro-
tected not by sentiment alone, but by law. Latent collective rights by both lineal 
and collateral agnates forbid our describing household means of production -
especially land- as the completely free-moving "capital" of the capitalist mode 
of production. 
The constant possibility of owning or increasing one's means of production 
in the PCMP resembles the process in capitalism known as primitive accumu-
lation, described as "the process by which small-scale producers such as peas-
ants are divorced from their direct connection to the means of production and 
their properties are accumulated in relatively few hands .... Primitive accu-
mulation ... is part of the same process for which the term 'proletarianization' 
is also used. That is, there was not only a period of primitive accumulation, 
prior to the rise of capitalism as we usually think of it, but this process contin-
ues to occur as non- and precapitalist modes of production are incorporated 
into the capitalist world-system" (Wessman 1981:241-42). In the Chinese case, 
at every generation, tributary pressures channel the rewards of work away from 
some household members toward others. In petty-capitalist contexts, market 
pressures exaggerate the initial tributary imbalances, sometimes to the point 
that tributary obligations to kin are ignored. Households that succeed in accu-
mulation enter factor markets with an advantage, forcing other households to 
follow in a competitive spiral. 
100 
C H 
I 
N 
A 
S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
When we look at family land and shops from the point of view of social rela-
tions within the household, we see not capital but ancestral property. But when 
we observe the relationships among households under Chinese commodity pro-
duction, we see something that can almost be called capital. For centuries, house-
holds hired labor in and out as a normal part of agrarian and artisan life. The 
classic owner-operator household often did both to take full advantage of tem-
porary labor needs and surpluses. This typical "middle peasant" strategy was un-
likely to produce very substantial accumulations of means of production. The 
same strategy by holders of larger properties who hired workers at less than the 
value they produced, enabled relatively rich Chinese to become close analogs to 
European mercantile and rent capitalists. 
Their accumulations through this mechanism look remarkably like capital, in 
the strict sense. Interclass exploitation, as well as intrahousehold inequality of re-
ward, kept drawing means of production out of the hands of the children, women, 
and poor families that went to the wall in this fierce competition, and into the 
hands of male owners of large means of production. But the double nature of ex-
ploitation prevented this tendency from reaching the momentum that produced 
true capitalism elsewhere. Chinese petty capitalists had traditional authority to ex-
ploit themselves and members of their jia at levels that more impersonal employ-
ers would not have dared to demand (Harrell1982:1o8-13, 1987; Niehoff 1987). 
Surpluses extracted from within the household were antagonistic to those extracted 
between households. A household head, pressed too hard by the processes of ex-
ploitation which bore upon him from wealthier households, could not only con-
vert family members into the wherewithal to resist engulfment but also continue to 
reproduce more members for whatever purpose. Labor power was "free" as it cir-
culated amongjia, but not individualized, or free, vis-a-vis its jia. 
Parental authority to exploit the young may have been as much responsible 
for "braking" the accumulation of true capital in Chinese society as any other 
factor. The exploitation of the labor power of one household by another could 
happen, in part, because poor households with no means of production rented 
out their members. Households normally made strenuous attempts to retain 
their members, doubtless for affective as much as for economic reasons. At many 
times and places in China, however, kin seniors calculated the relative economic 
value of keeping or disposing of household members to preserve a balance be-
tween their available means of production and the number of males needed to 
perpetuate its ownership. Except for babies who were killed or neglected to death, 
most of these "extra" people became members of other households, as wives, 
adopted daughters and sons, and bondspeople. More labor power was trans-
ferred by the contractualized movement of persons between jia than by the trans-
fer of labor power through wage work. The truly capitalist tendency for capital 
accumulated through the exploitation of wage labor to snowball tends toward the 
Patricorporations: State and Household 
101 
creation of relatively few but large owners of capital. This tendency was damped 
in China by the direct reallocation of persons among patricorporations. These 
varied in their prosperity, as Greenhalgh has cogently argued, with their depen-
dency ratios (1985b). What Greenhalgh and other Chayanovian theorists ignore 
for China, however, is how rigorously kin seniors intervened in late traditional 
times to keep those ratios manageable. 
102 
C H 
I 
N 
A 
S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
Patricorporations: 
The Lineage 
They will go from city to village, from county to [prefecture) ... collect-
ing money to build up an ancestral hall. They will fraudulently give 
themselves out as the descendants of some famous men, and all the 
worthless characters struggle to imitate them, so that there are many of 
this kind .... The money left over from the building of the ancestral hall 
is used either to buy more land or is stored as money or grain often being 
lent out to members of the same [surname). The simple people who de-
pend on the ancestral hall are thus exploited by having to pay interest. 
-
Memorial Regarding the Abuses of the Ancestral Halls 
in Kiangsi, 1764 
Some people say that the Li lineage became so large because they were the 
first settlers, and naturally all their descendants are named Li. Some say 
tllat it's because tlley have such good geomantic gravesites. The real reason, 
tllough, is tllat once they got a little power, everyone else wanted to marry 
tlleir daughters and take on the Li name. The Li lineage ate up all our sons. 
-
Wang Weimin, Fujianese villager, summer 1990 
Because of daily self-interest, the legal obligations incumbent on 
kinfolk, and the ultimate economic unity imposed on households, Chinese peo-
ple had no choice but to organize themselves as jia. A jia thus wore two faces: it 
was the unit within which one must live and from which escape was, in theory, 
impossible (should it be desirable); and it was the legitimate social instrument 
with which to wrest a living from a hard world. The state did not require people 
to belong to a lineage (as to a jia), but to do so was to gain the leverage of a pow-
erful political-economic tool. 
Lineages are only partially homologous to jia, although, as David Faure points 
out, some observers and Chinese "officialdom tended to see the lineage as an ex-
103 
tension of the household" (1986:129 ). Lineages were constructed in part from the 
same ideological elements that pinned jia in place, but these elements were used 
to create social units with much broader capacities than those the state envisaged 
for households. Endowed with official legitimacy by the logic that supported ag-
natic kinship as a fundamental bond, they were an unimpeachable mechanism 
for collectively confronting both the state and the market. Just as jia faced both 
the tax collector and the employer, so did lineages enable men to enter the dis-
tinct competitions for tribute and for capital. They did this through amassing lin-
eage estates that were ritually sanctioned, legally protected, collectively held, and 
inalienable. 
In lineages, which began to take modern form in the Song, we find tributary 
principles operating in a commoditized economy to shape popular organizations 
that could siphon resources from the TMP into the world of commoners. Lin-
eages, sometimes, expanded into petty capitalism's analog of the capitalist busi-
ness corporation. 
LINEAGE ORIGINS 
The history of lineage development from the Song, as we learn from the vol-
ume edited by Patricia Buckley Ebrey and James L. Watson (1986; see Davis, 
Dennerline, Hazelton, Hymes, Naquin, and Watson) and from David Faure 
(1986) reveals the often contradictory nature of lineage construction. The mate-
rials on which such research is based show how wealthy families sought prestige 
within and direct personal links to the TMP by concentrating on lineages as ac-
cumulators of tributary power. These materials are far less helpful for our unrav-
eling of the ways in which large-scale patricorporatizations enabled important 
members of lineages to further their petty-capitalist ends. But a growing body of 
evidence supports the claim that lineage organizations could both assert official 
status and claim official perquisites, on the one hand, and legitimate and expand 
private production, on the other. 
David Faure's study of the distinction between lineage and village in the Hong 
Kong region speaks to a four-hundred-year process of the penetration of rural 
villages organized around settlement rights in pioneered territory by the kind of 
lineage organization now well known from the structural analyses of Maurice 
Freedman (1958, 1966, 1974b), the social history of Faure (1986, 1989), and from 
much recent ethnography (e.g. Baker 1968, Potter 1968, Pasternak 1969, Ahern 
1973. J. Watson 1975, R. Watson 1985). Similar penetrations of territorial groups by 
kin ideology must have occurred, with regionally differing results, in many parts 
of China since the Song. We know that the lineage form itself was created in the 
process of such penetration (Ebrey and Watson 1986). In analyzing Hong Kong 
lineages, Faure stresses their most elaborated form, in which large corporate bod-
ies symbolized their unity through written genealogies, tightly controlled ances-
104 
: 
C H 
I 
N A ' S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
tor worship, graveyards, and large, free-standing lineage halls. Such lineages were 
"the unintentional creation of official policies" (1986:165). The connection of ris-
ing kin groups to official Neo-Confucian culture was realized by appropriate rit-
ual, lineage support for members' education, and by the gaining of official 
position. The rich who wished not only for further riches but to transcend the 
limited status that wealth alone could give, constructed lineages replete with the 
appropriate structure and symbolism. By the Ming, such forms existed, had offi-
cial support, and thus directly channeled seekers after power into the use of 
specific organizational forms. An important element in the historically earlier 
construction of such legitimacy was the Song state practice of permitting a re-
stricted number of candidates to join the civil service through agnatic ties to 
ranking scholar-officials or to prominent court personalities. Such rank brought 
the privileges of government stipends, various tax exemptions, and social pres-
tige (Davis 1986:62), thus giving material value within the tributary system to pa-
trilineal ties. 
As recruitment tightened, another advantage of agnatic cohesion may have 
come to the fore. When it became less easy to appoint a particular young relative 
to a "protected" position, it was more necessary for kinsmen to broaden the pool 
of talent from which to draw trustworthy successors. Lineage organization 
stressing the virtual interchangeability of men of the same generation made it 
almost as advantageous to train a patrilateral nephew as a son, or a distant ag-
nate as a near one. Supported by a whole lineage through the arduous years of 
competition for posts, the successful official owed his debt to that collectivity; 
any agnate who could make use of the successful man's political leverage had a 
right to demand it. Although even a large, rich, and enduring household could 
expect to produce an official only occasionally, by pooling their male kin ju-
niors, members of a lineage greatly increased their chances of finding a reliable 
official connection. 
A 1794 scandal illustrates how establishing this connection might be accom-
plished and the risks it sometimes entailed. A candidate gained a degree in Han-
kou, where he was not legally registered and where he thus had had no right to sit 
for the examination. When he was exposed by a rival, provincial authorities not 
only nullified the degree and punished various concerned officials but revealed a 
wider pattern of illegal registration for examinations. Some men were claiming 
descent from registered Hankou families in order to be eligible to be examined 
there. Worse yet, resident merchants were importing young agnates and claiming 
them as sons in order to better the young men's chances of making it into exam-
ination quotas. This practice, William Rowe notes, suggests the possibility "that 
nationally prominent mercantile families may have systematically established lo-
cally registered branches at various commercial centers throughout China and 
routinely shuttled their heirs back and forth between local examinations, thus 
multiplying their chances for success:' The same thing was going on in Hangzhou 
Patricorporations: The Lineage : 105 
and Suzhou, at any rate (1984:240-42). Men traveled from Quanzhou and Zhang-
chou to Taiwan at about the same time to take exams illicitly, perhaps using the 
same stratagem (Vertente et al. 1991:131). 
When family circumstances made male adoption necessary, the insistence on 
preferential adoption of sons from within the lineage emphasized the degree to 
which boys were seen as a human resource whose loyalties ought not to be di-
luted by affiliations with outsiders. The ease of such adoptions from branch to 
branch (like transfers of children among brothers in contemporary Taiwan) 
stressed the ideal of interchangeability of members of a generation which makes 
a lineage "like" but larger than, a household. 
Another element of the form lineages were to take may have been set as early 
as the Tang, when the highest-ranking officials were allowed to build altars 
(miao) to more generations of ascendants than were lower-rankers, while the 
lowest officials and commoners were restricted to offering ancestral worship in 
their own homes (Ebrey 1986:21). Ability to define agnatic connections through 
worship was thus specified differently for people of different ranks. By Qing 
times, when such rules no longer applied, much greater prestige was still attached 
to worship in free-standing ancestral halls than to that performed in domestic 
structures (Faure 1986: 148). 
The state made constant efforts to control the ideological conditions under 
which lineages continued to exist. Song officials were uneasy at the presence of 
large descent groups not headed by educated leaders (Ebrey 1986:20)- that is, 
by a cadre of men socialized into the values of the TMP. Lineages were "extermi-
nated" by early Ming emperors for crime or rebellion (Faure 1984:34-35), a sign 
that their adherence to the supremely feudal virtue of loyalty had failed. 
Steered by such instances of state emphasis on agnatic unity, lineages took 
their modern form as they sought to legitimate local contention for power 
against the state. The numerous ancestral halls built in seventeenth- and eigh-
teenth-century Hong Kong were, Faure claims, "symbols of territorial and lin-
eage unity: fronts, if one wishes to call them that, behind which the segmented 
bodies tracing common descent might appear as corporate bodies in regional 
politics and in dealings with the yamen" (1986:159-60). These bodies sought as 
well, it must be believed, to tap into sources of tribute to which patricorporations 
with ruling-class members might lay claim, to strengthen their ability to extract 
the wealth that made the entry into that class possible, and to avoid paying trib-
ute on that wealth (Siu 1989:37). 
As Freedman and others have argued, officialdom feared lineage power that 
could compete with its own for wealth. Lineage competition and hence in-
equality may often have been exacerbated by periods of state weakness. Much 
of the sharp class differentiation to be found around Hong Kong dates from the 
aftermath of a massive forced population move inland in 1662. The evacuation, 
which caused immense hardship, was rescinded after seven years. The period 
106 
: 
C H 
I 
N A ' S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
that followed was something of a free-for-all, as those who had managed tore-
main claimed their own and other people's property against the demands of re-
turning kin groups. Rubie Watson states that "the structure of dominance ... 
found in nineteenth- and twentieth-century Hsin-an can be traced to the pe-
riod of great prosperity that followed the dislocation of the evacuation. Most of 
the institutions (for example, corporate estates, ancestral halls, markets, temple 
committees) that a few lineages used to establish their power and authority 
over others date from, or were substantially expanded during, the late seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries" (1985:21-22). Hilary Beattie's research de-
scribes a similar pattern of economic expansion accompanied by sharp 
interlineage inequality following a devastating rebellion in Anhui in the mid-
seventeenth century (1979:44-47). lnterlineage inequality may have arisen in 
times when, with TMP controls relaxed or impotent, petty-capitalist competi-
tion led to both economic expansion and the monopolization of resources by 
the strongest groups. 
Where lineages were especially strong, they were a tax-dodging device (Faure 
1989:24). Their success at denying tax revenues to the state was sometimes in-
strumental in limiting the state's ability to act locally. In areas where official 
power was comparatively weak, lineages depended on their own force of arms to 
hold their claims. In areas of state strength, lineages competed more in lawsuits 
than on the battlefield. Whether buying peace with taxes was a good bargain is 
difficult to decide, for superior force (not the equality of the marketplace!) usu-
ally decided this social contract in favor of officialdom. Regions such as the 
southeast coast where officials could not stamp out lineage political autonomy 
("feuding") were also regions where they had difficulty in collecting taxes and 
suppressing petty capitalism. 
LINEAGES AND COMMODITY PRODUCTION 
People invented and then used the lineage both to attain office and to validate 
the status achieved by officeholding, as Faure points out (1986:144). The lineage 
was effective as well in expanding commodity production. A lineage could be "a 
partnership, formed in much the same way as a business partnership might have 
been formed" (1989:24). In eighteenth-century Taiwan men of the same surname 
"took ... an ancestor on the mainland ... as an object of common worship, and, 
by contractually subscribing to shares, organized ho-yueh-tzu [common shares] 
lineage organizations." They purchased land to rent out for income to support 
ritual; these lineages contrast with lineages founded on blood relations and were 
more like community ritual groups (shenming hui) and other local affinity orga-
nizations than descent groups (Chuang Ying-chang 1987=194-96). Although ar-
guing in this paper that contractually founded lineages were stimulated by 
frontier conditions, Chuang has since found similar ones in heavily petty-capi-
Patricorporations: The Lineage : 
107 
talist Fujian, from which the immigrants came (personal communication, 12 
March 1992). In Taiwan, where petty capitalism operated freely and where links 
to the tributary system were few, lineages did not stress the examination route to 
success. In the later nineteenth century, although Taiwan had a generous quota of 
examination places and vigorous lineages, few men applied for the exams (Ver-
tente et al. 1991:131). 
Joining with one's agnates to form a lineage was an effective strategy for accu-
mulating the initial resources that made social mobility possible. A rare Chinese 
Horatio Alger might enter officialdom via self-instruction on the back of a water 
buffalo, but most members of the ruling class from the Song on were drawn from 
the ranks of prosperous kin groups. In Song Suzhou, a time and place in which 
dramatic social mobility was possible, Robert Hartwell states that "sixty-three 
families provided ninety per cent of all the successful candidates between 960 and 
1279" (1982:419). The path upward was plain: the paternal generation made 
profits and paid for a son or nephew to earn a degree; the filial generation got ap-
pointed and received tribute. The protection state kinship ideology offered to 
productive resources labeled as ancestral -
rather than individual or private -
property was extremely important to successful social climbers. A rich man's 
wealth was easily confiscated; a lineage's sacrificial land (or brick kiln or pawn-
shop) was a sacred trust officials felt bound to honor. 
The Western sinologist's phobia about being accused of economic determin-
ism (too Marxist, or not Marxist enough), combined with the nature of Chinese 
source materials (heavy on glorifying ancestral worthies, all-too-tactful about 
how the worthies made their money) has left what is probably the central issue in 
lineage studies- economic activities- seriously understudied.~ The problem 
may be rooted in the gender ideology of those who wrote the sources on which 
historians must rely. Anthropologists are more fortunate: they can ask Chinese 
women the necessarily crass questions, and get more straightforward answers. In 
Hong Kong's New Territories, Rubie Watson learned much from women about 
the origins of the inequalities of two neighboring hamlets belonging to the same 
lineage: 
Unlike their husbands, Sik Kong Wai women are very forthright in their con-
demnation of San Wai's landlord families .... [The] women would point in 
the direction of San Wai and say that all of Ha Tsuen's landlords and money-
1. Patricia Buckley Ebrey argues against an economic (or political) origin of descent group cohe-
sion, attributing it to changes in religious views especially about worship at grave sites in the Tang 
(1986:29). Inherently suspicious of ideas as independent causes of behavior, I suggest that the well-
known use of grave sites as claims to pioneered or reclaimed property was as likely as anytiling else to 
have motivated increased attention to graves in a time when Han settlement of the south was the most 
significant source of cultural change. My (Han) father's bones in your (non-Han) fields is the Chinese 
equivalent of planting the flag on Hispaniola. Any sensible state would encourage such symbolism. 
108 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
lenders live there. It was these people, the women maintain, who in the past 
owned all the land and lent them money at high rates of interest .... their 
husbands are more reticent. It is not that these men are blind to the fact that 
the landlord-merchants lived in larger houses, ate better food, and owned 
more land than they did. Rather, they imply that these matters are not a 
proper topic of conversation. (1985:102) 
Most argument about the significance of lineage property to the solidarity, 
power, and existence of the lineage revolves around land as essential to corpo-
rateness. Inevitably, in preindustrial China, lineages were more likely to own, 
and profit from, land than from other resources. The scholarly literature now 
presents a fairly clear picture of this aspect of lineage economy. Sometimes lin-
eage land was farmed in rotation or by the poorest members at a lower-than-
market rent; sometimes it was rented at market rates to anyone, or to nonkin 
only, to maximize income. Where agriculture was profitable because of the 
proximity of urban markets, or because of special environmental advantages, 
however, lineages invested heavily in land reclamation and in the expansion of 
commercial crops. To carry forward our understanding of lineages as petty-
capitalist corporations, we should focus on two issues: first, on the surplus-
generating accumulation of lineage means of production; and second, on the 
different allocations of this surplus: egalitarian redistribution, tributary-style 
appropriation, and consumption by lineage power holders, and petty-capitalist 
reinvestment. Lineage regulations typically required that surplus should be dis-
tributed by tributary principles. It should be available: according to need to im-
poverished members, to all boys equally for education, to degree holders as 
ranked stipends, and to (male) members at large through age- and generation-
graded access to food at sacrifices. Where a cash surplus existed, it was to be al-
located by various systems, to men either as individuals or as representatives of 
particular lines (see Potter 1968:108-10). Yet somehow pools of ancestral prop-
erty accumulated and flowed into channels other than those prescribed by lin-
eage rules. 
Some lineages both obtained and used surpluses as capital, seizing surplus 
value by underpaying producers and then reinvesting it. Large southern lineages, 
especially those of Guangzhou, about which we are best informed, generally in-
vested in the production of agricultural commodities. A lineage capitalized the 
clearing or draining of land or the building or improving of irrigation systems, or 
it encouraged the production of regional specialties (Siu 1989:25-33, 36-37, 54, 59; 
R. Watson 1990 ). Much of the land reclamation on which New Territories lineage 
wealth was based was situated not on some remote frontier but in the hinterlands 
of major cities to which the rice, vegetables, or fibers produced there could easily 
be sold (Faure 1986:173). Such lineages indeed "put their money into land" but 
not, or not primarily, into household plots on which a peasant love of the soil was 
Patricorporations: The Lineage : 
109 
the only surplus beyond subsistence. They constructed the polders on which 
their crops grew. They raised productivity to the point where their products fed 
and clothed city workers as well as their own members. They were often proces-
sors and merchants of the resulting commodities as well (Siu 1989:59-62, 128-29). 
The Pearl River delta was transformed by such petty-capitalist lineage efforts; the 
tea country of northern Taiwan was similarly opened, held against Aborigines, 
and brought into the tea trade by patent holders, some of which may have been 
lineages that had the necessary "pull" in the capital to obtain land patents (Shep-
herd 1993:227-28; but see 315). What Philip Huang (1985) has called tenurial land-
lordism was a classic petty-capitalist pattern in which the landlords were 
sometimes cliques of powerful lineage leaders who rented, or refused to rent, to 
their own kinsmen. 
Detailed examples of lineages whose funds were invested in nonagricultural 
production are scarce. We know that lineages (and their segments) owned mar-
kets, moneylending ventures, commercial establishments, and shipping firms and 
sometimes indirectly controlled property through temples (Faure 1986:153-55). As 
Ng Chin-keong has shown, they were essential in Fujianese trade in the seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries, providing manpower and what can only be called 
commercial capital for voyages (1983:216). Further: 
Maritime trade was the most important factor affecting the lineage organiza-
tion. With capital derived originally from land and backed by large lineage or-
ganizations providing manpower, the prominent local families were able to 
monopolize the great profits from trade. They sent out their relatives or ser-
vants as managing "partners" for the risky voyages. The relationship of the 
two parties was that between superior and inferior rather than that of an equal 
partnership. The need for trade assistants also gave birth to a new custom in 
Fukien, that of adopting foster children [to travel abroad for commercial en-
terprises and perhaps later to be uxorilocally married, thus becoming "true 
sons"]. (29) 
Ng discusses at length these commercially motivated adoptions and the forma-
tion of pseudo-lineages by the aggregation of several surnames: "Because the au-
thorities would be suspicious of local associations of this kind, the new aggregate 
functioned under the officially acceptable form of'lineage' "(29-32). 
An agnatic group in Ming/Qing Zhili, Naquin tells us, supported itself on 
earnings from leadership in one of the White Lotus sects, amassing considerable 
wealth from "city dwellers or itinerant people: urban vegetable farmers, artisans, 
shop owners, barbers, Taoist priests and nuns, metalsmiths, tailors, peddlers, 
geomancers .... Resources were apparently invested in the Longevity-Peak Tem-
ple, the ancestral shrine, and the common task of proselytizing, which in turn 
generated new income." This lineage lived on its esoteric skill capital until, in a 
government sweep of the heterodox in 1821, all the founder's known descendants 
110 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
(136 persons) were executed or exiled and their property confiscated and sold. 
"Two hundred years after Wang Tao-sen's own death, his descendants received 
the punishments for which they had long been legally liable" (Naquin 1986:235, 
237, 239). 
From the fifteenth to the eighteenth century, two Zhejiang lineages near 
Xiang Lake ran an important brick and tile industry, described by R. Keith 
Schoppa. They sold construction materials to Hangzhou and Shaoxing, at one 
time employing 210 kiln households from one of the lineages (1989:54, 70, 77, 
115). Industry was combined with commerce and agriculture; the brickmaking 
-
with its associated dredging, wood cutting, mixing, firing, and porterage -
were mostly done outside of the agricultural season (115). Other nearby lineages 
based power on wealth gained from a salt franchise, fishponds, and a variety of 
lacustrine cash crops. In these lineages, petty-capitalist earnings allowed some 
members to "concentrate on the civil service route to solidify and perhaps le-
gitimate existing local economic power" (136). Some leading households were 
"centers of comparative wealth in an expanse of general poverty" (76). One of 
the richest built several Buddhist temples and shrines that "symbolized his ties 
to Buddhism and represented the charitable display of riches and dedication to 
strengthening individual [Schoppa's italics] karmic wealth" (77). This history 
recounts the experience of patricorporate producers who in the Song found it 
relatively easy to "seduc[ e ]local officials into silence and connivance" ( 47 ), but 
who slowly entangled themselves in the temptations and risks of officialdom, 
seduced in their turn by ruling-class power and perks. Schoppa's work 
strengthens the hope that much more evidence exists for the economic andes-
pecially the nonagricultural activities from which lineages built themselves into 
petty-capitalist corporations. 
Lineage membership itself can be seen as patricorporate property, as we saw 
when junior kin were pooled for examination purposes. Where the heirs neces-
sary to continuity failed to appear, lineages permitted their constituent house-
holds to adopt from agnates, but found nonkin adoptions morally and legally 
troublesome. 2 Some lineages, however, acquired human resources with a free 
hand, ignoring agnatic ideals. In Ming Guangdong they sometimes adopted men 
to take on their own military obligations, then dropped the adoptees' descen-
dants from their books (Faure 1989:22). Fujianese lineages were notorious for 
taking in talented outsiders and labor power through adoption (Ng 1983:29); in 
Fujian today, people in many regions describe prerevolution lineages as eager to 
add to their manpower for work and war through adoption and uxorilocal mar-
riage. Ann Beth Waltner notes that in commercialized Qing Anhui, adopting un-
related male heirs may have furthered the setting up of branch firms: "An 
2. See Ball1982 for an effective summary of adoption practices and Waltner 1990 for a detailed ex-
ploration of this topic. 
Patricorporations: The Lineage 
111 
adopted son is more reliable than an ordinary employee, yet more expendable 
than a biological son:' From the Ming on, officials tried to keep separate the roles 
of son and hired hand, while commoner employers illegally purchased bondser-
vants whom they disguised as adopted sons (Waltner 1990: 90, 83-87). The large 
Guangdong lineages' tributary orthodoxy on marriage and adoption is ac-
counted for in the next chapter. 
In the contemporary world, Chinese lineages have shown themselves to be 
clever and innovative economic actors. Perhaps the best-known example is the 
Man lineage of the New Territories, whose travel agency and restaurants have 
been documented by James L. Watson. The Man's most efficient and productive 
restaurants are family businesses, with nearly all other businesses operated by lin-
eage mates in a variety of partnerships (1975:109, 107). The accessibility of re-
sources through the trust agnatic ties engenders has made it possible for Man 
members to chain-migrate and prosper in considerable numbers. 
Large lineages, especially those that produced for and traded with capitalist 
outsiders, pushed hard on the concept of petty capitalism. They acted (or their 
leaders did) as capitalists act, and it is difficult not to call their accumulations 
capital. Had their influence been powerful enough to unseat tributary rule -
in 
southeast China, for example -
a Chinese polity dominated by a truly capitalist 
class might have emerged. Under such circumstances, the tributary rights of lin-
eage members would surely have eroded quickly, leaving only market and con-
tract to govern relations among kin. Because no such bourgeois revolution in fact 
occurred, I conceptualize lineages as petty-capitalist patricorporations, not cap-
italist corporations. My first two lines of argument toward this conclusion have 
already been made in Chapter 2. Whatever we call these social structures, they did 
not drive China into machine-assisted industrialism and a different demographic 
dynamic; and, until a capitalist class comes to dominate society, social relations 
will not be transformed by capitalism. The third reason is that, because tributary 
power continued to structure society, lineage relations of production, even in the 
southeast, contained a large admixture of kin duties along with wage employ-
ment. Maintaining inequality among workers as kinfolk was key to the tributary 
control of would-be capitalism. 
LINEAGES AND INEQUALITY 
Internal inequality that transcended tributary hierarchy and dispossessed 
members of tributary rights was a well-known feature of many lineages. Some 
was structural inequality- tributary logic requiring agnates to be differentiated 
along lines of age, generation, and polygynously married mothers. But as Rubie 
Watson points out, "To have any structural significance, differentiation within 
the Chinese lineage must be based on the incorporation of property, usually land, 
into ancestral estates (tsu). To establish a new segment a man must do more than 
112 
: 
C H I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
marry and produce sons; he and his descendants must have enough personal 
property to endow an estate .... economic differences among agnates, far from 
being opposed to or in conflict with the Chinese system of descent, are in fact of 
fundamental importance to that system" (1985:37). 
But, Watson continues, "What ... kept the [Deng]lineage from dissolving 
into discrete resource-holding units, each attempting to dominate its less affluent 
agnates? Why did the rich not deny their relationship with the poor or subordi-
nate and enserf them, as sometimes happened among agnates in Indian society?" 
(37). Much of the remainder of her study is an answer to this important question. 
Descent among the Deng is discussed as a conceptual system and a set of complex 
social practices. 
Watson is surely correct in refusing to "reduce descent simply to a matter of 
property relations." Yet the inequalities of property were continuously repro-
duced, despite the constant cultural admonishment to fraternity. Her study of 
"inequality among brothers" shows us much about why the Deng were less un-
equal than they might have been; and rather less about why, within a single lin-
eage, she found the kind of economic disproportion that so exasperated the 
women of Sik Kong Wai. Perhaps, as is so often the case in Chinese studies, the 
capitalist-like dynamics of Chinese life appear so natural, so much the general 
order of the universe, that they seem to require no analysis. A persistent bias to-
ward interpreting Chinese society in terms derived primarily from the "great tra-
dition" of TMP ideology deflects attention from its material relationships and 
from the ideological dimensions of petty capitalism. 
As lineages accumulated wealth, when was it simply consumed in ritual or re-
distributed among agnates, and when was it used as capital is used: reinvested to 
create ever-greater wealth? For a powerful lineage member to have used common 
income for individual purposes was sometimes merely corruption, but it could 
also have been an act consistent with a different set of principles. Petty-capitalist 
logic and morality argue strongly for accumulation and investment and discour-
age consumption. Investment that enhanced a man's position to the point where 
he could help his kinsmen on a grand scale could easily be seen as legitimate, es-
pecially to the man in question. Whether help actually trickled down to poorer 
agnates may have depended on how consistently lineage leaders reinvested rather 
than redistributed joint income. Where pressure to redistribute to the poorest 
members conflicted with the desire and opportunity to invest, leaders had a key 
role in deciding how much welfare consumption the group would continue to 
support. Lineage regulations made it relatively easy to define the poor as low-
class no-accounts who engaged in disreputable occupations and flouted high 
standards of morality by marrying widows or by performing domestic ritual 
shabbily. When so defined, they could be excluded from membership rather than 
kept on lineage welfare, a move that reduced the consumption burden. As Faure 
points out, "Not only does a lineage segment, but it also continually displaces the 
Patricorporations: The Lineage : 
113 
weaker and poorer lines from its midst" (1986:64). Such actions, however ratio-
nalized, were not likely to appear often in records whose purpose was to validate 
lineage organization in terms of tributary principle. 
Iflineages had functioned as relatively egalitarian redistributive units, the class 
differentiation among their members would have been far less marked than it 
sometimes was. In an eight-village Hong Kong lineage described by Jack M. Pot-
ter, "most large ancestral estates in the village belonged to wealthy lineage seg-
ments ... which contained few farmers. On the other hand, most farmers in the 
village were from relatively poor lineage segments that owned only small ancestral 
estates. Thus, most farmers in the village and in the two adjoining villages ... 
rented land from the large ... ancestral estates in which they had no share" 
(1968:81). Even under the restrictive conditions imposed by the British in Hong 
Kong, lineage leaders held authority over ancestral estates and thus managed the 
reproduction of internal inequalities along with their property. Their attempts to 
accumulate capital for their closest kin while conforming to principles governing 
the organization of the lineage as a whole often led to complex and inconsistent 
choices. 
In a contemporary lineage in which 93 percent of the members' land was held 
in lineage trusts, the ranking leader of each principal segment, Potter says, "has 
the responsibility of announcing and chairing all meetings of the group called to 
make decisions concerning the management of disposition of the ancestral lands . 
. . . [He] must sign all lease agreements concerning the ancestral lands before the 
contract is valid, and [he has] the power to renew the leases of existing tenants:' 
Such leaders now and in the past normally acted on behalf of wealthy and pow-
erful members who were able to manipulate both rental and sale of estate land. 
Potter notes that "in traditional times as at present, usually only a handful of men 
of the group know about the financial affairs of the ancestral estate;' with the re-
sult that embezzlement (of which he cites several serious cases) was not difficult, 
and was much feared (1968: 103-4, 106-7). Secretly renting estate land to favored 
kin at a low rate that enables the renter to profit from cash crops or higher-rental 
subleasing (113-14) hovers between illegitimacy and proper concern for duty to 
one's closest kin. 
Lineage leaders had the choice of whether to follow the feudal kinship logic of 
the TMP or the contractual kinship logic of the PCMP in the disbursement of 
collective resources. It is consistent with the scattered data as I know them that, 
where commodity production was vigorous, petty-capitalist morality often pre-
vailed. Under such circumstances, lineages became more sharply stratified inter-
nally, with subordinate members acting as tenants and employees of their 
class/kin leaders, rather than as a body of brothers. 
Lineage villages such as the Lin Family Garden of Banqiao, Taiwan, dia-
grammed their social relations in their architecture: elegant palaces, with sepa-
rate women's quarters, gardens, a theater, and grand ancestral halls housed the 
114: CHINA 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
important households; small row houses sheltered the hundreds of working-class 
families. The history of this nineteenth-century testament to lineage inequality 
has been edited by economic interest. Its recent reconstruction as a public park 
has resulted in the destruction of its sociological significance. To save part of their 
property, the Lins razed the working-class dwellings, leaving the false impression 
that all coresident Lins lived in grand style. 
Kin ties between the classes in large lineages have often been described as ame-
liorating (or even eradicating) class conflict in Chinese society. The legal bias to-
ward tributary kinship ideals gave poorer members some claim on their richer 
agnates. Theft from kinsmen was punished more lightly than that from nonkin 
(Bodde and Morris 1967:247-48, 297), apparently on the principle that kinship 
coincides with economic pooling; charitable support of poor members was not 
only a pious fiction. Yet kin ties between lineage-mates of different classes may 
equally be seen as a state-supported form of labor discipline. If rebellion against 
economic exploiters could not be handled within the lineage, the laws condemn-
ing violence against kin seniors could be invoked in all their severity. 
LINEAGE VARIATION 
The best-known Chinese lineages were large corporate bodies with substantial 
collectively held property important in local political economies, notably in 
Guangzhou, Fujian, and the lower Yangzi Valley. More common and more widely 
distributed were small bodies of agnates with little or no collective property. Such 
lineages have had considerable significance in Chinese society and cannot be ig-
nored as merely underdeveloped examples of the more complex type. 
The larger, estate-centered lineages had a narrower distributional range, con-
centrating in the southeast coast and Yangzi Valley regions. Found only sporadi-
cally in other regions (Naquin and Rawski 1987; A. Wolf 1989a:248-5o), they had 
productive estates and distributed their income less equally than tributary prin-
ciple required, in practice if not in ideology. With investments in land, improve-
ments to arable, industrial production, overseas trade, domestic commerce, and 
moneylending, cliques of leaders in such lineages, backed by the arms of their 
poorer brethren, were major actors in petty-capitalist undertakings. Where talent 
or numbers failed, they adopted freely, often in unorthodox fashion, and some-
times allowed uxorilocal marriage, with an in-marrying son-in-law treated as a 
sort of male daughter-in-law or as a temporary, dismissable concubine (Waltner 
1990:89, 100-101). 
Small lineages without corporate estates, such as the north China Liu de-
scribed by Martin Yang (1945:134-41), existed only through a kind of loose self-
consciousness, with no accumulative institutions whatsoever. They owned only 
nonproductive property such as a graveyard or a small trust of land the income 
from which supported annual sacrifices. Surpluses were consumed in ancestral 
Patricorporations: The Lineage : 
115 
feasts, modest welfare benefits, and architectural symbols of unity. The education 
of boys that lineages sometimes paid for can be seen as a continuum of conspic-
uous consumption, gambling, and actual investment: boys educated with collec-
tive resources may have found official employment or contacts and returned 
more benefit to the lineage than had been spent on them. Most young talents, 
however, did not. 
Small lineages generally strongly opposed the adoption of outside heirs, which 
would limit claims on their narrow resource base. Kin practices of other kinds, 
too, were likely to conform to tributary ideals, such as major marriages with at 
least some dowry for adult daughters, rather than uxorilocal or minor marriages 
(Wolf 1989; and this volume, Chapter 7).3 Their activities seem largely to have 
been aimed at maintenance and stability rather than at expansion through capi-
talist-like behavior. 
Economic transactions of the smaller lineages generally conformed to the 
tributary model; those of the large lineages displayed attributes of petty capital-
ism. The former appear to have been a transparent corollary of Chinese family 
law; their history, even were it accessible, is unlikely to reveal much more than 
can be seen from their surface contemporary appearance. The history of the large 
form shows them to have been primarily political-economic actors using kinship 
forms acceptable to the state as shields to deflect ruling-class rapacity from petty-
capitalist undertakings. 
Arthur P. Wolf has discussed variations in lineage scale, corporateness, andre-
cruitment, concluding that one can account for the estate-holding form (to-
gether with some other important variations in Chinese kinship) by aligning 
these variations with long-standing cultural substrates (1989a:26o ). Although dis-
agreeing with Wolf about the general significance of substrates in the interpreta-
tion of Chinese kinship (see Chapter 5), I find that his regionalization of lineages 
accords well with my expectations based on political economy. 
Using regional data collected through field interviews of more than six hun-
dred women sixty and over in 1980, Wolf divided prerevolution Chinese lineages 
into three categories, which closely resemble those devised by K. Hazelton (1986). 
Wolf's Type I lineages were similar in their segmentary structure and in having a 
large membership and substantial corporate property; his Type II lineages had 
single-surname settlement(s), an ancestral hall, and a common grave site; his 
Type III lineages jointly worshiped ancestors, possessed a corporate symbol (such 
as a genealogy or ancestral tablet), and showed social solidarity (1989a:247). To 
see most clearly the differing effects of tributary and petty-capitalist influences, 
we can usefully reduce these types to only two -
I versus II and III -
in which 
3. In "major" marriage, in Arthur Wolf's terminology, the bride goes as an adult to begin marital 
life in her husband's home; in "minor" marriage, she is reared from infancy by her future parents-in-
law (A. Wolf 1968). 
116 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
the most distinguishing feature was the collective ownership -
or lack of it -
of substantial means of petty-capitalist production. For brevity, I refer to 
"owner" and "nonowner" lineages, though it is understood that Wolf's Types II 
and III did own collective property in the form of ritual buildings, grave sites, and 
the pooling of effort and human resources which give material meaning to the 
term "social solidarity." Such collective property significantly affected standing in 
theTMP. 
Both owner and nonowner lineages also possessed what David Faure calls 
rights of settlement: When an ancestor made his home at a particular place, "his 
descendants gain [ ed] the rights that were associated with settlement at that place, 
and through his departure from it, they los[t] these rights." Faure reminds us that 
these settlement rights were not simply symbolic. They were legal rights in the 
TMP, giving document holders access to contractual protection (and, less desir-
ably, the obligation to pay taxes). He cites a lineage-foundation legend in which 
(as in other similar legends) "the documents that were supposed to have been is-
sued by the ... subprefect and the magistrates who permitted subsequent settle-
ment are quite often included" (1989:11, 12-13, 9). Although lineages sometimes 
claimed land they had purchased, they universally claimed land their ancestors 
had been permitted by officials to settle. Although all lineages owned settlement 
rights, only Wolf's Type I lineages used patricorporate property to make rein-
vestable profit. 
Why did institutions so similar in their ideological and legal status differ so 
radically in how they used their collective means of production? Wolf's answer to 
this question is, in its general outline, compatible with my own: "Although there 
were broad regional differences in the relative frequency of the various types of 
lineages, examples of all types of lineage organization can be found in almost 
every locality. In other words, the regional differences were statistical rather than 
normative. People always had the option of developing the more complex forms 
of lineage organization if they had the desire and could muster the necessary 
human and material resources" (1989a:258). Faure adds weight to this view by 
concluding that by the Qing "a common ritual language had developed in rela-
tion to lineage practices that was used throughout China and that was not re-
stricted to any particular social class" (1989:8). (Faure habitually uses "class" to 
refer simply to social strata based on wealth.) 
Wolf's approach to lineage formation, based on a large and reliable field sam-
ple, fits well with the idea that lineages chose between TMP and PCMP actions. 
Such choices depended, I believe, on the existence of an active market for the fac-
tors of production such as land, labor, products, and money. In active markets, 
those to whom lineage organization gave even small initial advantages found mo-
tivation outside the lineage structure to begin to exploit their kinfolk, treating 
them less like brothers and more like employees. Without such a market, pres-
sures by relatively prosperous lineage segments to exploit their kin were more 
Patricorporations: The Lineage : 
117 
easily held in check by the tributary ideal of equality among agnates. Although 
such equality was qualified by the hierarchy of age and generation, this was very 
different from the hierarchy of class. 
Lineage estates structured the possibility of inequality among kin into the very 
foundation of the lineage system. A man whose household had grown rich under 
his leadership might allocate part of that accumulation as a collectively held es-
tate for his lineal descendants. The rest, certainly including any property he him-
self had inherited individually from his father, would be divided equally among 
his sons. The benefits of an ancestral trust, properly managed, persisted through 
the generations, making it likely that those whose lineage branch was thus en-
dowed would grow richer than those whose ancestors had never created such a 
sacred trust. This procedure protected accumulated wealth against the lineage's 
more egalitarian tendencies, and exacerbated class divisions. 
Accidental inequalities between households or branches could trigger brief 
cycles of dominance by one part of a lineage over others, or by a whole lineage 
over its neighbors. From such inequality in control of means of production 
might come the extraction of surplus from subordinated populations which 
could lead to an accumulation spiral. Clearly, however, such imbalances did 
not lead to accumulation spirals and expanded reproduction at most times 
and in most places. Only when the capacity of officials to drain off tribute was 
limited could surpluses begin to be used as capital. The areas in which 
nonowner lineages were the statistical norm were often poor (as in north 
China), and poor people were more likely than rich ones to organize them-
selves into lineages that owned no marketable means of production. Regional 
poverty, however, may be largely the result of the effectiveness of the TMP at 
extracting wealth. 
Although it is useful to reduce Wolf's three types into two to emphasize the 
significance of lineages as petty-capitalist patricorporations, retaining the origi-
nal three types suggests a more fine-grained analysis of regional variation among 
lineages. Wolf's field data correlate reasonably well with the political-economic 
regionalization set out in Chapter 4· Wolf's type I, with large corporate property, 
should be found especially in low TMP/high PCMP regions (such as the south-
east coast); type II, with some ancestral property, in high TMP/high PCMP re-
gions (such as the Yangzi Valley); type III, with no marketable means of 
production, in high TMP/low PCMP regions (such as the North China Plain. 
(The reader will recall that low TMP/low PCMP regions were culturally mar-
ginal, not fully Han in population. Lineages there might be better explained by 
Burton Pasternak's frontier hypothesis [1969]). 
In a discussion of Wolf's findings, Jack Goody (1990:60-61) refers the reader 
to exemplars of each of Wolf's types, chosen, I believe, because they are excellent 
ethnographically. These exemplars are not all found in the regions I predict for 
them here. Some very small present-day north Taiwan lineages studied by Emily 
118 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Martin Ahern (1973), for example, are Wolf's type II. Not all lineages in a given 
region took the predicted form. By examining Wolf's original data, however, I 
conclude that his lineage types were closely congruent with my three regional 
outcomes of the interaction of the TMP and the PCMP at high and low levels of 
strength. 
My reinterpretation of Wolf's findings turns on a distinction between the 
different kinds of things owned by lineages, and between the uses to which they 
were put, and are put today. Groups of agnatically related men who exercised 
control over one another's disposition of ancestral property and heirs possessed 
some common property: they were, by definition, corporate bodies when and if 
they did this. As has been argued earlier, because the Chinese state supported just 
such claims, Type Ill lineages were potentially near-universal. They were likely to 
fade entirely from view only in areas, or at times, when massive and chaotic pop-
ulation movements disrupted their otherwise almost automatic formation. Type 
III lineages, found especially in the North China Plain and among the poor 
everywhere, made small, pragmatic contributions to the welfare of their con-
stituent households, but ultimately contributed most to the smooth extraction of 
tribute by the state by teaching and enforcing tributary virtues. In such regional 
economies, drained dry by the state, neither lineages nor individuals accumu-
lated much surplus. 
A lineage that went beyond this minimal form -
Type II -
had a genealogy 
written, established a graveyard, built a hall, founded a school, perhaps even set 
aside sufficient land to underwrite lineage ritual. This collective property was 
valuable, but it was not productive, at least not in the market. These things were 
use values, not exchange values; they were distributed among members according 
to the logic of tributary exchange. They brought prestige, they may have assisted 
lineage members to tap into the tributary system -
schools and well-conducted 
rituals were essential to this entry -
but they were not means of production, or 
anything like capital. Type II lineages took advantage of their prestige but were 
deflected from investing solely in patricorporate enterprise by the rich possibilities 
of an active TMP. With ample opportunity for political patronage in such regions 
as the Yangzi Valley, individuals could shelter their wealth without disguising it as 
collective property. 
By contrast, a Type I lineage, which created new fields, ran a market or pawn-
shop, made bricks, or bought a salt franchise, had productive corporate "ances-
tral property" that could be used very much as capital is used. Wolf's type I 
lineages were possible where petty capitalism was strong and the tributary mode 
too weak either to control it effectively or to divert its members' energies to the 
pursuit of wealth in the TMP. Such lineages appeared in Fujian and were founded 
in Guangzhou during moments of state weakness. They were major political-
economic actors, obscuring with kinship rhetoric their capacity to accumulate 
capital and generate social inequality. 
Patricorporations: The Lineage 
119 
It is the central paradox of petty capitalism (and other versions of petty-com-
modity production) that capitalist -like relations of production in the wider soci-
ety may preserve and even create intensely feudal productive relations in the 
guise of kinship (Collins 1991; Lem 1991). In China, where the TMP insisted that 
people organize themselves as jia and rewarded those who invented and used the 
lineage, the lineage emerged as one of the most significant institutions in com-
modity-producing regions. 
Perhaps the most universal, and historically oldest, function of lineages since 
the Song, however, has been their contribution to the reproduction of gender in 
society. Lineage activities raised maleness to the status of the sacred. Though 
mothers too were revered as ancestors in Chinese society, it was only through a 
line of males that the whole body of kin could trace their links to one another 
and to the apical ancestor upon whose putative existence the structure of the lin-
eage rested. Agnatic ties were honored, celebrated, ritualized; other kinds of kin-
ship, and female roles other than the relation of mother of sons, were essentially 
ignored by the lineage. In many lineages, women were forbidden even the small-
est role in lineage ritual or any share in lineage property. Even a scattering of 
smallish, propertyless lineages about the countryside made an important ritual 
statement about the importance of men, and the unimportance of women, in 
late-imperial society. Core values of the tributary mode regarding gender and 
other forms of hierarchy were reenacted and reinforced at every lineage cere-
mony and business meeting. 
The most vivid sign of real revolutionary change I have observed in recent 
fieldwork in rural China was the delight on the faces of two fourteen-year-old 
Fujian girls who were telling me about their participation in recently reestab-
lished lineage rituals. "People come from everywhere to our lineage hall. There is 
so much food for everyone, we all get new clothes- it's really wonderful!" one 
sparkled. "Girls too?" I asked. "Did you two get shares?" "Of course -
it's our 
lineage!" came back the innocent reply. 
120 
C H 
I 
N A 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
7 
Dowry and Brideprice 
After a few days, I became still more crazy about him . . . and I began to 
dream what dresses I would ask him to present me and what curtains 
and what beddings and what furniture I would ask him to buy me, and 
I would ask ... [for] that three-roomed house on the north of the 
southern court, and how I wanted him to furnish it for me, with so 
many long tables and square tables; and I would ask him to purchase 
some decorations for the tables and I would ask him to buy me a desk 
clock for the centre table and another clock for the side wall; and I 
wanted a gold watch in my jacket, and ... certainly I could not go with-
out a gold bracelet on my arm. 
-
A fictional heroine, dreaming of her lover, 1936 
If people are very poor, they give their daughters only a suit or two of 
clothing when they are married. If they are rich, they give them much 
more than the amount of the betrothal money. 
-
A Chaozhou woman, born about 1830 
It is a truth universally acknowledged that Chinese daughters are 
the byproducts of attempts to produce Chinese sons.' In this chapter, I examine 
the key kinship institutions for those daughters: marriage, along with the ex-
changes of dowry and brideprice that sealed it. I view institutions from the by-
now-familiar double construct of unavoidable TMP constraints and their PCMP 
subversion. 
Marriage was the principal means through which female workers and repro-
ducers were recruited as permanent members of, and workers in, jia. In mar-
1. This does not mean, of course, that Chinese daughters were never loved. The heartbreak of a 
Chinese father on the death of his toddler daughter, expressed in a lament he wrote in 1619, is addi-
tionally poignant, however, because his emotions seemed to him disproportionate -
she was, after 
all, only a very little girl (Ayscough 1938:8- 13). We know, too, that women sometimes prayed for 
daughters (Grap875:453). 
121 
riage as a mechanism for shaping jia, the cultural text is perfectly transparent. 
Marriage was a contract, its conditions written on paper, legally dissoluble only 
by a court (at least of customary elders), with its central economic features ei-
ther written down or clearly recognized in custom. Insofar as law mattered, a 
Chinese marriage could not be formalized without a written document. In the 
words of M. Hue, traveling in 1846, "When the Chinese contracts a lawful mar-
riage, he is perfectly aware that he is forming an indissoluble tie, and the writ-
ten laws of the Empire are in harmony with the general conviction. They 
impose severe punishments on married persons who openly neglect their du-
ties" (1970, 2:227). 
Marriage transferred a woman from dependency on her parents to dependency 
on her parents-in-law and, when he attained his majority through their deaths, on 
her husband. Her reproductive and economic duties were thence to them, though 
certain other rights and duties continued to bind her to her own parents. 
The ideology governing relations among male agnates was necessarily struc-
turally compatible with men's inheriting and using ancestral property on the 
basis of their differing kinship positions. The rules governing women's kinship 
behavior operated very differently. Women had no right to inherit means of pro-
duction, although sometimes women of wealthy families were given the use of 
such property in dowry as special marks of favor (see R. Watson 1984:2, 8). 
Women were temporary members of their natal patricorporations and tenuous 
members of tllose into which they married. They were moved from one jia to an-
other like wrapped packages, veiled and sealed in a carrying chair to symbolize 
their transfer (Waltner 1990:103), after extended negotiations about what goods 
would accompany them or be given in return for them. Qing law made economic 
exchanges necessary to a formal marriage, though it did not specify the nature of 
the goods to be exchanged. Avoiding the devolution of agnatic property to 
daughters automatically enmeshed them in exchange relations as their only 
means to a livelihood under the TMP. 
Relations among affines, and those between a woman herself and her natal 
and marital families, were thus more vulnerable to transformation into market 
transactions than were those among men linked by common property claims. 
Formal, legal rules for marriages existed, appended to those that governed ag-
natic relations, but marriage practice in fact easily slid into something a little like, 
more like, or completely like the negative reciprocity of the market. 
MAJOR MARRIAGE WITH DOWRY (MMD) 
In arranging their daughters' adult careers, Chinese commoners could choose 
among many forms of marriage, as Arthur Wolf and Huang Chieh-shan have 
shown (1980). They identify major marriage as a culturally superior form in 
which the bride had reached the age of majority, had reached menarche, and in 
122 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
which affinal relationships had been established. This form was drawn from legal 
requirements that structured not only elite marriages but also marriages of peas-
ants leading uncommoditized lives in subsistence regions. It assumed no role for 
a woman beyond the production of use values for a husband's household and en-
visioned her primarily as a reproducer for a husband's family. In her natal family, 
she was "spilled water," a cost to her parents for no return beyond the limited 
housework she would do before she married. If a woman was primarily a repro-
ducer and housewife, not a potential source of ancestral property through land 
transfers or money earnings, a daughter would be reared to adulthood because 
she was useless to another family until then. She had to be married out, and 
promptly after puberty, as otherwise she might have borne children who could 
rob the true owners of their resources. 
Never a co-owner of her natal jia's means of production (Shiga 1978:110 ), a 
daughter nevertheless had customary protections, derived from the ideology 
that supported an uncommoditized, tributary, political economy. The most 
fundamental of the daughter's protections was her right to be married and thus 
to come eventually to membership as a mother in another patricorporation. 
Even a little slave was sold with the understanding that she would be married 
off at a reasonable age to an appropriate man by her own parents or new 
guardian/parent/owner. In the 1930s a father disposing of a baby girl by setting 
her afloat in a river near Jiaomei, Fujian, included her astrological "eight char-
acters," necessary for proper matchmaking (A. Wolf 1980 fieldnotes). A young 
woman would, if possible, marry into a family of equal or slightly better condi-
tion than her own, to prevent stress in an already delicate relationship between 
the two households and to assure reasonable treatment for her. Elaborate 
horoscopy, go-betweens, and gossip grapevines assured this outcome. Once 
married, she had the right to be secure from divorce without cause. "Eternal life 
through sacrifice is guaranteed to a woman through marriage," according to 
Shiga (1978:127). 
Another important protection for daughters was the dowry of consumables, 
especially the furniture, bedding, and clothing she would need in her new home. 
Although marriage was legally contracted by the bride's family's acceptance of 
betrothal gifts from the groom's family, a bride was given dignity by contribu-
tions from her birth family to her husband's. The flavor of the exchange appears 
in an account of a wealthy Macao bride in the late nineteenth century. Her fam-
ily having inadvertently omitted the firewood to cook her husband's first meals 
which the dowry should have included, the bride haughtily boiled his rice by 
burning two rolls of silk, refusing her mother-in-law's good-natured offer of 
fuel. Her father, extremely pleased that she had so dramatically saved his repu-
tation, then sent one hundred coolies with firewood to his daughter's new 
home, more than the house could hold (Menpes 1909:17). Without her dowry, a 
bride ran the risk of being told she came as a beggar, stealing resources for her 
Dowry and Brideprice : 123 
own upkeep from a husband's family. That family had only a very ambiguous re-
sponsibility for her until she bore them children and thus earned some eco-
nomic rights in their patricorporation, of which she initially was only a 
potential member (e.g. Sa 1985:292). A bride arriving without a dowry might not 
have the wherewithal to live comfortably in a household where anything she was 
given might legitimately be grudged a nonagnate. A detail in the customs sur-
rounding the delayed transfer marriage, in which the "bride-daughter" is mar-
ried but still lives apart from her husband and parents-in-law, is revealing. In the 
1920s, one such bride, retaining the independence her earnings gave her, refused, 
on her brief visits to her mother-in-law's house, to eat or drink anything pro-
vided there. She brought all necessary provisions for herself (Stockard 1989:19 ). 
Until she began to fulfill her sexual duties, to eat her parents-in-law's food was 
inappropriate in tributary terms. Her refusal was a powerful ritual statement in 
her petty-capitalist-inspired negotiations with them over her labor power. 
Throughout China, without a dowry, a bride brought only her body, which, 
until it had done its reproductive job, had uncertain value. The simple dowry of 
consumables which many brides received conveyed an extremely mixed message 
about a woman's worth. 
Marriage ceremonies were to be carried out with some at least of the custom-
ary symbolism, public display of the bride and her dowry, and socially validating 
feasts. Although tributary logic encouraged parents to provide a dowry, when 
they did not do so the daughter was not wronged. Dowry was a gift, not a right 
or an inheritance (Graham 1961:129; McCreery 1976:164; Shiga 1978:n8, 147 ), and 
it almost never contained means of production, which rightfully belonged to 
men. If a dowry was not given, she had no legal case -
unlike a disinherited son 
-
although she might complain loudly about its lack or limitations in bridal 
laments (Xie Zhimin 1991, 2:774-79). Her likelihood of receiving dowry varied 
readily according to outside pressures, including the local level of commoditiza-
tion of the economy. 
What I label "major marriage with dowry" -
MMD -
was universally 
known and widely practiced in China. It was the sanctioned form of the scholar-
official class, and a prestigious and frequent alternative among Chinese every-
where. It was the form most compatible with the tributary principle that each 
person's rights in the political economy were determined by social status. It al-
lows as well for the affection for daughters that receives little recognition in Con-
fucian allocations of household resources. Most studies of Chinese kinship take 
MMD to be Chinese marriage. 
But it was not. Under the influence of petty-capitalist possibilities for the 
commoditization of women and their work, many tributary rights of women 
were abrogated, and other patterns of marital relationship emerged. The per-
manence of marriage was seriously undermined when a woman did not bear 
children, for example. In strongly petty-capitalist regions, many childless 
124 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A 
S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
women were repudiated by their husbands' families. In north Taiwan in the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, of childless women married in the 
major fashion, 20 percent were divorced by the end of fourteen years of mar-
riage, and 23 percent after twenty-five years. For women married out in the 
minor fashion -
that is, in infancy or childhood -
47 percent were divorced 
after fourteen years of marriage, and 56 percent after twenty-five years. In this 
region, even the production of children did not gain a woman a secure place in 
her marital family. A north Taiwan woman who had borne two children by her 
twenty-fifth year of marriage had a cumulative probability of divorce of nearly 
10 percent for major marriages, and nearly 20 percent for minor marriages (A. 
Wolf 1995: chap. 8). 
This same region gives us evidence for how parents ignored the tributary 
ideal that girls should be married after menarche, as young adults, because par-
ents were responsible for rearing them in childhood. Like dowry, brideprice, and 
the form of marriage, the woman's age at marriage might also be negotiated, 
rather than being fixed at early adulthood as TMP logic would require. In the 
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the great majority of girls in one 
Taiwan region were married out in infancy to live with in-laws (Wolf and Huang 
1980:233). 
Age at marriage (or disposal) was especially sensitive to calculations of how 
much it would cost to rear a girl if she was seen as simply a consumer in the 
household, and of the opportunity costs of marrying her too early if the local 
labor market enabled her to earn income for the household. Women in the 
highly commoditized countryside near Shaoxing, Zhejiang, were "bride-
priced" at so many yuan per sui (year) of their age at engagement; the cost var-
ied from 4 to 10 yuan per sui. In northern Fujian in the early twentieth 
century, slave girls were sold at rates varying with the price of rice, and valued 
by age (Darley 1917:62-63). A ]iangsu woman who eloped in the 1980s was told 
by her father that "if she did not return home, she would have to pay her fam-
ily a lump sum of fifteen yuan for each month of the eighteen years she had 
lived with them" (Honig and Hershatter 1988:287). In Shandong, where 
women's labor had little cash value, brideprices suffered marked decline after 
women passed their early twenties, however; in the absence of suitable in-
come-producing work, these women's only value lay in their probable fertility 
(A. Wolf 1980-81 fieldnotes). 
The TMP preference for "matching doors;' or economically equal households, 
for a marital pair was also readily ignored -
to the detriment of women -
where girls were highly commoditized. I have encountered several old Taiwanese 
women from rich families who had been married off as infants to a carpenter, a 
small farmer, and a wetnurse's household. In early-twentieth-century north Tai-
wan, where the TMP played so minimal a role, wealth gave sufficient prestige; 
one did not need to waste money rearing and dowering daughters. 
Dowry and Brideprice 
125 
MAJOR MARRIAGE WITH BRIDEPRICE (MMB) 
Under petty-capitalist influence, marriage forms became extremely variable, 
sometimes as historically fleeting phenomena, sometimes as enduring patterns. 
Many women in late-imperial China were married in ways that deviated signifi-
cantly from MMD, often in economic circumstances that allowed for some 
parental choice. Although the customary major-marriage symbolism of bridal 
clothing, sedan chairs, and so forth may well have been provided, the financial 
transactions that lay behind them were more varied than appearances implied. 
Some families sold a daughter outright or married her in childhood, or provided 
little or no dowry out of their own resources, or brought the son-in-law to live 
with them in the uxorilocal form. MMD stood in opposition not to a single non-
major category but to a wide range of marriage practices found in many parts of 
China. Major marriage takes two forms, or combinations of them, with nearly 
opposite economic consequences for the two households: the dowry form and 
the brideprice form. Let us label the latter MMB. 
In MMD the bride's family expends its own resources on the dowry. Tainan 
people, who still give large dowries, say that "marrying out a daughter is like hav-
ing your house robbed." In MMB, by contrast, most or all of the marriage ex-
penses are borne by the groom's family. The bride's family may keep part or all of 
the brideprice; if there is a trousseau of clothing and household goods, it is all or 
largely purchased with funds supplied by the groom's family. Although such mar-
riages are solemnized in rituals essentially identical to those of MMD, the mate-
rial consequences for bride, groom, and their households are markedly different. 
A classical MMD marriage is costly for the bride's parents. They may supply the 
bride's trousseau and all the household goods for the new couple, or may add 
substantially to what the groom's family will give them. In MMD, the bride's par-
ents are not compensated for their expenditure on dowry, and the cost to the 
groom's family is less. 
MMB, in which the trousseau is all or largely paid for by the groom's family, 
is more common than MMD, now as in the past. Demands for large gifts by the 
bride's side, even though all these gifts usually return with the bride to her hus-
band's home, may plunge the husband, his household, and thus the bride her-
self into a morass of debt, for the repayment of which the bride is now also 
liable (Honig and Hershatter 1988:149). One may say- and sometimes Chi-
nese people do say -
that MMB is much like selling a daughter or buying a 
daughter-in-law. 
MMD and MMB can also be described as the marriage forms associated with 
direct and indirect dowry, which I discuss in the next section. Between these ex-
tremes lies a more-or-less-balanced exchange in which both sides contribute to 
the dowry the bride brings her to her husband's home. Sometimes a woman's 
parents explicitly match the brideprice with an equal sum. 
126: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
Wolf and Huang have drawn attention to two other marriage variants in 
north Taiwan between 1845 and 1945 (1980). One of these was uxorilocal mar-
riage, in which a son-in-law entered an heirless household, agreed that his chil-
dren (or some of them) would bear his wife's father's surname, and might even 
take the name himself. Uxorilocal marriage was widely known in China as a 
crisis strategy for sonless households and propertyless men. As an obvious so-
lution to serious domestic difficulties, it was relatively common in some re-
gions, reaching almost 40 percent of all marriages, for example, in parts of 
southern Taiwan early in this century (Pasternak 1985b:315). In regions where 
the PCMP was weak, uxorilocality was sharply restricted by agnates of the po-
tential bride's father, who refused permission for unrelated men to lay claim 
through marriage to property over which they had residual claims. The posi-
tion of a wife in such a marriage was markedly different from that of a woman 
married in major fashion. She had the power, with the agreement of her par-
ents, to push out the husband after he has fulfilled his reproductive function. 
Where it is permitted at all, uxorilocal marriage reveals a set of implicit under-
standings quite different from those of the TMP -
that property relations, not 
generation and gender, determine the distribution of power in Chinese fami-
lies; that agnatic principle is in fact negotiable for a family with the property to 
attract a son-in-law; that wife/husband and in-law relationships are reversed 
when women are the links to property. 
The second of Wolf and Huang's marriage variants was "minor marriage:' In 
north Taiwan, a region of explosive nineteenth-century commoditization in 
which labor-intensive tea growing played a large part, 74 percent of girl babies 
were adopted out shortly after birth to be raised as daughters-in-law in their fu-
ture husbands' households (1980:233), and So percent actually entered such mar-
riages (196). Wealthy families as well as poor, landlords along with laborers 
arranged such marriages for their sons (263-65; Sa 1985). Minor marriage was a 
normative, socially acceptable alternative to major, the latter often only a house-
hold's second choice when attempts at arranging a minor marriage failed. Minor 
marriage was a form common as well in many parts of the China mainland, 
sometimes as the despised last resort of the impoverished, but sometimes cultur-
ally well accepted (Wolf and Huang 1980:255, 2-8). Minor marriage carried 
parental authority to a hypertrophied extreme at the expense of young people, 
especially girls. It expanded with the sudden growth of demand for young labor 
during the nineteenth-century tea and camphor boom and rapidly contracted as 
Japanese rule altered the local political economy. The coincidence suggests that 
parents were highly responsive to market conditions, using their power to over-
ride major-marriage protections for women. 
Another Chinese marriage variant became for a time a fully accepted regional 
pattern, practiced by rich and poor alike (Gray 1878, 1:207-8; Topley 1975; Sankar 
1978; Jaschok 1984; Stockard 1989). It was glimpsed by the perceptive M. Hue in 
Dowry and Brideprice : 
127 
the silk and cotton districts, where daughters were allowed to live with their natal 
families, and parents were "even unwilling to see them marry and enter another 
family" (1970, 2:347-48). 
This form, which Janice Stockard has called "delayed transfer marriage" is best 
known as it existed in the silk-growing Canton or Pearl River delta. Young 
women, their hands not yet roughened by the harsh domestic tasks of wives, 
which included cutting silkworm fodder, earned good wages reeling silk in late-
nineteenth-century Guangzhou. With the encouragement of peers and parents, 
the reluctant agreement of parents-in-law, and the no doubt increasingly surly 
tolerance of their husbands, silk reelers married in major fashion and promptly 
returned to their parents' bed and board. By various stratagems, they evaded sex-
ual intercourse and pregnancy for up to six years before transferring to their mar-
ital homes and bearing children. Some women refused transfer altogether, 
purchasing substitutes to meet their childbearing obligations and thus ensuring 
them ancestral status. As with Taiwanese minor marriages, we see that marriage 
forms were most negotiable where the PCMP was strong. 
MARRIAGE AS SALE 
In the nineteenth century Arthur H. Smith wrote that "there are regions in 
northern China where the money extracted from the family of the future bride-
groom is so considerable, that what remains after the real bridal outfit has been 
purchased is a positive source of profit to the fathers" (1899:270-71). This com-
ment, by a man extremely familiar with Chinese life, and describing an area 
where women were more protected against market manipulation in normal 
times than in most of China, must be attended to. Yet the most contentious 
issue to confront the analyst of Chinese marriage is the question of whether 
"marriage" was ever the same as "sale" in that society. Following the arguments 
developed for the understanding of marriage exchanges in many African soci-
eties, Jack Goody has consistently denied that this is so (1973, 1990:30 ). Other 
anthropologists who draw primarily on examples from nonmarket societies 
also deny that the giving of brideprice for a woman constitutes a sale. Conrad 
Kottak thinks "the term 'brideprice' is unfortunate, since it suggests that the 
wife is being sold. In most [African] societies with bridewealth institutions, 
people do not regard the transfer of such wealth as a sale. Certainly they do not 
think of marriage as a relationship between a man and an object that can be 
bought and sold" (1974: 134); while Marvin Harris has commented that, for 
African societies, "the exchange of women is not equivalent to the selling and 
buying of automobiles or refrigerators in Euro-American price-market soci-
eties. The wife receivers do not own their woman in any total sense; they must 
take good care of her or her brothers and 'fathers' will demand that she be re-
turned to them" (1971:279-80). Goody makes similar arguments, which are fur-
128: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
ther complicated by discussion of the effects of dowry and prestige (see also 
Harrell and Dickey 1985). These are, of course, relevant to marriage perceived 
in a tributary context, but they do not preclude the commoditization of mar-
riage in the Chinese case. 
Chinese people freely use the terms "buy" and "sell" in reference to marriage 
arrangements, and not as metaphors. In the very recent past, women seem to 
have been owned in something very close to "a total sense:' The only universally 
recognized legal and customary right men retained over a married female agnate 
was the posthumous protest of her suicide or early death due to mistreatment. 
Fathers and brothers certainly did not demand the return of ill-treated daughters 
and sisters, 2 or offer them significant protection during life. As Maurice Freed-
man has remarked, "there is a general lack of definition in Chinese society of the 
norms governing relations between ... a married woman and her agnates" 
(1979:271). And China, unlike the African examples on which Goody and Kottak 
rely, was a "price-market society" in which, as studies of slavery and adoption 
clearly demonstrate, there was and is a well-developed market for the sale of per-
sons (Gates 1995). 
Even a bought person remains a person, with some rights and capacities that 
no nonhuman creature or object has; women are not, and have not been, pure 
commodities in Chinese society. But in everyday speech and to a very great 
degree in common fact, women could be "bought" and "sold;' with even adult 
marriages requiring money transactions. Under petty-capitalist (or capitalist) 
conditions, the money that symbolized female reproductivity could become a 
price, and woman a purchase. From the point of view of the girl's patricorpora-
tion, a daughter sold had been disposed of so that she was no longer a drain on 
its resources and indeed added to them through her purchase price. Her position 
-
and theirs -
was not as grand as if she had been married for a brideprice, but 
then this marriage, in turn, was not as honorable as marriage with dowry. There 
were choices. 
During the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, evidence abounds 
that sale was one end of a continuum of transactions in women. I note R. F. 
Johnston's cheerful description of men in Weihaiwei who had a friend buy them 
brides in Beijing (1910:211-13); Gray's account of recalcitrant nuns officially sold 
to men who otherwise could not afford wives (1875:586; see also 567); Robert 
Coltman's detailed account of a "just judge" in Qinan who in the early 1870s 
closed all the local houses of prostitution, arrested the prostitutes, and sold them 
by weight at the day's market price per catty of pork to unmarried farmers as 
wives (1891:116-18). A Sichuan father wanted to betroth his daughter "where they 
2. It is always a pleasure to find exceptions to such harsh generalizations. I learned recently of a 
family in 1920s Sichuan who retrieved their married daughter from a mother-in-law who bound the 
woman's waist to keep her from eating heartily. 
Dowry and Brideprice 
129 
could get the most money;' but conveniently died, leaving the transaction to her 
kinder-hearted brothers, who said, "Let our sister be happy, even if the money is 
less" (Mrs. A. Little [1898]:101).3 Another Sichuan resident, considering buying a 
wife from his home province, "discussed the matter in very businesslike style 
with [Mrs. Little's] husband. 'I can get a wife in Szechuan for ten dollars,' he said. 
'But, then, I can know nothing about her family and habits, as I could if I took a 
wife from Hupeh .... It is true there I should have to pay more .... Now, if I find 
after marriage that the woman I have chosen smokes opium, there will be my ten 
dollars gone, and nothing to show for them" (Little [1898]:129). In Shandong, 
"the plain-speaking peasants ... will talk of buying and selling their wives and 
daughters in much the same way as they would talk of dealing in farm produce at 
the neighbouring market" (Johnston 1910:208 ). Sale of women to other men to be 
wives was a Qing-code punishment for adulterous women, the purchase price 
going to the state (Staunton 1810:307, 404). Little girls adopted (or "sold") into 
minor marriage in northern Taiwan, for example, often were resold to other men 
as brides when the needs of their fostering families changed (Wolf and Huang 
1980:114-15). One of the most common metaphors in rural Taiwan for marriage 
is the "pig taken to market" -
and pigs were the market animal par excellence, 
raised as one of an ordinary family's sole annual sources of cash.4 
Taiwan has offered me many opportunities to discuss marriage by purchase 
with participants in and observers of such a system. When the Guomindang 
brought nearly two million people, mostly men without families, to Taiwan be-
tween 1945 and 1950, the six million native Taiwanese were under severe eco-
nomic pressure to provide some of them with brides. Many parents succumbed 
to this pressure in the first decades of Guomindang rule. While most women 
married in such a way are embarrassed to admit having been sold, some are an-
grily or tearfully forthright about it. "Father sold me to him and gave me nothing 
out of the brideprice: not a dress, not a storage chest, not a coin. It was as though 
I were a pig in the market," said one woman bitterly. Other Taiwanese women 
who were married to Mainlander men in those years hasten to specify that theirs 
was not a "buy/sell" marriage. In the late 196os in working-class Taibei neighbor-
hoods, people used the word "to buy" as a near synonym for the term for a man 
marrying, and it is still much used today by people with no pretensions. Even 
when local women married other Taiwanese, the husband's money gift to the 
bride's family outweighed whatever money and goods might return to him with 
the bride. In north Taiwan, unlike the dowry-heavy south, it was assumed that 
getting a daughter-in-law was costly, and disposing of a daughter might bring in 
a little something. 
3· Brothers, unlike fathers, had to have a woman's consent to marry her off (Commeaux 1970:188). 
Let us believe that the quoted brothers were simply rather nice. 
4. I thank Arthur Wolf for referring me to this bucolic trope. 
130 
: 
C H 
I N A 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
In some parts of China "marriage by capture" was a variant in which parties 
to the arrangement sought to avoid customary costs. It sometimes involved direct 
sale, although it often occurred after secret negotiations between the couple's kin 
seniors. A party of the groom's relatives ambushed the bride-elect and carried her 
off. That this move forestalled protests by the bride is a rare hint that an assertive 
daughter might indeed have had a say in her own disposition -
and saved the 
cost of dowry for the bride's family, as in an example from Zhejiang. Or the cap-
ture might simply have been an abduction, not agreed to by the bride's family, 
but accomplished by the groom's to avoid the payment of brideprice (A. Wolf 
1980 ). Instead of sale, we see robbery compounded with rape. The existence of 
local terms for these practices (including those in Sichuan, according to my in-
formants) indicates that they were well known. 
Hsu Chang-ming examined marriage transactions as recorded by reforming 
Chinese Communist party cadres in the Shaan-Gan-Ning Border Area in 1946, 
where the local sex ratio was 135 males to 100 females. She distinguished between 
outright sales of women and an exchange pattern in which the groom's family's 
presents were not counterbalanced by an equivalent dowry and excluded cases of 
pure sale. She then described cases of brideprice-only exchange as follows: 
In 1939, a rich peasant could buy his son a wife for 64 yuan, which was more 
than a year's income for a shepherd (about 45 yuan). Two years later, the cost 
of a bride reached 50 to 200 yuan, and by 1942, woo to 8ooo yuan. The fact 
that a correlation existed between the bride's price and her ability to work 
could be seen in the differing sums attained in 1942, a year in which a seven 
year old girl could be bought for as little as 700 yuan, while a girl in her teens 
fetched twice that amount, and a widow could be purchased for 3000 yuan. 
(1984:15) 5 
Gradations in marriage exchanges make Chinese marriage especially difficult 
to conceptualize as a single class of event. Attempts to define it for legal purposes, 
as in the setting up of law codes for an independent Singapore, proved difficult 
and frustrating for such an expert as Freedman (1950:98-112; 1979), especially in 
regard to the question of bought wives. In 1948, a Hong Kong's Governor's Com-
mittee Report observed, "There has probably been more controversy about the 
exact relationship and position of the tsip [purchased, secondary wife- H. G.] 
and the way such relationship may be constituted than there has been about any 
other sphere of Chinese law and custom (1953:22). Although some tsip were 
"from a very much lower social stratum than the tsai [primary wife- H.G.], ... 
treated like a handmaiden and ... subject to commands ... of the husband's 
mother;' some "came from approximately the same social class ... [and thus] 
5· For lists of girl children simply sold into slavery in early-twentieth-century Guangzhou, see 
Jaschok 1988:145-46. 
Dowry and Brideprice 
131 
could more readily enforce her rights." Basing its conclusions on Chinese cultural 
expectations, the report stated that a tsip "is in law considered a wife, a secondary 
or inferior wife it is true, ... but nevertheless a wife and not a kept mistress" and 
that her children are legitimate. Many women who were not polygynously mar-
ried became daughters-in-law and mothers of legitimate children and thus, pre-
sumably, wives, after being taken with "no ceremony ... required at aU;' such 
unions being "purely a matter of bargain and sale" (1953:23, 24, 25, 22). 
Maria Jaschok's poignant histories of Guangdong-area mooi-jai (female 
bondslaves) living under the most extreme petty-capitalist conditions show pur-
chased slaves bearing their master's children, and sometimes being made tsip, at 
his whim (1988:38-39, 57, 95). Robert Shaw's interviews with women who had 
been bondservant-wives in prerevolution Xiamen reiterate these points in all 
their human tragedy (1994). The "real" status of bought "servant/daughters" has 
created much conceptual difficulty for outsiders attempting to make sharp (and 
inappropriate) distinctions between women as kin and women as property. A 
mooi-jai might be incorporated into a household as an inferior sort of daughter, 
or simply used until it was convenient to resell her at a profit (Jaschok 1988:76, 
83-84, 99, 125n. 33). Much the same could be said for Taiwanese baby daughters-
in-law (simpua), slave girls (cabokan) (Wolf and Huang 1980:114-17), or, indeed, 
for any girl child. As Jaschok says, "Options for making profit out of daughters 
were manifold" ( 1988:7 ). Petty-capitalist mentality and practicality were absorbed 
even by women themselves. Jaschok describes a young woman in desperate 
poverty absolutely insisting that her father sell her to give him the cash to start a 
new life, while at the same time giving her the easier existence as a house servant 
with regular meals (54). The sliding scale of negotiations on which their lives 
were measured show us the range of marital possibilities for women, from the 
misery of slavery or prostitution through various versions of marriage to the self-
respect of the rare self-supporting delayed-transfer bride-daughters. 
Can we draw sharp lines between the marriages of the formally clad, dowered 
bride in her sedan chair "going to her mother-in-law," the bought maidservant, 
resold to a suitable workingman after her years of service, and the girl sold from 
Henan to Shanxi by her famine-stricken parents? Can we, with such lines, ex-
clude the sale of women from an analysis of marriage? I think not. For this analy-
sis, it is not necessary to depend on the "exceptional," if not unusual, cases of 
daughters sold in times of disaster, for boys too were sold at such times, though 
more reluctantly, less often, and for higher prices. I examine the ordinary choices 
of more ordinary times, when parents might have seen daughters either as infe-
rior but "real" family members entitled to childhood care and a suitable marital 
sendoff, or as the patricorporation's negotiable assets. In making these choices, 
Chinese people often were guided by two contradictory models of good behavior. 
That one was a little better than the other was accepted; each followed a different 
economic logic to a different conclusion. 
132 
: 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
There was no single PCMP model of marriage. Petty capitalism generated va-
riety in marriage forms, which are the most easily recovered evidence for differ-
ing uses of young people's labor. In several of the forms discussed above, the logic 
of the market is clearly apparent. Observing Chinese kinship from a gendered 
political-economic perspective suggests that such variation derived from engage-
ment in market/contractual relations rather than in tributary/inheritance rela-
tions. Where petty capitalism was especially strong, we should expect to see 
women's labor and persons treated differently and to find ramifications of this 
difference affecting regional kinship customs. We also expect to see considerable 
effort by the state to constrain such variation away from full independence by 
women and young men. These efforts should have succeeded best where markets 
did not flourish, or where they did, but were overshadowed by abundant flows of 
tributary resources, as in capital cities and other regions of high government 
spending. 
As research on women in China continues, we may expect to see more mar-
riage variants, and these should conform to the arguments made here. I should 
be surprised to learn, for example, of a region of China where neolocal residence 
with last son as sole heir was the norm, but not of an exaggeration of delayed 
transfer marriage where a substantial period of bride service preceded an even-
tual patrivirilocal residence pattern. The former could not stand against legal 
claims made by elder brothers; the latter would be a matter of how long the 
groom's family could afford to do without his services under a given male-female 
labor market. 
DOWRY AND BRIDEPRICE 
Eleanor Leacock contrasts societies in which "women move back and forth 
as valued people creating, recreating, and cementing networks of reciprocal 
relations through their moves, which are recompensed for with bride price" 
with those "in which a woman's role is primarily to provide household services 
for her husband and his family, and in which bride price takes the form of 
purchase rather than exchange .... A further difference appears when the flow 
of significant wealth reverses and marriage calls for dowry rather than bride 
price" (1977:258-59 ). Less striking than variation in marriage forms, but also 
puzzling, is the variation observed across China in the giving of dowry and of 
brideprice. In the complex connection between these fundamentally contra-
dictory marital exchanges lies the clearest expression of a model of kinship 
behavior in which persons -
especially women -
seem to become com-
modities. 
An important and well-known discussion of the brideprice/dowry conun-
drum is to be found in 1973 essays by Jack Goody and Stanley Tambiah. In 1990, 
Goody returns to this theme. His new section on China, while much expanded in 
Dowry and Brideprice : 
133 
scope and replete with insights into the Chinese system in comparative perspec-
tive, depends ultimately on his earlier arguments about the nature of dowry and 
brideprice. 
In their 1973 essays, Goody and Tambiah agree that what they prefer to call 
bridewealth and dowry are not opposites or mirror images. They are mecha-
nisms for the transfer of wealth which have different implications both for those 
immediately involved and for wider social relations. By emphasizing examples of 
non-state African societies in his discussion of bridewealth, Goody stresses the 
egalitarian and redistributive functions of the transfer: "Bridewealth passes from 
the kin of the groom to those of the bride; it forms a societal fund, a circulating 
pool of resources, the movement of which corresponds to the movement of 
rights over spouses, usually women" ( 17). Bridewealth commonly takes the form 
of "a distinct set of objects which circulate in their own cycle" (18), such as cattle. 
For his arguments on bridewealth to make sense, the goods given must indeed 
have restricted circulation, usable only for such transactions. 
In China, however, brideprice is frequently paid in that most flexible of ex-
change media, money. Money does not flow only in circuits of spouse exchange. 
It can be, and is, used for anything: spent to educate the husband's brothers, put 
into land, paid out as a debt, used as capital to start a business. Women in con-
temporary Taibei and Chengdu have mentioned all these as uses to which their 
brideprices have been put. 
Tambiah recognizes that in south Asian societies bridewealth sometimes has 
"a distinct flavour of 'purchasing' women;' and he discusses other salelike mar-
riage transactions that increase among categories of people deeply involved in the 
commodity economy (1973:64, 62-63, 70 ). China resembles India in this respect. 
In neither is the term brideprice inappropriate, nor does its operation conduce to 
egalitarian relations and circulating social funds. Dowry, common in south Asia, 
has the societal effect of concentrating wealth and widening the gap between rich 
and poor (Goody and Tambiah 1973=19, 64-65). 
Goody and Tambiah also see dowry as a part of a women's property complex 
in which resources come to rest in the hands of the bride, usually under the con-
trol of her husband, as the nucleus of a separate conjugal fund within the wider 
kin group (J. Goody 1973:17, 1990; Tambiah 1973:63). Goody specifically analyzes 
Chinese marriage as an example of diverging devolution in which resources 
from both sets of parents become the economic support of new couples 
(1990:36). Emphasizing intergenerational transfer, Goody and Tambiah merge 
the resources given to a bride by her parents -
dowry proper -
and resources 
given to the bride by her new parents-in-law (or husband) via her parents-
the so-called mdirect dowry. This concept of gift giving very nearly erases the 
question of which kin group gains materially, and which loses. The question, 
however, is central to an understanding of how women are viewed both cultur-
ally and analytically. 
134 
: 
C H I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Goody and Tambiah argue that dowry -
direct and indirect together -
is a 
form of premortem inheritance (J. Goody 1973=1, 17; Tambiah 1973:64). But only 
dowry proper can be considered to be a woman's inheritance and hence a part of 
a woman's property complex; resources given by the groom's kin (indirect 
dowry) cannot. A woman whose husband's brideprice has bought her dowry 
stands on very different ground in his family from one who has brought her own, 
at no cost to them. Also, dowries rarely contain the fundamental productive 
wealth -
means of production -
except for money in the form of gold jewelry 
(R. Watson 1984:8); dowries are primarily made up of consumables. In the Chi-
nese case, the idea of dowry as inheritance for women is difficult to support. 
Tambiah cites Maurice Freedman to the effect that "in China both brideprice 
and dowry occur together: a brideprice is received for a woman who also takes a 
dowry ... with her ... some or all of which may have been paid for out of the 
brideprice received for her" (71-72). Goody, in both his 1973 and 1990 studies, 
makes the conflation of dowry and brideprice the key to his analysis and gives the 
impression that Chinese "dowries" are usually of the indirect sort. Reality is both 
more flexible and more interesting. Marriage exchanges in China exhibit more, 
and more regular variation than Goody's argument can account for. His efforts at 
disentangling China's enormous class and regional variability in these matters do 
little to clarify matters. 6 
6. Goody deals with the hierarchical and the regional variations. He begins with the assumption 
that "for pre-industrial times, the differences in the Asian and the European structures and organisa-
tion of marriage and the family fell within a specific range of variation that is generally consistent 
with their roughly similar forms of productive activity based on Bronze Age developments" (1990:1). 
Put differently, the Chinese social formation (like the European and Indian, but unlike the African) 
was organized by a tributary mode of production. Drawing on Maurice Freedman, but avoiding his 
fundamentally materialist use of "class;' Goody recognizes the significance of social hierarchy, but in 
the most neutral way possible. Throughout his analysis of China, people and groups are described 
sometimes as "strata" (e.g. 101), but usually as "upper" and "lower" people, groups, and lineages that 
manifest "high" and "low" "trends" (98, 104). These spatial metaphors, utterly without theoretical 
content, are all Goody offers to link marriage and family variations to the political economy that 
differentiates Chinese from Africans. 
Regional variation is hardly better served. Goody relies heavily on a grand distinction between 
north and south China, and offers an evasive explanation: "What is it that tends to make upper 
groups generally more like the North and lower groups more like the South? The practices prevalent 
in the North and among upper groups are closer to Confucian norms, that is, closer to those of the 
original core of Han culture, Confucian and nco-Confucian, of the more recent centres in the South, 
and closer to the norms contained in the written (Confucian) works which formed the basis of 
schooling for those who were privileged to attend. This distribution is understandable since the 
North is the original home of Han society, but of course the great cities, and even the smaller towns, 
any centres of literate culture were also centres of Han culture and of Confucian learning, whether in 
the South or in the North. And it was of course the upper groups in the South ... who were more 
likely to follow the patterns of the North whereas the lower groups were attached to local ways of 
Dowry and Brideprice : 
135 
Such variability may in some sense be regional, but it is temporal as well, with 
marriage customs altering rapidly when changing political-economic environ-
ments shift the pressures. Rita Gallin describes the Xinxing villagers of Taiwan, 
whom she has observed over several decades. In the late 1950s, 
the cost of the dowry was supplied by the groom's family who provided a 
brideprice which was, in turn, used to purchase the dowry. Although some 
families might augment the brideprice by buying a larger dowry than covered 
by the money received, most did not. Some families even sent a dowry that 
was smaller in value than the brideprice received (B. Gallin 1966:208) .... In 
the 1970s, however, the cost of a dowry weighed much more heavily on the 
bride's family than the groom's. As one woman said, "Today people not only 
do not keep the brideprice, but they add things to the bride's dowry." (R. 
Gallin and B. Gallin 1987:27n-4, 7) 
From MMD through MMB to simple sale are two ends and a middle point 
of a spectrum of marriage exchanges that are the logical outcomes of the in-
fluence of commoditization working within TMP constraints. Local marriage 
customs locatable at some point along this spectrum are outcomes of the inter-
action of choices to act according to one or the other of the two modes of pro-
duction. In regions experiencing rapid change in the previously existing 
balance between the two modes, negotiations within and between households 
may well follow no fixed "traditional" pattern but produce many options. Spe-
cial local circumstances affecting this range of possibilities have generated 
minor and delayed transfer marriage and perhaps others as well, as yet unstud-
ied. MMD is the ruling-class model, and any household using it may always 
safely claim high status. Locally, however, the advantages to be gained from 
making petty-capitalist marriage choices may outweigh the worth of that 
claim. Except among officials' households, class is not the factor that explains 
the existence and distribution of Chinese marriage variants; local articulation 
of two modes of production is. 
doing things. Part of the convergence was, I have argued, due to similar socio-economic conditions, 
part due to the advent of immigrants and the power and prestige of the colonisers. But a major part 
was due to the influence of the state and Confucian ideology mediated by the educational system" 
(109-10). Goody hardly mentions the role of the state; "socio-economic conditions" are usually 
"wealth" or "poverty;' occasionally "rural" or "urban."The class link to the economy is denatured out 
of existence. In his insistence on avoiding the "crude reduction to market activities favoured by some 
economists and anthropologists" (129), he abandons the influence both of market and nonmarket 
modes of production on family and marriage in favor of an ideology that some people could afford, 
while others could not. Goody thus leaves readers unversed in Chinese data with a misleading im-
pression of uniformity by brushing aside (as politically incorrect?) abundant evidence for the market-
like nature of many Chinese marriage exchanges. 
136 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
THE DISTRIBUTION OF MARRIAGE EXCHANGES 
How are these variants distributed? Although the available data are inade-
quate, it is possible to demonstrate a congruence between patterns of marriage 
exchanges and different combinations of the two modes of production. To illus-
trate these patterns, I draw on three sets of data: my own, collected in 1986 and 
1988 from two hundred small-business women in Taibei and Chengdu; notes on 
several hundred interviews on kinship with older rural/suburban women in 
seven Chinese locales in 1980-81 (the notes were generously lent to me by Arthur 
P. Wolf); and the information on wedding expenses from J. Lossing Buck's 
China-wide surveys o£1929-33. Wolf's data (taken from women who in 1980-81 
were over fifty-nine years of age), and Buck's represent mainland China during 
the 1930s and earlier. My own range from as early as that time until the present. 
We may better understand the distribution of marriage exchanges by begin-
ning with a comparison between Chengdu marriages, where prerevolution cus-
tom and recent experience have made tributary relations particularly salient, and 
those of Taibei, where booming markets have long made marriage highly nego-
tiable. I begin by contrasting a sketch of prerevolution and current Chengdu 
marriages with my much fuller knowledge of marriage transactions in Taibei 
over the same period. 
Prerevolution Chengdu gifts from grooms' families to brides' were mostly im-
mediately consumable luxury foods -
notably pork and candy, along with 
clothing and small gifts of jewelry to brides. When money brideprice was given in 
Chengdu, money returned in dowry was often more or less than the brideprice, 
in about equal proportion. Dowry was mostly made up of household furnishings 
and of clothing and jewelry for the bride. There was no institutionalization of a 
separate "price" for the bride's body which remained in her parents' hands, and 
virtually no point in the transaction when her parents might hold back money 
for their own use. Brides were often given small sums of money tucked into their 
trousseau chests for its symbolic value; and their jewelry had at least limited pro-
tection against parents-in-law's desire to pool resources. 
Chengdu prerevolutionary marriage exchanges well exemplify the tributary 
extreme, MMD, in which a daughter receives a dowry supplied primarily by her 
parents, and in which betrothal presents from the groom's family to the bride's 
parents are immediately consumable, not easily converted into capital. Marriage 
exchanges since the revolution have necessarily responded to shifts in the politi-
cal wind. In the 1980s, during the decade of economic reform, they have con-
formed to the pattern now typical in Chinese cities of substantial indirect 
dowries (brideprice) supplemented, in some households, by dowry from the 
bride's parents and almost always by goods purchased by the new couple from 
their own savings. In this Chengdu class fraction, the change from the strongly 
TMP pattern of the past to what Emily Honig and Gail Hershatter call "marital 
Dowry and Brideprice : 137 
materialism" is striking (1988:98). A strong expectation remains, however, that 
the wedding funds will be given as or spent on consumables rather than be trans-
ferred to the couple as cash. 
In Taibei marriages, which are extremely negotiable, resources enter the trans-
actions from many possible directions and can be routed to several possible des-
tinations. Negotiations, formal and informal, take place at each transfer, so that 
outcomes can differ greatly. At the most prestigious, dowry-heavy end of the 
scale, the bride's family may provide virtually everything the bride (and to an ex-
tent) her groom may need for daily life "right down to the chamber pot": bed, 
furniture, and clothing for their daughter, together with a complete head-to-foot 
outfit of clothing (with watch and wallet) for their son-in-law as welF Money for 
dowry, however, may come all or in part from the groom's family, or from the 
bride and groom, singly or together. 
The ideal that parents give away the bride while receiving little or nothing in 
return is ritualized in Taibei when her parents refuse the negotiated brideprice 
that is ceremoniously presented on the wedding day. A large brideprice, settled 
on beforehand, may be substantial. A small brideprice- from one-fourth to 
one-tenth of the large- may be spent for dowry, so that it is returned to the 
groom's side. If the bride's side does not accept the large brideprice- which 
smacks of selling their daughter -
it will retain the small brideprice to keep, to 
spend on dowry, or even, rarely, to return the whole. The initially offered large 
brideprice may be kept by a more grasping family. At one 1970s wedding, an in-
terfering bride's mother's sister seized the large brideprice on behalf of her rel-
atives, nearly ruining the relationship between the bride and her outraged 
mother-in-law for good. In practice, most families do not negotiate separate 
large and small sums. 
In 1988, seventy-five Taibei women active in family business, whose ages 
ranged from twenty to eighty-five, described their marriage exchanges to me in 
detail. For the 10 women over 50, four had requested no brideprice; six had ne-
gotiated (rather, their families had) an average of NT$7,000 in brideprice; and 
five of those six had actually accepted an average of NT$6,550. For the 17 women 
between 40 and 49, six brides' families had requested no brideprice; 11 had nego-
tiated brideprices averaging NT$8,750; and 8 of the 11 had actually accepted an 
average of NT$7,600. For the 22 women between 30 and 39, only one had notre-
ceived brideprice; 21 negotiated an average of NT$143,400; and 13 of that 21 actu-
7· Asking why a bride's household sends the groom a full suit of clothes usually produces the an-
swer that such is the custom. One wise informant suggested that it symbolized the hold a woman 
wants to have over her future husband. "It means you get all of him!' The explanation I offer here is 
that sending the groom a full suit is congruent with and emphatic of the ideal statement made by a 
bride's parents through her dowry: "She won't cost you a cent; we have enough money to support 
even our daughters." 
138 
: 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
ally accepted an average of NT$93,000. For the 26 women between 20 and 29, 
nine families requested no brideprice; 17 negotiated an average of NT$123,300, 
and 11 of those 17 actually accepted an average of NT$114,000. 
When they are given at all, brideprices for the youngest cohorts show a steady 
secular increase, even allowing for the dramatic inflation that occurred between 
1968 and 1988. This trend reflects the rapidly expanding economy based largely 
on the labor of young unmarried women. The average accepted brideprice for all 
cohorts was roughly equivalent to twice the current cost of building or buying 
and furnishing a simple dwelling, or to between five and ten times the yearly 
wage of an unskilled laborer. 
The oft-stated convention that part of the brideprice be returned to the 
groom's parents had not greatly affected the average brideprice of the women I 
interviewed. Brideprices that were actually accepted did not differ much from the 
sum originally negotiated, except for women in their thirties. Taibei parents have 
not traditionally (or actually) dowered their daughters out of their own pockets 
and have often retained cash after wedding expenses were paid. 
Brideprice can flow through many channels. All or part may remain with the 
bride's parents, rather than being funneled to the new couple. A bride's parents 
may agree to match the brideprice they plan to accept, and spend the whole on 
the couple's dowry. Or they may simply give the young people the money to 
spend as they like; many small businesses grow from such funds. The couple and 
their parents may agree that the young folks may use all cash gifts from friends 
and relatives. A bride may give all or part of the red envelopes (of money) she re-
ceives during the engagement to her mother, to defray the costs of entertaining 
the groom's family. The mother may secretly invest some of this money and qui-
etly return it when the daughter has developed some independence of action in 
her new home. 
Although very recently many Taiwan newlyweds have set up their own homes, 
generations of Taibei people expected a young couple to reside with the groom's 
family, at least for a year or so. During these months, many groom's parents in-
voke the TMP jia ideal of pooled resources for all coresidents, including the 
dowry of new brides. Cash dowry sometimes is deposited with the bride's 
mother-in-law for use by the groom's family. A Taibei woman married in the 
mid-1970s complained bitterly that her entire large money dowry had been con-
sumed in living expenses and the education of the groom's younger siblings. An-
other, younger bride told of turning over to her mother-in-law even the gold 
jewelry she brought into marriage. (Gold jewelry, easily converted into cash, is 
usually treated as a consumer durable, protected by sentiment against the 
groom's family's claims.) 
The "public" part of money dowries, sometimes twenty-four-carat jewelry, 
sometimes an elegantly presented bankbook, is displayed on the day of marriage 
and is often supervised after marriage by the groom's parents. A bride's "private" 
Dowry and Brideprice : 
139 
money, however, is given secretly, and sometimes kept in her mother's care, to 
prevent its being pooled. Private money has its continuing significance for 
women, and its irritating quality for husbands and mothers-in-law, because it 
contravenes the principle that a jia is a group of people with a common economy. 
Despite that principle, the couple may have resources of their own and so may 
negotiate separate control of wedding gifts and payments. 
As important recent research has demonstrated, most wage-earning daughters 
maintain less control over their wages than do sons (Greenhalgh 1985) and must 
rely on parents' whims to determine how much of what they have contributed to 
the family purse will be returned to them in dowry. Young married business-
women, however, often finance their enterprises out of capital saved from pre-
marital earnings. A woman in Chengdu is nearly three times as likely to have such 
independent savings invested in her business than is a Taibei woman, to whom 
the absolute TMP duty to parents is much stressed. Such Confucian ideology is 
actively (if often feebly) combated in urban China by socialist support for 
women's work and independence. Nothing comparable legitimates women's au-
tonomy in Taiwan. 
Once saved, whether by a young woman's mother for her later use or by the 
woman herself, a sum thus earned is generally accorded a special aura. A 
woman's right to dispose of such an earned trove is likely to be respected, even by 
parents and parents-in-law. It is tempting to speculate about the mystical, 
fetishized quality of money in Chinese society -
I return to this theme in Chap-
ter 8 -
but we should not ignore a more pragmatic explanation for this appar-
ent inviolability of women's nest eggs. Parents-in-law (or husbands) only with 
difficulty lay claim to money a woman has saved prior to marriage quite simply 
because perhaps only she knows what she has and where it is. To accumulate it 
she may have already deceived her parents or negotiated with them about keep-
ing it. She may not have told her husband about her finances, or she may have 
trusted him with this knowledge against his mother. Confucianists are right: 
money is subversive of order; its abstract nature, as an easily portable concretized 
store of value, empowers the weakest. Or, as Taiwanese women put it, "Whoever 
has money is Number One:' 
Many women expand their separate and secret accounts, through time-
honored petty-capitalist mechanisms such as rotating credit associations, 
moneylending, buying houses to rent out, receiving money from their working 
daughters, creative accounting with household money supplied by their hus-
bands, gambling, and, in contemporary Taiwan, by investing in a free-wheeling 
stock exchange. This last lies halfway between sober corporate capitalism and a 
crapshoot, more fun than mahjong. Chengdu women too told me of their own 
and their mothers' investments in gambling, rotating credit, moneylending, 
commodities, and gold bars in prerevolution times. But: "We don't do that now, 
of course." Marriage exchanges offer a moment when astute young women may 
140: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
lay hands on a sum that may be their most dependable guarantee of good treat-
ment and a voice in household councils.8 
Grooms get a good deal less out of marriage exchanges. They will share in the 
dowry consumables -
the beds and bedding, the televisions and motorcycles -
but in dowry-heavy marriages they will not get much cash in hand unless they 
get it from their wives. When brideprice and indirect dowry have been substan-
tial, young men can capitalize businesses with more assurance that the "dowry" 
is really theirs. Dowries, whatever their origins, purchase a new lathe, stock for a 
store, or, in the old days, even a little piece of land.9 The future harmony of many 
a marriage is assured or destroyed in the initial negotiations between wife and 
husband over the money that each has brought to their germ of a new jia. 
A young man has more opportunities than a young woman to earn money be-
fore he marries, and he is under less pressure to give it to his parents. Like a 
woman, his ability to influence what his parents will put into the marriage pot, 
and how much of that will come into his own hands, depends very much on his 
economic relationships with his parents before marriage. It is harder for a man to 
bargain with the parents whom it will always be his duty to care for. Women carry 
neither the economic nor the ideological burdens of men, including the burden 
of appearing at all times to conform to the tributary model of a filial son. Women 
are thus more willing to discuss the delicate financial choices they make, to allow 
that a dowry was especially big "because I worked in the family business for many 
years, and helped them make a lot of money." Men are not supposed to think 
about brideprice as something that, under some circumstances, will benefit them 
at the expense of their parents and siblings. They are not supposed to turn over 
their pay envelopes to Mother in order to build up a claim on a large brideprice 
from which he will benefit. They do these things, I think, but find it wrigglingly 
embarrassing to talk about them. 
Both young men and young women are sometimes expected to earn what is 
given in their marriage exchanges (Chen Chung-min 1985). For a woman, es-
pecially, the price of choosing her own husband may be exactly what her fa-
ther would ask of any suitor. A woman from Qingdao, forced into a marriage 
8. Ownership of half or more of the capital in a family business in which she participates may also 
give a woman greater power to control her fertility. This is only slightly less true for a sample of Taibei 
and Chengdu women born before 1950 as for those born after (Gates 1993). 
9· Where land was expensive, dowry money would rarely be enough for its purchase. Informants 
from outlying areas in Taiwan, however, have told me of purchases of land made from dowry. Brides 
in Taiwan and, to my knowledge, in Sichuan, bring land as dowry only very rarely. Arthur Wolf un-
derlines the unusual nature of such a gift in prerevolutionary Taiwan by its method of presentation: 
a box full of dirt, labeled as to the size and quality of the plot, took an honored place in the proces-
sion of dowry goods to ilie groom's household so that even the illiterate would know of the grand gift 
(Wolf and Huang 1980:76). 
Dowry and Brideprice 
141 
by her father in the 1930s, vowed she would run away as soon as she found 
someone she liked. She did, too, sending her father enough money from her 
wages as a textile worker to enable him to arrange her divorce and "buy" (her 
word) a substitute wife for the first husband. "I had to, didn't I? I had left him 
without the wife they'd agreed on." Twenty years later, a Taibei woman paid 
her father the scraped-together savings of ten years of dressmaking as her own 
brideprice. "If your husband doesn't have it, you will have to take responsibil-
ity!" Daddy insisted. 
In my Taibei sample, money was a major element in marriage exchanges. This 
has been true for a long time, judging from stories of elderly informants and 
from accounts of customs in both Taiwan and Fujian into the last century. In the 
Chengdu sample, it played a much smaller role; direct consumables that could 
not be transformed into the means of production were far more salient. Indeed, 
the whole pattern of marriage exchanges was noticeably different. In Taibei, 
among women over fifty, 50 percent of all marriages included money brideprices; 
in Chengdu, only 8 percent did. In Taibei, among women forty-nine and under, 
77 percent of marriages included money brideprices; in Chengdu, the figure was 
16 percent. In the younger group, as both cities became more prosperous, money 
was included in more brideprices. In Taibei, marital exchanges drew money from 
more sources along more paths of transmission, and resulted in more varied out-
comes. 
These data from Taibei and Chengdu illustrate the ways in which TMP and 
PCMP pressures on kinship produced a variety of results, but alone they would 
not convince. Setting them against two other collections of information about 
marriage exchanges strengthens the argument considerably. Neither of these sets 
was collected within the framework of concepts I wish now to apply to them. In-
sofar as they support, or at least do not contradict, my arguments, they are strong 
evidence: they are larger than my set, represent more regions in China, and lack 
the biases of data collected from a single class fraction. 
THE WOLF DATA 
The first of these sets of information on brideprice and dowry is taken from 
the fieldnotes of Arthur P. Wolf, made at seven sites from 1980 to 1981 on prerev-
olutionary practices. He interviewed between eighty and ninety women over age 
fifty-nine in each site except that near Beijing. Much of China was closed to for-
eign investigation at that time, so that most of the sites were near urban centers. 
Falling into three natural groups, they include two on the North China Plain 
(near Beijing and in Shandong) and one in Sichuan (in Chapter 4 described as 
strong TMP, weak PCMP); two in the lower Yangzi (in Zhejiang and in Jiangsu) 
and one in Shanxi (strong in both TMP and PCMP); and one in Fujian (weak 
TMP and strong PCMP) and similar to what we know about Taiwan. They thus 
142: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
permit closer scrutiny of three "type" locales and two that push my hypothesis to 
its limits. 
Table 1 categorizes the information supplied by Wolf's subjects about which 
family- bride's or groom's- gave more in marriage exchanges in seven sites. I 
have separated the marriage exchanges for which Wolf gives data sufficient for 
deciding this question into seven categories: "D only;' in which the bride brought 
a dowry, even if only a humble one, with her; "D > BP;' in which the value of the 
dowry outweighed that of gifts given by the groom's side; "Bal.," in which the two 
families gave approximately balanced amounts to the couple, often by explicit 
agreement; "Ind. D," in which all or the greater part of the dowry came as indi-
rect dowry from the groom's side; "Ind. D + BP," a category made necessary by 
the customary separation, in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, of the brideprice into two 
distinct components (one a cash sum to her parents "for rearing her" or as "buy 
body money," the other earmarked for the purchase of dowry goods); "Sale;' in 
which local informants described one-sided money transaction as such; and "No 
exchange," in which nothing but the bride's person was transferred -
either be-
cause of extreme poverty or because both sides wanted to save money and agreed 
to limit ceremonial expenditure. 
I summarize these figures by grouping them into three categories: "dowry-
heavy" (D only, D > BP, and Bal.), "brideprice-heavy" (Ind. D, Ind. D + BP, 
Sale), and No exchange. The logic for this division depends on my focus on 
daughters (rather than on sons) as objects of exchange, as Chinese surely see 
them, and on the very material difference between whether a woman's marriage 
added to or subtracted from her natal family's resources. I sift the data through 
three types of TMP/PCMP locales. 
In Beijing/Shandong/Sichuan (high TMP!low PCMP), a woman's family 
gave a substantial part of the wedding exchanges: in 76 percent of the cases, as 
opposed to the 21 percent in which the groom side's contributions were heav-
ier. My argument, suggesting that people living in areas strong in TMP forms of 
exchange would follow TMP expectations and dower their daughters rather 
than sell them, is supported. Families followed the TMP ideal because PCMP 
ideals were unelaborated; these were areas of low commoditization and little 
demand for women's labor outside the household. A woman's family was the 
weaker party in the negotiations to arrange for her maintenance as a reproduc-
ing adult; they thus paid the cost of arranging it for her as their final duty to a 
female agnate. 
In Jiangsu/Zhejiang/Shanxi (high TMP/high PCMP), dowry-heavy ex-
changes are markedly fewer, and brideprice-heavy ones much more numerous: 
n percent as opposed to 72 percent. These areas of strongly competing TMP 
and PCMP forms of exchange demanded ostentatious ceremonial in response 
to TMP pressures to celebrate kinship. But, given equally strong PCMP pres-
sures to accumulate investable wealth, they skimped on those ceremonies as 
Dowry and Bridepricc : 
143 
TABLE 
1. 
Relative weights of dowry and brideprice for women over fifty-nine in 1980-81, in three types of economic locales 
.... 
~ 
Site 
No. 
Dowry heavy 
Brideprice heavy 
No exchange 
~ 
Donly 
D > BP 
Bal. 
Ind.D 
Ind. D + BP 
Sale 
() 
:I: 
Beijing 
44 
7 
1 
24 
8 
0 
1 
3 
(16%) 
(2%) 
(55%) 
(18%) 
(0%) 
(2%) 
(7%) 
z 
Totals 
73% 
20% 
7% 
> 
Shandong 
78 
1 
9 
47 
18 
3 
0 
0 
(1%) 
(12%) 
(60%) 
(23%) 
(4%) 
(0%) 
(O%) 
"' 
Totals 
73% 
27% 
0% 
s:: 
Sichuan 
85 
3 
27 
39 
8 
1 
4 
3 
(4%) 
(32%) 
(46%) 
(9%) 
(1%) 
(5%) 
(4%) 
0 
Totals 
82% 
15o/o 
4% 
..., 
Averages 
76% 
21% 
0 
~ 
Jiangsu 
73 
6 
2 
6 
15 
27 
3 
14 
(8%) 
( 3%) 
(8%) 
(21%) 
(37%) 
(4%) 
(19%) 
Totals 
19% 
45% 
19% 
Zhejiang 
58 
1 
3 
2 
5 
29 
11 
7 
(2%) 
( 5%) 
(3%) 
(9%) 
(50%) 
(19%) 
(12%) 
Totals 
10% 
78% 
12% 
Shanxi 
67 
1 
2 
0 
10 
44 
9 
1 
(1%) 
( 3%) 
(O%) 
(15%) 
(66%) 
(13%) 
(1%) 
Totals 
4% 
94% 
1% 
Averages 
11% 
72% 
Fujian 
42 
5 
2 
5 
10 
0 
6 
14 
(12%) 
(5%) 
(12%) 
(24%) 
(0%) 
(14%) 
(33%) 
Totals 
29% 
38% 
33% 
Averages 
29% 
38% 
33% 
Source: A. Wolf 1980 fieldnotes. 
they applied to women. Parents gave their daughters little or nothing, forcing 
status-seeking husbands' families to foot the bill for suitable display through 
indirect dowry. These cultural responses were supported by a regional pattern 
of the use of women's labor. Women worked out in agriculture, handicrafts, 
and eventually in industry more in the lower Yangzi than in any other part of 
China. Marrying a daughter out was at least a small economic loss. Securing a 
daughter-in-law brought in labor power with calculable value.' 0 (It may seem 
odd to include the Shanxi site here; for Shanxi to be high in petty-capitalist 
characteristics is counterintuitive. This peculiarity will be discussed below, in 
connection with the Buck data.) 
The data from Fujian (low TMP/high PCMP) look decidedly different from 
those of the other two clusters. Its marriages fall roughly into thirds: 29 per-
cent are dowry-heavy, 38 percent BP-heavy, and 33 percent involved no ex-
changes. These figures support the contention that marriage exchanges here 
are the outcomes of extremely open negotiations characteristic of market 
transactions, a contention that the narrative data from which they are drawn 
also support. 
THE BUCK DATA 
A third set of empirical data against which to test my hypotheses of how in-
teracting modes of production affected marriage exchanges is that given in Land 
Utilization in China, compiled from surveys of 15,316 farms in 152 widely dis-
persed localities between 1929 and 1933 by J. Lossing Buck and his student associ-
ates (1937). The sample is neither random geographically nor fully representative 
of China's class range: it was drawn largely from households that owned land or 
had fairly secure tenure, and was thus overwhelmingly rural, agrarian, and from 
the middling to most prosperous parts of the petty-capitalist classes. It has been 
criticized on other grounds as well (e.g. Coale 1985; A. Wolf 1985a, 1985b; Arrigo 
1986). Its existence, however, like that of Mount Everest, is hard to ignore. And it 
includes the largest set of data on "traditional" marriage exchanges we will ever 
have. 
Table 2 summarizes the ratio between the cost of supplying a daughter with 
dowry (D) and the cost of marrying a son (W), derived from Buck's data. 
10. A small but well-contextualizcd set of data that adds to this pattern comes from Adele M. 
Fielde's life histories of about two dozen women in her 1887 study of women's lives in Chaozhou 
(Swatow). This region represents a southern extension of Hokkien peoples into northern Guangzhou; 
Chaozhou was a city known for its textile arts and exports. Fielde's evidence shows that many women 
supported themselves independently on such handicraft at that time. Marriage exchanges there took 
the form common in Zhejiang and Jiangsu, where an indirect dowry intended to purchase the 
trousseau was given along with a separate sum that appears to have been brideprice pure and simple. 
Dowry and Brideprice : 145 
TAB L E 
2. 
Summary of D:W ratios by political-economic type 
Political-economic type 
Site 
D:W 
High TMP /low PCMP 
(type) 
North China Plain 
1.13 
(variant) 
Sichuan Plain 
1.55 
High TMP/high PCMP (type) 
Yangzi Valley 
.71 
(variant) 
Guangdong 
.55 
Low TMP/high PCMP 
(type) 
Fujian 
.53 
(variant) 
Gansu/ Qinghai 
.50 
D:W ratios in these six regions in this table support the idea that regional phe-
nomena are appropriately interpreted as outcomes of interactions between TMP 
and PCMP choices." At the very least, they quantify the variation that regularly 
occurred among marriages essentially similar in ritual performance but signifi-
cantly different in the material results of marriage exchanges. In regions where 
petty-capitalist choices could be made without risking large losses in a complex 
tributary system, parents negotiated sharply over their children's marriage costs. 
Where markets were feeble or where a family stood to gain much through emu-
lating official ritual, they dowered their daughters and gave token brideprices for 
their daughters-in-law. 
The material in the Appendix supports the arguments about Chinese bride-
price and dowry made so far and provides an empirical test of the regionalization 
presented in Chapter 4· 
Marriage and the exchanges that accompanied it were among the most impor-
tant activities in which Chinese households engaged. Marriage, unlike death or 
birth, was arranged for largely through spending money; it was relatively control-
lable and tightly linked to the flow of resources within and between households. It 
responded to household needs for reproduction of family members, but also to the 
need for women's work. A woman's value, and hence the negotiations into which 
she, her parents, and her groom's parents entered, was determinable only through 
a complex local calculus of demographic, productive, market, and personal factors. 
The relatively abundant quantitative data on brideprice and dowry support the 
contention that tributary and petty-capitalist exchange patterns penetrated the so-
11. Although the B11ck data on weddings and dowries (and on funeral expenses) would repay fur-
ther investigation, the task deserves separate study. For example, it is apparent to anyone working 
with these data that the D:W ratios of the North China Plain as it grades westward increasingly re-
semble those of the lower Yangzi Valley, a predictable result because distance from the capital in-
creased choices. 
146 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
cial organization of late-imperial/early-republican marriage. One might find par-
allel patterns of regionally varied customary behavior in other areas by consider-
ing the implications for them of two coherent and partially contradictory modes 
of production linking custom and economy. A changing market for women's 
labor would not instantly transform marriage exchanges. But a commoditizing re-
gional economy would generate a powerful pressure for market/contract transac-
tions. If commodity production persists, this model would come to be seen as an 
alternative guide to kin relations, especially those most weakly protected by law. In 
such regions, people would respond to new conditions, especially as they affected 
women and the young -
as in minor and delayed transfer marriages. Daughters 
and wives were worth haggling over. In regions not much penetrated by com-
moditization, the strongest force shaping the natural chaos of household decisions 
would be the hierarchical exchanges of ideal kinship and the legal framework that 
protected the property rights of men. Daughters and wives were dependent bur-
dens -
unwelcomed, expensive necessities for the reproduction of sons. The 
complex of exchanges, social relations, and justifying ideology which made up a 
mode of production framed and shaped people's responses to economic change, 
whether that change came from population growth, new technology, imperialist 
capitalism, or ruling-class fiat. 
The existence of a demand for commoditized labor does not instantly trans-
late into cultural variation: people must find ways of thinking about it, of ratio-
nalizing it, and of valorizing it. Such new thoughts, however, are themselves 
drawn especially from the concrete experiences of production and exchange, 
which are the relationships through which we maintain our material -
and 
hence our social and intellectual -
lives. 
Dowry and Brideprice 
147 
Folk Ideologies: 
Rulers and Commoners 
The Chinese ofWeihaiwei [Shandong] say that in spite of the devastation 
that locusts can work among crops they are not really so much to be 
dreaded as many other insects who have no king and are therefore under 
no one's control and subject to no law. If monarchical government, it is 
thought, could be established among the more harmful flies and grubs, 
the happiness of labouring mankind would be materially augmented. 
-
R. F. Johnston, district officer and magistrate, Weihaiwei, 1910 
Money is a good fellow, round and square alternately .... With ten-
thousand in your pocket try hard and you may attain to any nobility, any 
rank. ... If you have money, fear not to go wherever you like, even to 
Yunnan or Kueichou. The years pass until you have a good fortune. Then 
you buy rank and a button for your cap and you dress in excellent furs. 
Then you pack up your wealth, hire satellites, armed with foreign pistols, 
and return home. Everyone comes to congratulate you on becoming a 
Ts'ai Shen [Wealth God), and to admire you. To sum up, all other words 
and things are useless. The best is money. 
-
From couplets on a popular depiction of the wealth god, 
early twentieth century 
This chapter focuses on folk ideologies as they have reflected 
power and enabled resistance among ordinary Chinese people. Ideologies are sets 
of ideas and practices by which we explain and justify the world as we know it. 
We construct these in large part to rationalize to ourselves our own painful expe-
riences or to rationalize to others the pain we inflict on them. We construct them 
also as a means to argue, and sometimes to act, on behalf of what we want. Al-
though many things we "want" are socially constructed, folk ideologies nearly al-
ways emphasize basic and obvious desires: for health, for supportive intimate 
relations of some kind, for dignity and esteem, for the absence of physical bru-
tality and overbearing external control, and for the material resources to make all 
the rest possible. In these desires, ordinary people do not differ much from one 
society to another, though ruling classes often develop baroque and involutional 
longings and express them in overripe images. 
Ideologies are necessarily multiple, especially in class societies. Life's difficul-
ties arise both from influences clearly outside human control -
we may delay 
death, for example, but not avoid it -
and from those which are more or less 
clearly perceived as resulting from human action and which are thus controllable 
-
we must pay the rent, but perhaps we will someday save enough to buy our 
land. Even allowing for the plasticity of culture, truly natural constraints on our 
desires exist. In addition, every significant social group will have a particular per-
spective, and some will have greater power than others to spread and implement 
it. Those with power to categorize the cosmos into natural and social and to val-
orize its elements can be contested, but it is usually necessary to hold the contest 
on the ground they have defined. This is because the experienced world from 
which their ideology grows is also in part our experienced world: they make us 
pay the rent. And it is true because, conspiratorially or in honest belief, rulers 
propagandize their vision, their language, their class stance as the best. 
Caught in this web of words and deeds, ordinary people only with great diffi-
culty formulate their real experience clearly. It is harder yet for us to articulate an 
alternative, autonomous vision. Most people in class societies have only frag-
mentary experiences with either autonomy or another world imaginable outside 
their own. Should such an ideology achieve real lucidity, it would constitute a 
threat to the power of those who rule partly through monopolizing the produc-
tion of ideas. Folk ideologies must be revealing enough of common experience to 
ring true to their makers, but cryptic enough to conceal that truth from the 
minds of dogmatic rulers. Ruling-class ideologies are like cannon; their profiles 
on the city walls are displayed for all to see. Folk ideologies are like punji spikes 
or the grenades made of hollowed stones that Chinese revolutionaries strewed for 
enemy feet; they are weapons in a long guerrilla war. 
How does one analyze an ideology constructed to remain only intermittently 
visible? The collection of essays on popular culture edited by David Johnson et al. 
shows the state of the art in this endeavor at present. In their preface, Johnson 
et al. emphasize their focus on values and their communication, noting that "it is 
impossible to comprehend behavior without understanding the values, ideas, 
and beliefs- the mentalities- of those who are acting. And to understand val-
ues and the like one must study how they moved from person to person and 
group to group, and how they changed as they moved .... we believe that focus-
ing on values and their communication offers an especially effective way of un-
derstanding late imperial China" (1985:i). Materialists would add that it is equally 
impossible to comprehend mentalities without observing the behavior of those 
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners : 
149 
who are doing the thinking. Thought does not come from gods, platonic 
essences, or even simply from others' thoughts -
as every generation of young 
people responding ambivalently to their parents' values attests. Experience in the 
material world valorizes some of the notions that are floated through our minds, 
while devalorizing others. 
Johnson et al. also ask how the diversity of Chinese values was integrated into 
"a single complex cultural system," without which "the whole idea of Chinese 
culture dissolves"; they assert that "the sharing of values, ideas, assumptions, and 
points of reference across great social, geographic, and economic distances is the 
result of specific, identifiable human actions. Hence, one of our main concerns 
has been with the agents and mechanisms by which verbal and symbolic struc-
tures were transmitted. We have also sought to understand, from the very begin-
ning, how beliefs and attitudes were modified as they were presented to different 
kinds of audiences, and how the mentalities of the various social groups differed 
from each other" (xiii). The difficulty here is this program's assumption of the 
prior existence of the values being transmitted. Issues of causation, explanations 
of why these values were what they were, are not central for most of the essays. 
In her essay in this volume, however, Evelyn S. Rawski sketches an account of 
the creation and selective maintenance of values. She emphasizes the Ming/Qing 
commercialization, which generated an "ideology of merit-making" and associ-
ated phenomena, and "the rise of elite concern about declining morals, itself a 
product of social change" ( 28). The growing integration of late-imperial Chinese 
culture was a product not only of conscious official policy but of the increased in-
tegration of markets and hence of rural and urban places. The enhanced com-
munications network helped bring the value systems of the elite and peasant 
tradition into closer congruence. Integration brought social stability, Rawski ar-
gues, but it also "increased social differentiation and social tension, which were 
engendered by the same socio-economic conditions that produced integration" 
(28, 32, 33). 
Although Johnson et al. and many similarly inclined scholars focus on the dis-
tribution or exchange of values, we must address their creation as well, else the 
values we explore will be severed from their broader meanings, from the con-
creteness and ambiguities of experience which make folk ideologies a weapon in 
the struggle for power rather than a catechism to be accepted. Concern with the 
production of values is necessary too because it is increasingly difficult to accept 
a vision of a stream of values created by previous generations flowing automati-
cally into our own lives (Hobsbawm and Ranger 1987). Tradition, values, ideol-
ogy, are produced with each new generation, almost always as a means to capture 
experience coherently, and thus gain power. 
Some aspects of Chinese folk ideologies are neatly institutionalized in folk re-
ligion and other direct discourses: on women, on fate, on the universal dualism 
of yin and yang. Others must be unearthed, delicately, from anecdotes of daily 
150 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
life. In what follows, I listen attentively to what Chinese people say the super-
natural world is like and to their insistence that supernaturals are homologous 
to social categories. This approach may be criticized as "reflectionism," a posi-
tion properly condemned when the analyst imagines that the supernatural mir-
ror reflects toward common people (and anthropologists) only the vision of 
rulers. Religion may be a partial, but can never be a complete, mystification of 
ordinary people's lived experience: experience is too necessary in the formation 
of thought, and especially in those forms of shared thought that constitute ide-
ology. Religion is not something passively accepted as given from on high, but 
rather a device created and used to make counterstatements about what is, 
about what ought to be, and about how the desirable can be achieved. We can 
and should interpret Chinese folk ideology as an ambivalent and even critical 
account of social reality. Such an account has been shaped by popular experi-
ence as well as by the hegemonic power of rulers. It is used to valorize and im-
plement behavior not sanctioned by the model of laudable hierarchy which it 
initially presents. 
As in most class societies, a great deal of folk religion -
rituals and their as-
sociated explanations -
is about power. Some actors have more, and some 
less, and power comes from different sources. The analyst risks a great deal by 
seizing too quickly on "power" as an irreducible, free-floating given, an end in 
itself. To see power detached from the material world is either superstition or 
inappropriate naturalism, a demonic desire for domination implying that our 
species-nature is power-mad. Lack of an adequate political-economic concep-
tual framework almost always drives those who seek explanation into natural-
ism or idealism. 
FOLK IDEOLOGY AND THE MATERIAL 
If belief and ritual are to serve their creators not only by reflecting reality for 
contemplation but also by teaching people how to manipulate the world, they 
must be reasonably transparent. Symbols and sets of symbols must cohere, vivify 
ideas, and appeal to the masses of people who have little time or taste for intel-
lectual deconstruction. This is not to say that either Chinese or their popular 
ideas were simple-minded; the complex code of folk religion immediately repels 
such a notion. Much of folk ideology as known to elite and folk intellectuals, 
however, is esoteric, irrelevant as guides to life or shapers of thought. For popu-
lar ritual specialists such as Daoist practitioners or Buddhist nuns, ideological 
elaboration is the stock in their petty-capitalist trade. Like academics, they com-
pete to produce intellectual novelty based on the authority of history or personal 
revelation. In parallel, the anthropological analysis of folk ideology has, in recent 
decades, achieved a truly astonishing luxuriance of complexity. This specialist 
solipsism need not concern us here: a materialist understanding of folk ideology 
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners : 
151 
depends on our grasping the relatively straightforward symbols and connections 
among them which are easily accessible to ordinary people leading commonplace 
lives. Even viewed from this perspective, folk ideology is obscure enough. The 
difficulties of perceiving its causes and effects are magnified, however, when ana-
lysts begin with incorrect assumptions about the material reality of which the en-
actment of ideology remains only a part. 
Much of folk ideology becomes transparent once an appropriate model of 
Chinese political economy has been constructed. Inappropriate models are seri-
ous obstacles to understanding these ideologies. Steven Sangren's recent subtle 
and impressive synthesis of Taiwan folk religion poises on just such a difficulty. 
Discrepancies between his perceptive rendering of the historical development of 
regional religious networks in northern Taiwan and political-economic assump-
tions taken from G. William Skinner's central-place analysis nudge his arguments 
away from connection with concrete material life. Because "marketing" and "ad-
ministrative" hierarchies fail to account for all the data, Sangren posits that "rit-
ual organization thus constitutes a third hierarchy of regional systems that must 
be added to the economic and administrative hierarchies Skinner describes:' Part 
(perhaps all) of the religious system, once institutionalized, can take on "an exis-
tence of its own" (1987:16, 62). 
Anthropology began with a rejection of such extremes of alterity in which 
other people's ideologies were simply inexplicable. There is little intellectual 
difference between thinking of people's beliefs as self-contained, self-reproduc-
ing, and irreducible and thinking of them as bizarre superstitions that their gods 
oblige them to enact.' Treating things that humans produce -
including ideas, 
values, visions of the supernatural, and ideational "culture" as a whole -
as 
agents is fetishism, not analysis. This is a curious error for Sangren to commit, for 
his careful data reveal examples of the lack of autonomy of ritual communities 
pulled into administrative orbits (e.g. p. 112). 
Sangren is too good an ethnographer and scholar to leave us in doubt as to 
where the problems in his data must be linked with autonomous ideology. As he 
tackles the explanation of the spatial and historical distribution of the practices 
of the Daxi (Ta-ch'i) area, he reminds us that 
in his analyses of China's hierarchy of central places, Skinner insists that eco-
nomic and administrative organization and functions be rigorously distin-
guished. He consistently argues that the spatial structure of economy emerges, 
1. This argument has been most pointedly put by Marvin Harris, criticizing the idealism of a clas-
sic of American anthropology, Patterns of Culture. "To explain striking differences among the cultures 
of the Kwakiutl, the Dobuans, and the Zuni, [Ruth] Benedict fell back upon a myth which she attrib-
uted to the Digger Indians. The myth said: 'God gave to every people a cup, a cup of clay, and from 
this cup they drank their life .... They all dipped in the water but their cups were different.' What 
this has meant to many people ever since is that only God knows why cultures differ" (1974:4). 
152 
; 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
more or less "naturally;' out of the maximizing decisions of peasants and mer-
chants. In contrast, China's administration, motivated to maximize very diff-
erent values, was imposed from the top down. As a result, despite forces 
tending toward convergence, administrative and economic hierarchies never 
align perfectly. Some district capitals were established in cities of minor eco-
nomic importance, and some economically dominant cities served no or only 
modest administrative functions .... Skinner is essentially correct in arguing 
that patterns of marketing behavior and social organization are correlated, 
but he may overestimate the causal priority of marketing logic in the histori-
cal process through which this correlation is achieved. (15-16Y 
Sangren allows Skinner's disjunction between marketing economics and ad-
ministrative politics to stand. At the same time, he sees the need for a political-
economic approach, drawing on the idea of a domestic mode of production. 
Recognizing that industrialization and other forms of change have not altered 
Chinese life as both old Marxist and neoclassical economists would expect, espe-
cially in the family, he observes that the 
persistence of traditional values challenges the notion that dominant modes 
of production ... clearly determine the nature of the "articulation" between 
domestic modes of production and the wider economy .... In fact, Chinese 
peasants and workers have effectively resisted attempts to obstruct the pursuit 
of traditional domestic values. This seems to indicate that, at least to some de-
gree, it is the wider sphere of economic organization that is constrained by the 
requirements of the Chinese form of the "domestic mode of production and 
reproduction" and associated values. (43) 
Sangren sees correctly the need for the connections among production, repro-
duction, social relations, and ideology which mode-of-production analysis 
offers. The domestic mode, however, sits uneasily in the same intellectual frame-
work with retail trade and bureaucratic administration. 
The household and its products can be seen more parsimoniously as the out-
come of tributary and petty-capitalist interactions. Such a position is implicit in 
some of Sangren's analyses. He shows us, for example, the interaction of TMP 
and PCMP mechanisms- and the predominance of the former- in the set-
tlement of north Taiwan as he grapples with the marketing/administrative di-
chotomy in Daxi: 
2. Barbara Ward makes a similar point: Skinner's market model persuades us that each standard 
marketing area was typically discrete. This separation was not true of temple festival areas [in the 
Hong Kong region], which, though organized by local committees and focused on particular temples, 
nevertheless often drew participants and probably always drew opera audiences from much further 
afield (1985:174). 
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners 
153 
Skinner's argument for the social and cultural importance of the standard 
marketing community in China is well supported in Ta-ch'i [Daxi] .... How-
ever, as I have repeatedly noted, the causal priority of economic factors is less 
than clear. In Ta-ch'i's case, the parameters of the standard marketing com-
munity seem to have emerged as much from the historical pattern of patent-
initiated settlement and subsequent competition among rival ethnic factions 
as from economic strategizing per se. The granting of government patents to 
develop large tracts of land resulted in the territorial clustering of ethnic 
groups in the island. 
These historical circumstances resulted in a close correspondence between 
ethnic group, town, and marketing communities that defies the assignment 
of clear-cut causal priorities. Much the same is true of the historical conver-
gence of ritual and economic patterns of interaction; again, the prominence 
of ethnic competition in northern Taiwan's settlement played an important 
role. Many multivillage-level territorial-cult deities achieved popularity for 
the aid they rendered in fights with rival factions .... this symbolic differen-
tiation from outsiders plays an important role in the social construction of 
the magical power of these deities .... Hence the convergence between stan-
dard marketing community and ritual domain in Ta-ch'i, and in many other 
townships in northern Taiwan, derives almost directly from the settlers' pen-
chant for differentiating very sharply between insiders and outsiders along 
ethnic lines. This penchant is certainly as much cultural as economic. 
(1987:108) 
The curious equation between retail marketing and the "economic" once again 
leads thought astray. Patent holders gained the right to import men to settle 
tracts of land. But to settle there, these men had to fight the Aboriginal owners 
and any other rival claimants, and they had quickly to bring the land under cul-
tivation to feed themselves. Surely these activities, and the rights to land tenure 
gained thereby, had economic aspects? With such rights sustained weakly by the 
state, and directly by the force of solidarity among the settlers, they had political 
ones as well. But by separating the inseparable, Sangren cuts ethnicity and reli-
gion free to become cultural penchants rather than part of the political-eco-
nomic process of reproducing people and resources in a specific historical 
context. 
Ethnicity and local identity are persistent problems for Sangren, always edg-
ing causally into autonomy and hence theoretically into idealism. Community 
identity (sometimes ethnic) crops up in his analysis of shetuan (she t'uan) or rit-
ual societies, which are extremely common in Taiwan. Some at least are occupa-
tionally based, resembling guilds. Sangren concludes, however, that "they do not 
exert any perceptible economic power." He attributes their persistence to "their 
symbolic utility in contributing to the reproduction of local identity." He tells us 
154 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A 
S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
too that shetuan members, who demonstrate bravery and invulnerability by fire-
walking, "are conceived as the gods' soldiers; their role, much like that of local 
militia ... is to help the gods protect the community" (1987:8s-86). 
In my experience, such groups are the musclemen who defend local monopo-
lies, local land and water rights, local gambling dens, and today the local bagmen 
who pay for votes at elections. Their members are of considerable importance in 
efforts to secure crumbs from the flow of tribute, and profits from the sale of 
legal and illegal commodities. Not all shetuan members are gangsters, but in a 
state seen as partisan and rapacious, and in a sauve qui peut market, one of the 
costs of doing petty-capitalist business is to have a few tough guys frequently on 
display. "Insider/outsider" identities are linked to the holding of resources against 
officials or against other petty-capitalist factions. 
Such plausible and materialist alternative explanations cast doubt on San-
gren's claim, in his interpretation of pilgrimage networks, that "convergence at 
the boundaries [of economic, administrative, and ritual catchment areas] should 
not be read as evidence that ritual community is epiphenomenal to economic 
causes" (120). Warned by Emily Martin Ahern of the intimate connection that 
ritual implies between this world and the other world (1981), I believe Sangren 
has erred. If we see ritual as deriving power from its political-economic base, we 
can make better and simpler sense of the folk ideologies that have structured 
popular politics in China both under the late empire and in this century. 
Through them we hear the clever and sometimes cryptic but rarely obscurantist 
voices of Chinese commoners. 
THE HIERARCHIES OF HEAVEN 
Defining a universe of supernaturals to serve as a table of organization to the 
social hierarchy has absorbed much of the Chinese religious imagination, as 
the following discussion emphasizes.3 In that universe the sociopolitical forms 
of power, orthodox or counterhegemonic, are generally imagined as humanlike 
actors in a single, unified cosmos. The Chinese "other world" -
the abode of 
supernaturals including the souls of the dead -
is the yin world. It lies below, 
or "outside;' this one, and is complexly connected to it. A large literature, Chi-
nese and foreign, has captured the many details that emphasize the parallels be-
tween and the connectedness of the two worlds. The yin world contains much 
3. Or perhaps the heavenly bureaucracy has simply absorbed too much of Western social scien-
tists' imaginations. Chinese readers will, I hope, forgive yet another manifestation of the Western de-
light in this characteristic of their folk tradition. Because most Western religions are modeled on a 
feudal system run by illiterate European aristocrats, not on one operated by bureaucratic scholars, 
their spiritual personnel charts differ vividly. Even a second-generation atheist, tone-deaf to Chris-
tianity, cannot help being charmed by the novelty of gods who file their receipts in triplicate. 
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners : 
155 
that is "just like this world;' if a bit old-fashioned: contemporary Taiwanese be-
lieve that officiating gods dress in Ming court costume and that women in this 
world still have bound feet (Wolf 1974b:150). A Taibei spirit medium- who 
claimed to have visited there often in trance -
described to me a countryside 
with domestic animals and towns with streets of shops much like the miniature 
paper models the pious set up for the convenience of ghosts at pudu, or "uni-
versal salvation" rites. Land for graves that are the homes of the dead in the 
other world is purchased with legalistic trappings that unite the two realms. 
Printed deeds were formerly sold in Sichuan shops to be burned at funerals, 
emphasizing the grave as a connection between the two realms, and documents 
were witnessed as evidence for possible court cases on earth or in the other 
world (Graham 1961:44). 
Popular books, stories, and paintings capture and transmit this experience, 
but spirit travel in both directions is probably more important than words and 
pictures in perpetuating belief in a supernatural. Much of what people "know" 
about the other world is regularly confirmed by the constant traffic between it 
and this one. Mediums go to the ghostly yin world in trance; supernaturals visit 
earthly folk in spirit possession and in dreams. Many Taiwanese who would never 
trouble to open a pious tract will have seen fire-walking, cheek-piercing, back-
bloodying dangki (Taiwanese), whose fast-healing injuries are seen to prove the 
existence of an alternative reality. Everywhere in China, shamanic healing makes 
crossing the invisible boundary an event that many have witnessed. 
The best-known parts of the underworld are the courts, prisons, and offices in 
which souls are punished and processed administratively for reincarnation (Gray 
1875:415; Gray 1878:415; Darley 1917:173; Ayscough 1924; Eberhard 1967:24-59; 
Dore 1970:85; Goodrich 1981). Comparing the courts and prisons described in 
Chinese sources over the past few centuries, Wolfram Eberhard outlines the spa-
tial and hierarchical organization of these "hells" and offers ethnographic tidbits 
confirming their deeply bureaucratic character: hells have written lists of their 
yin population (28n. 16). Officials teem- Clarence Burton Day lists fifty-eight 
position titles derived from popular prints of gods; these worthies are housed in 
Kafkaesque buildings 365 stories high, sending arriving souls from one office to 
another because of incomplete paperwork; living people can be docked years of 
life and wealth by pen-pushing supernaturals (1969, 214-16, 40, n6). Supernat-
ural officials must not greatly enjoy their otherworld tenure either: they can be 
demoted and punished for failing civil-service exams and are harassed by innu-
merable and complex procedures. Their staff often escape to earth, "where they 
caused harm to human beings working as doctors, whores, or as government 
officials" (Eberhard 1967:44). Chinese people find this sort of parallel both to the 
point and mildly funny. 
The bureaucratic relationship between gods and humans is a key, persistent 
element in the popular world view, even when hell is not the immediate context. 
156 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
A father praying for his daughter's success in Taiwan's 1992 Joint (University) En-
trance Exams punctiliously followed the form. In addressing the god, he specified 
his "daughter's name, her seat number in the exam room and the number on her 
examination admission card" (China News 26 June 1992, p. 8). Most prayers to 
popular supernaturals inform the recipient of the petitioner's name, household 
head, and detailed street address. 
Above the common world, in a rather better supernatural neighborhood, 
dwell the yang gods, the upper reaches of the bureaucracy in which hellish cleri-
cal workers also labor. Though the heavenly hierarchy includes underworld 
judges and jailers, yin and yang are separate, the latter pure, the former steeped in 
pollution. (The yang gods are discussed at greater length below.) Humans (in the 
ungendered generic) are yang. The universe, with its cosmic population of an-
thropomorphic agents, is divided in several ambiguous and overlapping ways: it 
is layered as Heaven, Earth, and Hell; the yang of most gods and all living people 
are in opposition to the yin of the lowest gods and all dead souls; the mundane 
world of ordinary life is in opposition to the otherworldly under- and over-
worlds. In one view, all currently disembodied souls are being judged, punished, 
or in transit to their next incarnation. By contrast, mediums describe the other 
world as a settled, permanent place, with the souls of ancestors and old friends 
doing very ordinary things. 
We do not have to infer that the supernatural world is very like our own: the 
Chinese insist that it is, offering endless corroborative details to support the 
proposition. Their imagery demonstrates that in some senses people and gods 
are alike (both yang); in other senses that gods and ghosts are somewhat alike 
(both denizens of a world other than this one). Although the lumping of yang 
gods and people asserts the fundamental goodness and productiveness of those 
groups over against the badness and destructiveness of the dead and their keep-
ers, the lumping of gods and ghosts hints at critique. I explore this ambiguity 
below. 
Discussing gods, ghosts, and ancestors, Arthur Wolf argues that Chinese folk 
religion "mirrors the social landscape of its adherents. There are as many mean-
ings as vantage points" (1974b:131). From a dense ethnographic base, Wolf argues 
that Chinese villagers distinguish sharply in their ritual practice among these 
three categories of supernatural beings, which represent, respectively, bureau-
crats, strangers, and kinfolk; ethnography in Taiwan supports this position 
strongly (e.g. Jordan 1972; Harrell1974; Wang Sung-hsing 1974).Wolf's reading of 
Chinese supernaturals as a folk vision of socially salient roles reveals the kind, 
quality, and limitations of power that come from placement in a system of polit-
ical-economic relations. 
While gods, ghosts, and ancestors are surely the key categories of popular rit-
ual discourse, another distinction, and an important one, remains unexplained 
in Wolf's trinitarian conception. The persistent dualism that exists in Chinese 
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners : 
157 
popular religion under the guise of Buddhism and Daoism hints at a social com-
plexity of some importance, some doubleness of power which Chinese wish to 
stress. 4 These two "traditions" flourish in parallel in contemporary Taiwanese 
folk religion, as they did in popular religion in many parts of China in the past. 
In Taiwan at least, this duality appears to have more connection with the two 
kinds of power accessible in a TMP/PCMP social formation than with the dis-
tinctions drawn by specialist practitioners ofliterary-philosophical systems. 
Popular religious tradition distinguishes between two kinds of gods: sin (shen) 
and put (fo ),5 seen simultaneously as part of one complex heavenly hierarchy and 
also as two distinct and parallel categories of spiritual beings. The varied folk tra-
ditions of contemporary Taiwan express this duality as one of their most widely 
shared commonalities. Domestic altars, temples, and emergent cults all symbol-
ize spiritual power in a way that supports the association between continuities in 
the political-economic system and the ambiguous hierarchy of Daoist and Bud-
dhist gods. 
Shen and fo, Daoist and Buddhist divinities, are merged in general conversa-
tion into the supercategory shen, "gods:' In Taiwan, shen is the unmarked mem-
ber used loosely to refer to both; fo is never used in this fashion. In many parts of 
China, the generic term for gods is sometimes pusa, "bodhisattva;' which appears 
to subsume all higher spirits within Buddhist categories. Why Taiwan exhibits 
this linguistic difference is explained below. 
The distinction between shen and fo is generally interpreted as arising from 
and being maintained by two distinct written traditions of which the various folk 
beliefs are illiterate and heterodox versions. Even the noted sociologist C. K. Yang 
assumed that folk unorthodoxy was the result of ignorant "mixing" of gods that 
"belonged" in one or the other literary tradition (1967:25). Assignment of gods 
and their associated rituals to "Buddhist" or "Daoist" categories thus appears 
random and therefore meaningless. If we approach the distinction in the essen-
tially sociological way in which Wolf has analyzed gods, ghosts, and ancestors, 
however, the existence of a dual pattern of gods and the symbolism through 
4· Outside observers too see much that is dualistic in Chinese religion: Maurice Freedman divides 
the data into elite and popular versions (1974a); Arthur Wolf rebuts this view, calling for historical in-
terpretations finely attuned to the class- and regionally varied Chinese social landscape (1974a:9). 
Such debates turn ultimately on the aptness of the social-class analysis presented. Freedman's is too 
simple and sweeping; Wolf's recognizes the complexity of the social landscape without organizing 
that landscape to reveal its predictabilities. 
5. Taiwanese generally use their own language in discussing folk religion; I use the forms sin and 
put where appropriate. As elsewhere in this book, however, I use Mandarin forms (shen and fa) for 
concepts widely known throughout the various Chinese societies and represented universally in east 
Asia by the same characters. Taiwanese nationalists who object to this practice offer no solution to 
this terminological dilemma (see Hong and Murray 1991). 
158 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
which the duality is expressed can be seen to convey important messages about 
the nature of political authority and social class. 
Taiwanese domestic altars are insistently, and anomalously, asymmetrical, al-
though Chinese ritual aesthetics is compulsively bilateral. The apparently univer-
sal deviance of altars from a bilateral standard in the arrangement of the gods' 
half of domestic altars is very noticeable, even disquieting. Domestic altars are di-
vided into unequal halves- the larger, left-hand segment for gods, the smaller, 
right-hand segment for ancestors- but this difference is understandable in 
Wolf's framework, in which gods outrank ancestors as political authorities out-
rank commoners. 
When we look only at the gods' side of the altar, or at an altar without ances-
tral tablets, another asymmetry stands out. It is one of the few invariant elements 
in what is otherwise a highly idiosyncratic display incorporating many or no im-
ages, a wide choice of decorative accessories, and a lot of generalized ritual litter. 
This more striking -
and unexplained -
asymmetry is in the framed or 
mounted graphic art that hangs behind and above the altar. These images are 
made and sold by craftmen in shops selling ritual objects and in those that sell 
mirrors and other pictures. They are not sacred images, not having undergone 
the ceremony of "having the eyes opened:' They are described both by ordinary 
shopkeepers and by those who make and sell ritual equipment as only decora-
tions. It would be easy to commission such pictures as images are commissioned, 
to meet idiosyncratic aesthetic interests. This is not done; the standard, asym-
metrical format prevails. Typically, two written phrases serve as borders enclos-
ing two pictures of gods. The larger, left -hand picture is often a representation of 
the Buddhist goddess Guanyin; the narrower right-hand one represents the 
Daoist figure Guan Gong. Guanyin is frequently pictured surrounded by smaller 
figures popularly identified as Daoist (the "Earth God;' Tudi Gong, for example, 
and the goddess Mazu). Occasionally one sees a single picture in this style used as 
backdrop to a small altar where space is a problem. Guan Gong, however, is never 
accompanied by a supportive cast of Buddhist figures. Pictures of him alone or 
with Daoist attendants appear as decorations on shop altars but not on domestic 
altars, it would seem. The left/right placement and the unequal size express a hi-
erarchy in which the Buddhist divinity consistently (and insistently) ranks higher 
than the Daoist." 
Informants, when asked, frequently reject a hierarchical interpretation of this 
invariant symbolism. On being asked which are greater or more powerful, shen 
or fo, informants gave varied answers. People with firm commitments to a par-
6. As I have observed the 1990s reinvention of folk religion in Fujian, Sichuan, and Zhejiang, I 
have seen many iconographic variants, but no displays that contravene the principle that, if shown to-
gether, Buddhist divinities outrank Daoist ones. The ranking is visible even above the altar of a Cal-
cutta Chinese family photographed by Ellen Oxfeld (1993:122). 
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners 
159 
ticular organization affiliated with Buddhism or Daoism (a scripture-chanting 
sisterhood, for example) tended to side with their favorite deity, but the majority 
were unwilling to make an invidious distinction or were puzzled by the contra-
diction implicit in it. An uncomfortable consensus leaned toward the Buddhist 
gods as ultimately higher, but this response left the question of how Tian Gong, 
the abstract "Heaven" at the top of the Daoist hierarchy, could possibly be out-
ranked. When I pressed the issue, observing that one could call all gods shen, but 
one could not call all gods fo, informants retreated to the position that they were 
more or less equal in power, but different in a number of ways -
which I shall 
shortly specify. 
Why then the asymmetrical format for altar pictures? 
Taiwan's temples are popularly identified as either Buddhist or Daoist, even 
though most display a wonderful variety of visible symbols characteristic of both 
traditions, plus imaginative extras. Although most identifications with one or the 
other tradition seem historically "correct;' some demonstrate that the catego-
rization of Buddhism and Daoism has more than a historical meaning. A widely 
worshiped Daoist deity- Qingshui Zushi Gong -
is iconographically peculiar 
in the crown and patched robe of a Buddhist, a costume that leads naive wor-
shipers to assume him to be Buddhist. While some informants told me of Bud-
dhist connections in his life, others insisted he is Daoist. Such cases indicate that 
the Buddhist/Daoist dualism is an inclusive one. People not only can categorize 
folk temples as Buddhist or Daoist: they must. Even the new sects that are con-
stantly emerging are seen as modifications of one or the other of the two tradi-
tions. There are no intermediate cases. The duality seen on domestic altars 
reappears in the categorization of temples, though because temples are identified 
exclusively with one tradition or the other, one cannot observe a hierarchy be-
tween the two. 
How does a naive worshiper -
newly moved to north Taiwan, say, and pay-
ing her respects to Qingshui Zushi Gong -
sort gods as Buddhist or Daoist? 
Iconography can be puzzling. The operative signal is the same Wolf observed 
being used to distinguish gods from ghosts and ancestors: shen and fa receive 
different food offerings. More than anything else, what people give to these be-
ings defines them. A knowledge of what offerings are appropriate alerts visitors 
to the deity's place in the religious dichotomy. In Taibei, with its large migrant 
population, such clues are necessary to a peripatetic worshiper. The modern 
four-way underpass to a famous and relatively new Taibei temple (Xing Tian 
Tang) is lined with stalls selling ritual goods. New visitors often ask vendors what 
offerings are acceptable. There and at other temples fellow worshipers and tem-
ple attendants sometimes chide the ignorant for bringing inappropriate offer-
ings. A positive outcome, not theological analysis, is, after all, the purpose of 
proper identification. The basic distinction in offerings lies in the life-protecting 
vegetarianism of Buddhists as opposed to the blood sacrifices of popular Dao-
160 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A ' 
S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
ism. Meats should not be offered in Buddhist temples, though the extremely tol-
erant style of traditional temples can accommodate mistakes: even Buddhas have 
guardians and soldiers who will eat meat offerings. 
Other practices also distinguish Buddhist from Daoist deities. Celibacy is as-
sociated with Buddhism, marriage and esoteric sexual potency with Daoism. A 
more significant marker for ordinary temple worshipers, most of whom are fe-
male, is the behavior expected of menstruating women. These should avoid the 
presence of Daoist gods, whom their pollution offends, but need not avoid Bud-
dhist ones. 
An "indigenous/foreign" dichotomy also distinguishes Daoist beings from 
Buddhist ones. In discussing differences between shen and fo, informants often 
volunteer that Buddhism is historically a religion from India, while Daoism is in-
digenous. Their familiarity with these facts may owe something to school-taught 
nationalism, but the information is well integrated into folk history through the-
atrical performances and popular literature. Foreignness still flavors Buddhism 
with long, meaningless, transliterated names of the Buddha and in the greeting of 
monks and nuns -
Omitofo -
which is often caricatured in jokes and popular 
drama, the Chinese equivalent of "mumbo-jumbo:' By contrast, Daoist ritual spe-
cialists -
and gods, when they speak through mediums -
are repositories of a 
greatly admired literary Taiwanese. Much is made by Daoist specialists of their 
fluency in reading memorials in this archaic dialect, and those who have paid for 
the reading take pride in its near-unintelligible authenticity. 
The Buddhist/Daoist distinction made in popular ritual presents a high de-
gree of internal consistency and coherence, suggesting that shen and fo represent 
two kinds of "real world" social experience. Following Wolf, shen in its broad 
sense ("gods" in general) can be equated with social authority beyond the kinship 
level. But while Daoist gods are very much like ordinary Taiwanese, Buddhist 
ones carry a different culture. Shen love meat, as do ordinary people; fo reject the 
most favored foods, reversing the value scale in common use. Daoist gods and 
their ritual specialists may be married, and the gods expect the culturally normal 
pollution tabus to apply in their presence. Buddhist gods and their attendants are 
celibate and seemingly beyond concern for menstrual taboos. Shen are native; fo 
are alien. What social realities do the familiar, Taiwanese-like shen and the foreign 
fo represent? 
I suggest that in the imperial period the mass of common people made use of 
what they knew of the two scriptural traditions to symbolize the two kinds of 
nonkin authorities which held power in their world. The first were the local land-
lords/merchants. These were separated from poorer folk by differences of petty-
capitalist class but shared with them some commonalities of language or dialect, 
food habits, and other customs; were linked to them by attenuated ties of kin-
ship; and were therefore relatively approachable as patrons. The second was the 
metropolitan official, a stranger to the area by bureaucratic tradition, forbidden 
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners : 
161 
to marry in the province of his post, alien in customs and probably in language. 
Perhaps no more influential for a commoner's purposes than a member of the 
landlord/merchant "gentry;' officials were difficult of access as bearers of both a 
class and a regional culture that differed from a commoner's own. Though the 
formal social status of officials was higher, a concrete Chinese with a real-life 
problem might be vexed in deciding which category of social authority was actu-
ally more powerful. 
Taiwan's historical remoteness from tributary authority- so that there were 
few and relatively weak members of the ruling class -
and the preeminence there 
of relatively uncontrolled petty capitalism, along with the merchant/landlords 
who benefited from it, perhaps explain why Taiwanese, unlike many mainland 
Chinese, historically have called the gods collectively shen rather than fo or pusa. 
The folk representation of gods as either Buddhist or Daoist, while often quite 
unhistorical, draws attention in direct ways to similarities between the two cate-
gories of powerful strangers who, unlike ghosts, were not to be despised and dis-
regarded. In the popular maintenance of a Buddhist-Daoist distinction we see a 
model of the same class complexity labeled academically as "China's gentry." 
From the commoner's viewpoint, Buddhist and Daoist deities were different, and 
in fairly transparent ways, just as sitting officials differed from rankless but still 
rich and mighty petty capitalists. Ultimately, however, they were the same in their 
power over those with no rank and little money. 
In Taiwan, the Buddhist-Daoist cosmological dualism has been reinforced by 
the political changes of the past eighty years: the incursions first of the Japanese 
and later of the Nationalists, whose more conspicuous officials have not been Tai-
wanese. Social and political power emanated from two culturally differing 
sources -
a Taiwanese upper class and a Japanese or Nationalist officialdom. Al-
though political representation and class accommodation slowly led to the inclu-
sion of more Taiwanese in government, the old cosmology persists in shaping 
popular interpretations of the structure of authority. In many parts of China, the 
powerful presence of central authorities, usually from distant regions and often 
living in postrevolution and hence segregated housing, is felt as an alien parallel 
to that of local notables- though these have only recently become petty capi-
talists again. 
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF THE UNDERWORLD 
Wolf's homology of gods, ghosts, and ancestors to socially significant cate-
gories is full of references to economic relationships. These offer evidence for a 
more political-economic interpretation than his is, yet is consistent with his ini-
tial statement of their socially conditioned polysemy. 
The Chinese insistently tell us not only that the world of supernaturals is just 
like our own but also that the two are closely integrated: living people, gods, 
162 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A ' 
S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
souls, and goods travel back and forth between the two, with much mutual in-
fluence. Attending to that insistence is important, so we should search for evi-
dence of the political-economic structure of the other world. 
As soon as we do, the obvious is revealed. The supernatural world is a world 
unsupported by a material base. Supernaturals eat, need clothing and housing, 
have debts to pay -
or they lack these things, and are consequently hostile -
but 
they cannot supply them without outside help. The tribute of food, clothing, and 
money which supports the other world comes from this world, from the work of 
living people. Like ghosts, both gods and ancestors are portrayed as dependents 
rather than as the creator-supplier-maintainers that rulers and parents claim 
themselves to be. What, and who, is powerful (and moral) is highly ambiguous. 
The simplest transactions with spirits are the regular domestic offerings to an-
cestors. These, in the form of normal meals, are simply the continuation after death 
of the obligation to support parents. This is an absolute obligation; neglect is sup-
posedly followed by ancestral punishment (Wolf 1974b:163-67; Li Yi-yuan 1976:334); 
imputations of neglect can be avoided sometimes only through gruesome acts of 
self-sacrifice, such as the use of a child's flesh to medicate a sick parent (Chaves 
1986:418-26). Ancestors will naturally attempt to aid their descendants, if only in 
their own interests, but their power is not actually very great, Wolf notes. Also, "A 
person's ancestors are his parents and grandparents, and parents and grandparents 
have no obligation to heed every request of a child or grandchild;' although Wolf 
allows that in rare cases persistently hostile-seeming ancestors may be forsworn 
(1974b:I67-68, 161). 
One does not import the discourse of the market into dealings with ancestors. 
Ancestors are not usually asked to help in money matters ("You go to a wealth 
god for that, or some very powerful god," informants told me).7 Their interven-
tion is more likely to be sought for a generalized stability and absence of trouble 
for the household. When seeking a special favor from an ancestor, the descendant 
need not make an offering then and there, for senior kinsmen are under a general 
obligation to heed the requests of their juniors, just as juniors are under a general 
obligation to provide comfort and support for their seniors" (Wolf 1974b:168). 
This is a tributary relationship, pure and simple. 
7. Geomancy appears to contradict the idea that ancestors are not asked to grant wealth, for cor-
rectly sited ancestral tombs are believed to be potent channelers of wealth to the family that erects 
them. But, as Freedman has said, "By geomancy ... men use their ancestors as media for the attain-
ment of worldly desires. And in doing so they have ceased to worship them and begun to usc them as 
things" (1967:88). Good fortune from successful geomancy does not come from ancestral volition, but 
rather from the mystical engineering of the gcomancer who taps into the natural forces of the uni-
verse. Gcomancers sell their skills to whoever pays them. The popular assumption is that, as in hiring 
a plumber, you get what you pay for. None of these dealings bears on the relationship between ances-
tors and descendants. 
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners 
163 
While real-world bureaucrats propagandized themselves as "father-mother 
officials;' the parents of the people, real-world human beings do not ritually treat 
otherworld bureaucrats like ancestors. The transactions human beings have with 
gods are more complex, exhibiting both tributary and petty-capitalist behaviors. 
Villages, city neighborhoods, sometimes entire towns hold festivals annually for 
each principal community god -
Tudi Gong (the "Earth God") or some local 
patron of higher rank. People residing in the administrative unit over which the 
god has control should participate in the celebration. People who choose not to 
avail themselves of the god's protection could, perhaps, refuse this obligation. 
Wolf observes that the worship of gods, unlike that of ancestors, was voluntary: 
"People ordinarily worship the god under whose jurisdiction they live because 
worship is often a community activity and because it is prudent to maintain good 
relations with such powerful figures, but it is clear that the average man does not 
feel morally obligated to make offerings to any god" (1974b:16o ). Wolf is focusing 
on individuals. In community ritual, however, the payment of very modest 
money contributions levied on each member of every household is a near-essen-
tial community duty; this is very evident in Taiwan. The amounts are deliberately 
set low so that only real poverty prevents participation. Similarly, in distant 
Shan dong, a man who refused to pay his share was brought before the magistrate 
by his fellow villagers, where he admitted that he had been wrong (Johnson 
1910:157). Households benefited from the protection implied by inclusion, and 
neighborhoods benefited by the reassertion of themselves as true, solidary com-
munities to visitors who paused to scan the careful accounting posted on the 
temple wall. 
People also relate to gods at times of their own choosing by visiting temples to 
ask favors. For some Taiwanese, temple-going is a constant preoccupation; many 
others never visit temples. Most people go to ask for a specific favor, and when 
someone does so, Wolf writes, 
he negotiates for [the god's] good will just as he would in attempting to secure 
a favor from a magistrate or a policeman. He makes a small sacrifice and 
promises a larger one if the god will grant his petition. If divination reveals 
that the god is not inclined to grant the petition, he then promises a more sub-
stantial gift, repeating the process until the god finally agrees. The god is al-
ways treated with all the courtesy owed someone of such high status, but the 
larger gift is not produced until after the desired outcome has been obtained. 
Having promised a pig's head if a child's illness is cured or the price of pork 
raised, a person does not actually sacrifice the pig's head until the child has re-
covered or he has sold his pigs at a profit. (1974b:162) 
One worshiper at least even advised a god to advertise a bit: "Every day I said to 
the god, 'You are a god with great ability, so why do you sit here and say nothing? 
You ought to show what you can do and let people here know what kind of a god 
164 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A ' S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
you are. It is because you don't show what you can do that people all go elsewhere 
to worship. If you would do something to make your ability known, the people 
would all come here to worship'" (160). 
"Offerings" to gods represent two different transactions. The small community 
charge at a festival is very much like a tax, owed by residents to a political superior, 
and not negotiable. The payer gains a highly generalized "protection" from this 
payment, but when something unpleasant happens anyway, no one is much sur-
prised that the collective protection proved feeble. Serious problems require a di-
fferent kind of assistance. The "worshiper" approaches a god and haggles over the 
price of the commodity/favor in fine petty-capitalist style. Sometimes the Chinese 
give their gods tribute, but they also treat them as official franchise holders of 
scarce goods for sale to the highest bidder. Like a passenger on Taiwan's earliest 
railroad, the petitioner tries to pay as little as possible for what she wants to pur-
chase, seals the deal with a down payment, and pays up only when she gets what 
she has been promised. Wolf's god/political authority parallel expands under ex-
amination to emphasize the dual economic possibilities inherent in relationships 
to class superiors. 
And what of ghosts? Ghosts are sometimes treated with charity, fed and 
clothed and supplied with pocket money in a spirit of compassion. They are gen-
erally seen, however, not as pitiable and helpless so much as vengeful and rapa-
cious. Wolf notes, "The more powerful among them roam the countryside like so 
many bandits." People make offerings to them "So that they will go away and 
leave you alone." They are like beggars, and "a beggar's request for alms is notre-
ally begging. It is a threat" (1974b:170, 171). Ghosts run a protection racket. Their 
demands are not negotiable; you may get nothing if you give to them, but you 
will certainly get trouble if you don't. 
Wolf argues convincingly that, as strangers, ghosts are merged with arche-
typal "others" who lurk outside the safe circle of kinship. But there is more to 
these devious ghosts. People stress their despised status but engage with them 
in transactions that look more like tribute than like buying and selling. They 
are wonderfully ambiguous, for one person's ancestor is another's ghost. And, 
very curiously, the imitation "spirit money" offered to them -
hok kim and 
gua kim -
is identical to that given to Tudi Gong and to the retainers -
low-
ranking secretaries and soldiers -
of Tian Gong, the highest god of all 
(1974b:I73-74> 180 ). 
Let us begin with the last of these peculiarities of ghostly status. Wolf says, and 
my own experience confirms, that in the popular view "the modern policeman, 
the traditional yamen runner, the bandit, the beggar, and the ghost all belong to 
the same category. 'You have to give them something so they will go away and not 
cause trouble' "(179). Of the beings grouped with ghosts as recipients of hok kim 
and gua kim, only Tudi Gong is virtuous. Or is he? Not at all: Tudi Gong, Wolf 
says, "is like a policeman who wears a uniform. He can only report to lower gods 
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners : 165 
like the Ch' eng Huang." Tudi Gong has two functions, "to police the [ghosts)" 
and "to spy on the affairs of his human charges, keep records of their activities, 
and report regularly to his superiors" (1974b:139, 134). 
It is counterintuitive for Tudi Gong to be lumped with the universally feared 
and despised ghosts. Iconographically, he is the very model of a sweet old "father-
mother official;' and his temples are often inscribed with the words "Fortunate, 
Virtuous, Upright God" -
a trifle fulsome even by popular Chinese standards. I 
have never heard a word against Tudi Gong. Yet Wolf is quite right that this low-
est ranker in the heavenly hierarchy is a policeman, an official's dangerous and 
interfering underling, and a spy. The same can be said for Cao Shen, the stove 
god who is the spiritual informer every household harbors: he reports at the end 
oflunar New Year on the family's misdeeds and thus must have his mouth closed 
with good food before he goes. Cao Shen got his unpleasant little job after sui-
ciding to end a life of poverty, bad luck, and having to sell his wife (Eberhard 
196sa:194-95). Suicides, as all know, make dreadful ghosts. 
Yet one could never call Tudi Gong a ghost. Dangerous, impossible, perhaps 
unthinkable to imagine sweet, sneaky old Tudi Gong (or, god forbid, Tian Gong 
himself) as a bandit. What gives this pillar of his community his Reaganesque 
ability to shed dirt? Two possibilities, neither excluding the other, suggest them-
selves. One of the best kinds of tribute to offer dangerous ghosts is housing. 
Building a shrine to shelter a ghost or god locates it in space, pins it down, just 
as ancestors are pinned down by being ritually located in ancestral tablets that 
are their "seats." Serious ritual precautions must be taken when supernaturals 
leave their shelters, as for processions at annual festivals, to protect people from 
their potential anger. People in Taibei pointed out that it is the same with the 
police: if they are out nosing around, bad things happen. If they stay in the po-
lice station, you can drop in every now and again to report things or invite them 
to a feast.s The relationship is still there, but, as long as they remain in their 
offices, people have some control. In the case of supernaturals, "We make tem-
ples beautiful so that the gods will be happy staying inside;' an old temple 
builder informed me. 
Tudi Gong, analog of the fearsome yam en-runner, is popularly promoted, in 
effect, from a mobile and troublesome bully to a respectable official when peo-
ple build him an office. He is, after all, the quintessential god of the locality. Im-
mobilized by elaborate etiquette and concealing architecture, he is pushed into 
passivity by his subordinates. As so commonly happens in Chinese life, the 
forms of respect and control are cleverly manipulated to give a modicum of 
control to those who in theory are controlled (H. Rohsenow 1973:167-69; Ahern 
1981). 
8. Intriguingly, a Qing bureaucratic regulation obliged many officials to remain in their yamens 
during their tenure of office (Balli982:JlO). 
166 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A ' S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
A second and more general explanation can be offered for why Tudi Gong is 
not described plainly as a ghost, despite the threatening policeman-like position 
that ritual details accord him. Tudi Gong is subject to the same limitation that 
makes it so hard for a person to admit that her mother might be "ghost" to some-
one else. By analogy with what one of Wolf's informants said about ancestors: 
"How could Tudi Gong be a ghost? Gods are protectors and help you. Ghosts 
make you sick and cause trouble." 9 Tudi Gong works for the government. By 
definition, he does good things: read the inscription. 
Even ghosts don't like to be called ghosts, Wolf's informants said: "They 
would be angry if you called them ghosts. Calling a ghost kui is like calling a beg-
gar 'beggar'" (1974b:171). 10 This does not mean, however, that they are not ghosts, 
for gui is a slippery category. Some ghosts- gui- are also other people's an-
cestors -
shen. Shen means both "god" and "ancestor." Ghosts can be gods. 
Sometimes, Wolf notes, ghosts are offered the same "three kinds" of whole meat 
offerings as gods. All demand nonnegotiable tribute-like offerings, on threat of 
either punishment or withdrawal of "protection." It would be very dangerous to 
say so, however, though peccadilloes irrelevant to class relations can be enshrined 
in folklore (Wolf 1974b:178, 145). 
Gods are (like) ghosts. Government officials are (like) rapacious bandits. Hi-
erarchs, heavenly and mundane, seize goods in return for promises of protection, 
though real protection must be bought separately, in another sort of transaction. 
Ghosts represent not only a lumpenproletariat, but the Lord of Heaven -
or at 
least his well-organized henchmen. In 1924, Florence Ayscough wrote that Cheng 
Huang, the urban deity who parallels a magistrate in his yam en, was associated 
with grotesque, ghostly beings portrayed by participants in popular processions 
in his honor. The same was true for the City God of Anjing, Anhui (Shryock 
1931). Both the rectitude of men who came to hold positions as otherworldly 
magistrates and their low taste in associates were stressed for this god. Even the 
epitome of compassion, Guanyin, appears at universal salvation rituals as a fero-
cious, blue-faced, male deity, Ta Shih Yeh (see Sangren 198p39-40, 154-56), 
sometimes merged with Yam a, the chief god of the hellish underworld. The kind-
est of gods has a threatening aspect. 
What does the ritual practice of ordinary people tell us (and them) about 
gods, ghosts, and ancestors? Whether clearly articulated or not -
and I think the 
9· Wolf's informant's actual sentence was "How could your ancestors be ghosts? Your ancestors 
are your own people and help you. Ghosts make you sick and cause trouble" (1974b:173). 
10. Euphemizing is the most popular of Chinese rhetorical turns. Even among themselves, the 
unclarities that this habit -
born of caution -
produces are sometimes called into question. 
Mao Zedong, attempting a clear description of various occupations in his 1930 social survey of 
Xunwu County, notes parenthetically that "when Xunwu people want to say that the tailor steals 
the fabric ... they say his scissors are sharp" (1990:93). 
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners 
167 
beliefs expressed by Taiwanese do articulate them -
the folk vision of the other 
world that is "just like" our world clearly specifies the nature of economic trans-
fers and the categories of social persons who engage in them. These, I believe, re-
veal that Chinese commoners held a much less positive view of their social world 
than is supposed by Daniel Overmeyer and many others. He argues that schools, 
lectures, and popular religious tracts "caused originally elite values to permeate 
popular consciousness. All of these factors led to an increased sense of cultural 
unity despite social differences, which were understood to be a part of the natural 
order of things" (1984:2-3). I read folk practice very differently. 
Unlike these folk practices, official rituals performed by bureaucrats engage 
humans with gods in purely tributary exchanges in the primitive form of usable 
goods: deities who are worshiped in state ceremonies received consumables, 
often presented in whole forms, such as a whole ox or sheep or full bolts of silk. 
In these elaborate rites, there is no hint of haggling, only constant stress on the 
submissiveness of the human participants to the expectations of the supernatu-
rals, and on the participants' "purity" and "emptiness" (Zito 1987:351); demands 
for reciprocity are absent. Most interaction of commoners with gods and ghosts, 
however, is petty-capitalist bargaining. People do not see this as corruption, I 
think, for in the face of the gods'/ghosts' ruler/banditlike capacity to demand 
tribute, when people receive something in return for their offerings, the exchange 
seems moral. 
MONEY FOR THE GODS 
The near-universal penetration of the ritual sphere by petty-capitalist values 
is plainly expressed in the extremely positive view taken of money, and of its use 
as something very like capital. 11 Money imagery permeates every sphere of Chi-
nese life. A Sichuanese telegrapher observed at the turn of the century that he had 
"spent [12 pounds]learning English, and therewith bought five thousand words" 
(Mrs. A. Little [1898]:184). Money appears in popular ceremony in innumerable 
ways: abstractly, as in the prominently posted lists of contributions to opera per-
formances and temple-building funds; and concretely, as money changes hands 
in temples to pay for incense and ritual services, and in the form of actual coinage 
used as ritual items. One is most likely to petition Daoist gods, or shen, to make 
money; Buddhist fo (like ancestors) are primarily responsible for family well-
being and tranquility (ping' an). In the old days, said elderly Taiwan informants, 
one ideally gave land to temples designated as yan or si (Buddhist) but gave 
money to miao (Daoist). 
Not surprisingly, the ritual use of money has long been associated with mar-
riage and fertility. Han dynasty "spring coins" -
rectangular, with auspicious 
n. Some of these arguments are included in Gates 1987a. 
168 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A ' S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
words on one side and a god and goddess copulating on the other, were thought 
to disperse evil in the household when given to a bride and groom on their wed-
ding night. In the Song, round "bedcurtain spreading coins" depicting various 
sexual positions were an integral part of the dowry, decorating the bridal bed 
(Chou 1971:181). In the nineteenth century, coinage was used on bridal beds in 
Xiamen (Doolittle 1966, 1:76-77); in Guangzhou, Gray saw the populace throw 
money onto the beds of the City God and his wife at festivals (1875:433) and hang 
cash on orange trees in bridal processions (1878, 1:202). 
Money is an alchemist's stone that transforms one commodity into another 
through the act of purchase. It represents in straightforward fashion the ex-
change of properties in the market. In a capitalist context, money- as Marx ob-
serves -
"reproduces itself" like a living being, as invested capital produces 
profit. It is thus easily fetishized -
perceived as an active entity, as among the 
peasants of Colombia (Taussig 1975) and the readers of the Wall Street Journal. In 
some parts of China, sprinkling coins with bat's blood may induce the coins to 
return to the person who spent them (Alexeiev 1928:31). 
To commoners, money is not contaminating, dirty, or evil. Indeed, money 
purifies. In contemporary Taiwan, packets of spirit money serve as insulators be-
tween spiritually charged objects (such as sacred images) and the table or floor on 
which they stand and as decorations for sacrificial pigs. When people move gods 
from private to public altars they burn "spirit money" to remove or avert pollution. 
Seventy years ago potential bad consequences of a child's inauspicious words were 
avoided if one rubbed the child's mouth with spirit money (Bredon and Mitro-
phanow 1972:115). Its purificatory effect was dramatized in a small political ritual 
from late-nineteenth-century Sichuan. A man accused of stealing a child paraded 
from shrine to shrine, "with a white calico placard pasted on to his coat behind, at-
testing his innocence, his pigtail hanging unplaited, and wearing a crown of coarse 
paper cash, with long streamers of paper cash hanging from it. ... A man went be-
fore him with a gong, shouting out the whole story" (Mrs. A. Little l1898]:184-85). 
Money in China has also been closely associated with the transformations of 
death (Naquin 1988; J. Watson 1988:114-15); as charms or amulets against evil 
spirits, or for communication with the dead (Doolittle 1966, 2:145; 1, 174, 177-78). 
A corpse asked to approve of its funeral arrangements responded by letting fall 
from its sleeve coins previously placed there. Water for washing corpses was 
"bought" from a nearby river in Guangzhou (Douglas 1887:320, 319); this custom 
is still followed in many parts of Fujian today. Contemporary Taiwan geomancers 
scatter coins on graves to encourage family fertility. The altars at a ceremony per-
formed annually by Fuzhou migrants to Taibei for the souls of their unknown 
dead function as banks in the transmission of wealth, including money, to the 
other world. Money is a wonderfully convenient symbolic connector for the 
strong relationship between death and fertility in Chinese culture (Watson and 
Rawski 1988). 
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners 
169 
The conspicuous use of money in funeral and death-related ceremonies de-
rives from a belief in the important supernatural transactions between people 
and gods believed responsible for each person's incarnation and fate. These 
transactions present models of, and for, human behavior which imply that the 
creation of human life itself depends on capitalist-like principles. 
According to my informants and Hou Ching-Lang (1975:35), a soul in the super-
natural realm seeks rebirth. First, however, it must obtain a body and a fate through 
which to pursue its karmic course. To do so, it must contract a mystical debt that will 
encumber its reincarnated life: one of a dozen celestial treasuries, each with its gov-
erning official, advances a loan to the spirit. Part of the money is used to purchase a 
body for reincarnation; the rest defrays the cost of the individual's future lot in life. 
A generous loan can purchase a happy and comfortable fate, while a person with a 
small loan must live with correspondingly straitened means. During life, one should 
strive to reduce the debt through the performance of virtuous acts, through prayers 
(one Buddhist sutra cited by Hou gives equivalencies between sutra recitations and 
cash values) (1975:48), and through donations of money to the gods, both as burned 
spirit money and as gifts of real value to temples. 
A person never completely repays the debt. At her funeral, relatives must pay 
off the account by burning great sums of spirit money if the spirit is to enter un-
encumbered into a new and presumably more fortunate incarnation. This "Cer-
emony of the Reimbursement of the Debt" requires the burning of specific sums 
of spirit money, and the making out and sending (by burning) of duplicate 
copies of a contract of fulfillment of obligation, one to the appropriate treasury 
officer, and the other to the spirit herself, presumably for her records. 12 A seal, 
stamped half on each copy, assures verifiability. The burning of paper spirit 
money automatically multiplies its quantity in the other world, so that more is 
repaid than was originally borrowed. Additional sums are burned for the use of 
the spirit during her stay in the other world, for various subofficials, to smooth 
the way, and sometimes to clear up the possibly uncanceled debts of other ances-
tors who might be in need of such assistance. "Sending a bit more is a good idea; 
the gods expect it;' said one informant. 
Although repaying this debt is the basic motivator for the offering of spirit 
money to the gods throughout life and for burning large quantities of it at folk 
12. Information -
"memorials" -
as well as cash can be transmitted from the mundane to the 
unearthly world by burning, and some Chinese interpret spirit money as memorials (Wolf 1974b:181) 
rather than filthy lucre. I believe that this view represents an attempt to bring folk practice into line 
with the supposedly higher morality of tributary ritual, which emphasizes use values and downplays 
commodities. Status climbing by popular ritual specialists denatures spirit money from real, spendable, 
interest -bearing cash to "petitions." That specialists attempting to claim close relationship with au-
thorities in the spirit world should take this view, while laypeople insist that the stuff is just like money, 
accords well with my proposal of the existence of two models of political economic transactions. 
170 
: 
C H 
I 
N A 
S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
funerals, other ritual complexities employing spirit money are possible. A per-
son who has had extraordinarily bad fortune may invite a specialist to perform 
a ceremony to change fate, in which eerie little paper figures of astrological sig-
nificance are burned along with spirit money. Hou describes the ceremony the 
"Restoration of Destiny," often performed after a stretch of extraordinarily 
good luck, which is assumed to have drawn too extensively on the debt-based 
account. The account might then become exhausted and its holder die prema-
turely. In another rite, the supplicant applies for an augmentation of her loan 
(1975:78, 99). 
In Xiamen (Amoy) in the late nineteenth century, under conditions of less-
thoroughgoing capitalist penetration of folk life than in present-day Taiwan, 
J. J. M. de Groot observed a somewhat different version of the paying-off-the-
debt ceremony. During the obsequies, kin entrust a special kind of low-denomi-
nation "treasury money" (kho ci: [Taiwanese]) "to the appropriate treasury 
officer who, with eleven others form a set of spirits who devote themselves exclu-
sively to this sort of work, not merely for the benefit of the dead, but also for the 
sake of their own purse, as the management of other people's money matters is, 
both in terrestrial and subterranean China, a business that pays well" (1969, 
1:78-79). The twelve treasury officers represent the twelve astrological animals; it 
is clear which officer should be invoked. A Daoist calls the spirit into a paper rep-
resentation, identifies the recipient, and burns spirit money, paper ingots, and 
the appropriate sum of treasury money. 
The treasury money plays a very prominent part in this remittance of precious 
metal and cash money to the other world .... It is ... designed for enabling 
the soul to liquidate its old debts there, which it cannot properly do without a 
large quantity of small coin . 
. . . . The prevailing popular notions ascribe every case of birth upon 
this earth to the release of a soul from Hades, which redemption is, how-
ever, never granted unless a heavy ransom is paid by the soul itself to Yama 
and his underlings .... [N]early all of them have to borrow from their fel-
low [spirits], if they desire to be re-incarnated on earth .... The soul, re-
turning now to Hades, will consequently at once be assailed there by a host 
of creditors, who are all anxious to collect the funds necessary for their own 
release .... [T] he small coin [which the boxes of treasury money] contain 
will help the soul to settle its accounts more quickly, and thus enable it to 
rid itself of its dunners in less time; moreover, it saves it the troublesome 
work of changing the bullion and keeps it out of the clutches of money-
changers, who, in the Chinese hell no less than in the Chinese empire, never 
feel any qualms of conscience .... [T]he quantity of treasury money re-
quired by a dead man ... stands in immediate relationship to the year of 
his birth. [1:8o] 
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners 
171 
The amounts required for each astrological year are posted in shops that sell 
spirit money, but "very dutiful mourners" send odd-numbered multiples of the 
minimum. 
From his observations in central China in the later nineteenth century, Dare 
describes two versions of this complex. In the less common, less monetized, and 
perhaps older version, mourners purchased paper printed with images of public 
granaries and state treasuries, which were burned with prayers to their guardians 
for their generosity to the soul of the deceased. In the more popular version, 
mourners filled chests with paper money and paper silver ingots, sealed the 
chests with the date and name of the recipient, and brought them to the temple 
of the City God. They were "deposited like capital" in the god's bank, producing 
interest for the account holder (1970:58-59 ). 
Spirit money not only represents earthly money, but its production was and 
is an important source of income in many regions bf China (e.g. western Fujian, 
a major paper-producing area). It is both symbol and reality. Sometimes, how-
ever, the money was purely imaginary, and "producing" it provided income for 
many women. A 1917 observer describes how, in Chaozhou, vegetarian "fasting 
grandmothers" recited sutras to earn supernatural money in the other world to 
save themselves or others from the torments of hell. So many recitals made up 
100 copper cash, so many rosaries count as 1000. The "Spirit Cong-Guing is re-
sponsible for the management of these women's affairs .... To him they offer 
the merit-money [earned in prayer- H.G.] ... ; and as he receives it from 
them, he passes it on to the spirit Hu-Sa, who, when they arrive in Hades, will 
give each one her own, but until they arrive, he places it all in Spirit Chong's 
bank, where, under the skilful conduct of accountant Spirit Li, it accumulates 
merit-interest." Such women were also paid by others to make merit-money for 
them, "so the poor amongst them are almost self-supporting, instead of help-
lessly dependant on a begrudged living, with their own descendants" (Darley 
1917:161, 159). In Zhejiang in the 1930s, Clarence Burton Day saw a similar scene 
in a Wealth God temple. 
Many women, however, were hired to produce paper spirit money. In 1940, 
women were paid seven cents a day to make nine hundred sheets (41/z by 6 
inches). Sometimes, pragmatically, kinswomen of a dead person made spirit 
money themselves to avoid buying it. "Thus economizing, they felt able to give a 
correspondingly greater amount to be burned for the Hades bank account of the 
dependent mother, and by this good deed thereby store up future merit for them-
selves" (1969:24, 30). 
The making of spirit money was concentrated in regions of China where ap-
propriate fibers were cheap: bagasse in Taiwan, where one could see petty-capi-
talist hand production through a putting-out system in the streets of Dansui into 
the 1970s; bamboo in western Fujian, where, until the 1950s, rural folk made their 
living carrying 8o-to-2oo-pound packages of mountain-made paper to the Jiu-
172 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A 
S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
long River for printing in port cities and eventual export to southeast Asia and -
now again -
to Taiwan; bamboo in Sichuan, where spirit money handmade 
from local papers reappeared for sale in the 1980s outside popular temples. 
THE MORALITY OF MONEY 
The offering of spirit money has often been caught by observers in moments 
of historical change. Hou describes the diffusion of an "occidental" style of 
money to Taiwan through more sophisticated Shanghai merchants after 1949 
(1975=16-17); I found that Taiwan Mainlanders from north China, where petty 
capitalism was always weak, still prefer to burn imitation silver ingots rather than 
either traditional or "occidental-style" paper money. 
De Groot's version of spirit mortgages differs from more recent ones in the 
relative simplicity of its financial arrangements, with its debtor's prison for souls 
and its highly personal basis for the original debt, while Dore's hints at a shift 
from the use of money to placate political power to its use in a capitalist way, to 
draw interest. Hou's version, which my Taibei informants support, assumes a 
highly institutionalized financial system, a celestial central bank. In it, we see the 
human body, the length of its life, and the quality of that life equated to specific 
sums of money- as extreme an example of the penetration of a money econ-
omy into human existence as metaphor can express. 
What do such transactions tell the Taiwanese about themselves and their 
economy? It is hard to resist standing Weber on his head for a "Daoism and the 
spirit of Chinese capitalism" view of the connections among the folk belief in 
Original Debt, popular ideals of righteous conduct, and petty-capitalist eco-
nomic practice. Simply staying in an owner-operator business, let alone prosper-
ing and expanding, depends on credit-worthiness and on trust that others will 
fulfill their obligations. Now, as always, people of Taiwan's lower classes do not 
look to the law and the state to enforce contracts. Saso (1982:185-86) identifies the 
Confucian virtue of yi with reciprocity among friends and business associates, 
arguing that the worship of gods expresses the social value of these important re-
lationships. That the gods are concerned with honesty and uprightness in human 
transactions, and reward these with prosperity, is a commonplace among small-
business people and craft workers. Paying one's debts, an essential obligation on 
earth, becomes elevated through ritual to a kind of sacrament in heaven, an act 
of personal salvation. 
I am interested, however, not just in money per se but in money used like cap-
ital, and in the extent to which these ritual uses reflect and encourage capitalist-
like relations. Marx distinguishes clearly between money that acts simply as a 
medium of circulation or a measure of value, the "universal material representa-
tive of wealth" (1973:216), on the one hand, and as capital, on the other. Money in 
precapitalist class societies, through its use as a medium of exchange and mea-
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners : 
173 
sure of value, became, in Marx's words, "the embodied form of wealth, in con-
trast to all the substances of which wealth consists." "From its servile role, in 
which it appears as mere medium of circulation, it suddenly changes into the 
lord and god of the world of commodities, while they represent its earthly form." 
As complex precapitalist societies monetarized their economies, money became 
"the god among commodities" (221). Chinese proverbs express similar imagery: 
"Ten ounces of silver gets through to the gods; one hundred ounces gets through 
to Heaven itself" (in Plopper 1969:168); "The Earth God runs a bank; money 
opens the way to the gods" (in J. Rohsenow 1991:234). 
Historically, perhaps, ritual offerings of consumable commodities, foodstuffs, 
and silk gave way to gold and its symbolic representations, and then to paper 
symbols much like those still in use. Sacrifices made in the state cult, which sup-
ported the anticapitalist tributary mode of production, included only consum-
able commodities- never money (Edkins 1878:18-38). "The idea of a sacrifice in 
them is that of a banquet" (23). While de Groot cites sources placing the transi-
tion to paper spirit money as early as the third and fourth centuries, with the 
offering of money taking nearly its present form by the seventh century (1969, 
1:713-14), Hou plausibly argues that the shift took place in conjunction with the 
great Song urbanization of the twelfth century, which so expanded the use of 
money in China, and with the growth of traditional banking and of paper bank-
notes. He comments that a text of this period, intended to be recited before di-
vinities and still in use at present, contains elements of "a religion of unknown 
origin which is totally founded on wealth" -
unlike previous Daoist tradition 
(1975:35-36). I seriously doubt that the version of the debt rituals current in Tai-
wan date from the Song; the existence of a less fully capitalist form in Xiamen in 
the nineteenth century, and an awareness of the plastic nature of folk ideologies 
in response to cultural change would argue against such a direct line of descent. 
That the offering of commodities shifted to the offering of money, and then im-
itations of money, appears historically valid, however. 
But is this money capital, or its petty-capitalist analogue? Can it be seen as a 
means to the production of more money, through capital's capacity for "ex-
changing itself for labour power, by calling wage labour to life" (Marx and Engels 
1962:92)? In the contemporary Taiwan rituals relating to a soul's supernatural 
debt we can see sketched out, for us and for the Chinese bearers of tradition, 
Marx's classic distinction "between the circulation of money as capital, and its 
circulation as mere money" (Marx 1977:250). 
Marx sums up this distinction in two simple formulas. The first -
mere 
money, or money as a medium of exchange- is C-M-C, denoting the selling of 
a commodity, C, for money, M, which is then used to purchase a further com-
modity, C, to be consumed. Here, money simply facilitates the transfer of two 
commodities of equal value. By contrast, M-C-M denotes the use of money to 
purchase a commodity, which is resold for money. Money has circulated and re-
174 
: 
C 
H 
I 
N 
A 
S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
turned to it original owner, perhaps in a larger amount, to be recirculated. "In the 
case of interest-bearing capital, the circulation M-C-M presents itself in abridged 
form ... as M-M', i.e., money which is worth more money, value which is 
greater than itself" (1977:257). "It has acquired the occult ability to add value to 
itself. It brings forth living offspring, or at least lays golden eggs" (1973:255). 
Are these not the transactions in which Chinese gods and people engage and 
that conclude in the payment of the debt? For human beings, money is a medium 
by which they exchange part of the fruits of their life's labor for the most essen-
tial of "commodities" -
a human body and life fate -
both of which when 
consumed, cease to be. Gods, by contrast, lay out money as interest-bearing cap-
ital that expands through the labor natural to a human life. Gods expect to re-
ceive more than they originally lent: a series of offerings over the lifetime of the 
individual in the course of normal religious activity, and a final repayment that is 
usually supplemented with extra amounts. This money returns to the celestial 
treasury to recirculate and expand itself through further capitalist transactions 
with human souls. Typical humans move endlessly through the cycle of birth and 
death, debt and repayment. Consumption traps us in the world's red dust. 
This last of life's rituals not only teaches the virtue of paying one's debts but 
also makes explicit the two uses of money, and the consequences of such uses. In 
religious metaphor, the putting out of money at interest is honored, the ultimate 
unproductiveness of its use to support consumption is underscored. Gods, 
wealthy and powerful, perform the one transaction; humans, poor and depen-
dent, the other. When people are admonished to model their behavior on the 
gods', they are given an economic program that is not separable from a moral 
one. How this transaction reflects on actual tributary rulers, who give nothing 
material in return for what they take, is plain to see. From the viewpoint of Third 
Wang and Fourth Li, the virtuous should truck, barter, and exchange, rather than 
grab from others or renege on what they owe; and they should be very circum-
spect about pointing out these strategies. 
By focusing on the supernatural hierarchy and on the transactions between 
this world and the other, we can see clearly the key assumptions Chinese com-
moners have made about power and class in their communities, and about their 
two modes of production. The folk distinctions established by anthropologists 
among gods, ghosts, and ancestors, together with the popular ideology of money 
as capital, clarify lines of cleavage in the social world between ruler/commoner 
and propertied/propertyless. They also invert the values the god/ghost/ancestor 
trichotomy intially implies. Spirits are nonproducing dependents, not providers; 
investing/producing are good, spending/consuming are only necessities. The 
Buddhist/Daoist distinction is constantly reinforced by the existence of both offi-
cial and unofficial sources of wealth and power in a two-mode political economy. 
In dealing with gods, and also with the ghosts and ancestors with which they are 
so complexly linked, people accept the hierarchical parameters of a tributary cos-
Folk Ideologies: Rulers and Commoners : 
175 
mos. Yet they valorize petty capitalism not because it is natural for people to cre-
ate markets but because immediate and concrete exchange between equals ac-
cords better with the human taste for autonomy than unequal or imaginary and 
delayed exchange. They recognize, and even sacralize, the petty-capitalist experi-
ence that opens a back door to their own immediate goals. Money subverts the 
rigid rules of tributary inequality, offers greater distributive justice, and thus 
glows with a luster brighter than virtue. 
The folk ideology of political-economic life directs our attention repeatedly to 
the double political economy of the real world, where both tributary and petty-
capitalist exchanges defined the status and the power of commoners and gave 
shape to community and ethnic identities. The giving of tribute, while obliga-
tory, also revealed the worth and humanity of the "inferiors" who supplied their 
superordinates' needs. The systematic symbolic insistence on this point shows 
that both class and kin subordinates questioned the official ideology that re-
sources, benevolence, life itself flowed from the powerful to the weak. The image 
of a trickle-down goodness from rulers and kin seniors so persistently purveyed 
to the populace may have been primarily effective in propping up the authorities' 
sense of themselves. If we read the evidence of the popular world view as it is 
plainly and emphatically set forth in folk religion, everyone knew that the welfare 
of all society rested on the work of household producers. They knew too that the 
ruling class was neither generous nor moral when they took the concrete and re-
turned only the abstract. 
The shifting images of gods, ghosts, and ancestors as bureaucrats, strangers, 
and kinfolk are, of course, socially constructed. They are also a form of critical 
theory. This insight belongs to Chinese popular culture, not only to academic 
discourse. No one says that the Chinese material world is a shadow of another, 
realer one, as Platonic thinkers do. They say that it is like ours. 
176 
C H 
I 
N 
A ' 
S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
Folk Ideologies: 
Women and Men 
T'ang Chu Shih, a Ning-hai [Shandong] widow of the Ming dynasty, be-
came so famous for her virtuous refusals of marriage that she was hon-
oured by the local magistrate with the official presentation of a laudatory 
scroll bearing the words, "Pure and chaste as frozen snow." 
-
From a regional gazetteer, 1910 
Legend pretends that the origin of [Zhu Xi's] superhuman wisdom was a 
pearl of great value which a fox-fairy, in the likeness of a beautiful young 
woman who came to serve him ... brought as a gift. Yielding to her en-
treaties, he swallowed the precious jewel [and became wiser than all 
other mortals]. -
Fox-fairy legend 
Commoners face rulers with an ideology of power which turns 
out, on close inspection, to be rather different from the one their rulers try to 
teach. In parallel fashion, men expect women to be absorptive and uncritical of 
masculinist lessons, while folk ideologies show women to be more independent-
minded than men would like. They also show, however, that the analysis implicit 
in folk belief stumbles on the intellectual obstacle of sexual differences. Cutting 
across the socially constructed cosmos of gods, ghosts, ancestors, and living peo-
ple are phenomena that Chinese firmly place outside of human tinkering, aspects 
of an absolute, unconstructed nature. Central to these is sex. 
Naturalism is always suspect. It conceals not only what we do not yet under-
stand but many things we understand all too clearly and cannot bear to consider, 
or do not dare to discuss. At the same time, we know we are a part of nature. In-
terpretations of our connection with it are part of all cultural traditions. Chinese 
naturalism as it is epitomized in sex forms the core of a vision of the cosmos 
which differs from that organized around a double political economy, but is not 
incompatible with it. 
177 
At the core of P. Steven Sangren's lengthy argument connecting ritual efficacy, 
legitimacy, and the structure of value is the durable Durkheimian insight that "to 
legitimate social institutions ... , magical power must be conceived as emanat-
ing from sources outside these institutions" (1987:4). By an extreme naturaliza-
tion of gender as sex alone, Chinese people concealed from themselves the 
artificiality of the gender roles that were essential to their political economy: 
asymmetrical property rights for women and men. Whereas the symbolism of 
the heavenly bureaucracy argues for a direct popular awareness of the con-
structed nature of political and economic positions and powers, the symbolism 
of sex argues that the (inevitable) social construction of gender was not directly 
apprehended. The concealment of its social aspects, and the exaggeration of its 
biological ones, resulted in a highly contradictory naturalization of gender. 
The sharpness of the gender distinction faced a very considerable intellectual 
challenge from within Chinese culture. Although they professed a powerful ide-
ological position that women and men are deeply different, Chinese people cer-
tainly did not assume that female and male characteristics would naturally 
emerge in growing children: they had to be taught, and taught hard. My hun-
dreds of interviews of footbound women show that girls had to be made into 
marriageable women through painful physical change, just as boys had to be 
beaten into literacy. Most Chinese firmly believed in both the power of and the 
necessity for forceful education, if only in modesty, embroidery, and pickle-mak-
ing. Since the Song, the system of political recruitment depended on such a be-
lief. The construction of the good person through li, ritual, and other forms of 
education was a positive obsession in Chinese life. Yet, despite the frequent state-
ments that children must be taught appropriate gender characteristics, despite all 
the obvious differences in treatment of girls and boys, the differences between 
them were perceived as natural. 
Previous chapters on the treatment of females in kinship, and of women's role 
in the economy, suggest why the great effort expended in the Chinese cultural 
construction of gender was determinedly ignored. Who could have borne the 
moral burden of such discriminatory acts without believing that women, less 
than true kin, less than fully human, stood beyond the pale of the moral obliga-
tions that obtained among men? Without the direct economic exploitation of 
women, however, petty capitalism and the energy with which it infused tributary 
circuits would have deflated to near-stasis. 
Trapped in this ideological necessity of the powerful men around them, how 
must women have seen the cosmos? Women's experiences were doubly muffled, 
doubly dangerous to articulate, compared with those of commoner men. Their 
opportunities to leave us written records have been fewer, and their actions were 
of little significance to the Chinese and Westerners who wrote about them. There 
are, of course, exceptions -
on these we must depend for all our information. 
Caught between the sketchiness of the relatively well-organized documents writ-
178 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
ten by outside observers- foreigners and Chinese, historians and ethnogra-
phers -
and the limitless number of tantalizing fragments of folklore buried in 
indigenous sources, I make no attempt here to delineate regional patterns in what 
follows. As in the previous chapter, I try rather to expand what many recent an-
thropologists have found to be true in Taiwan, where the record is best, and 
where I have been able to test my ideas with ordinary people, by noting what 
seem to be universal elements of a popular vision of women. Some of these are 
well supported by such recent and historically and spatially precise studies as 
those of Steven Sangren (1983, 1987), J. Watson (1985), Stevan Harrell (1986), and 
Robert Weller (1986). 
Even if the records were better than they are, we could never expect to find a 
fully expanded counterculture among Chinese women. Not having a coherent, 
honorable, and just view of self and surroundings is one of the destructive con-
sequences of oppression. Although it is important to document and analyze re-
sistance, subversion, and all the "weapons of the weak" (Scott 1985), the greater 
power and authority remained with rulers except when rare, revolutionary 
shifts in dominance occurred. Chinese women, however, have left us hints both 
of their influence on the popular vision (and sometimes even on the ruling-
class vision) and of the ideological positions they took when free to do so (see 
Teng 1990). 
WOMEN IN RITUAL 
Folklore sometimes captures an individual woman's contribution to local be-
lief. In the early part of this century, in the Shandong town of Rongcheng, a 
woman attributed her daughter's death to the City God's desire that she become 
his wife. The district magistrate accepted the evidence and arranged for the 
young woman's reburial within the temple and the installation of her image be-
side that of the god. The new goddess came to be venerated as a healer by local 
women, who left her many small offerings (Johnston 1910:369-71). We may as-
sume that the mother was pleased to have her maiden daughter so well settled in 
the afterworld and wonder how large a role she played in creating her goddess-
daughter's posthumous claims.' More commonly, however, we must look to the 
impersonality of custom to find female influence. 
Women were enthusiastic participants in popular public ritual, even in re-
gions where many adult women were normally secluded within the home or the 
1. Johnston describes this as a "story" much believed in and acted upon in Rongcheng (Jung-
ch'eng). It parallels in many ways a folk story treated by Wolfram Eberhard as an exemplar of a genre 
of maiden-marries-a-deity tales common in China since the Han (1965a:61-62, 212-13). A principal 
point of such stories is the relationship a family (usually through the bride's mother) can establish 
with a powerful being through the death/marriage of their daughter. 
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
179 
confines of the village. A nineteenth-century observer notes that for Shandong 
festivals "women and girls are allowed the unusual privilege of riding uncovered, 
on wheelbarrows and sedan-chairs, through the streets" and that they undertook 
triennial visits to their husbands' families' graves as enjoyable outings ( Coltman 
1891:6o, 109 ). Some festivals for female gods attracted only women (Gray 1878, 
1:382), who could thus attend without improper mingling of the sexes. Folk ritu-
als provided the greatest excuse for women to be out and about, however; some 
wedding contracts contained clauses specifying how many pilgrimages a year a 
woman was to be permitted (Mrs. A. Little [1898]:122). Foreign observers have 
often noted the large numbers of women attending community festivals and 
other public rituals; Chinese who vilified folk religion as superstition often 
blamed its persistence on its attractions for women. More evenhandedly, peas-
ants in Jiaomei, Fujian, say "men have ancestral halls, women have temples" (A. 
Wolf 1980, fieldnotes). 
Rituals for levels in the tributary hierarchy (the state, ancestor worship, 
commoner communities, and even of the domestic stove god) were ideally per-
formed by men. Doubtless many regional variations existed: a north China ob-
server of domestic offerings to the sun comments on the unusual role of 
women "whose presence is so often forbidden at the offering-table" (Bredon 
and Mitrophanow 1972:76, 16o); Taiwan women performed the day-to-day an-
cestral worship on domestic altars but yielded to men in lineage halls and on 
major occasions. 
Offerings to some supernaturals, however, could be made only by women. 
They officiated at domestic worship of the moon on the fifteenth day of the 
eighth lunar month, and of the Weaving Woman or her star counterpart on the 
seventh day of the seventh month. These were lighthearted ceremonies, but not 
minor ones. The moon festival was and is one of China's major popular celebra-
tions, attached in legend to Confucian virtues and thus officially encouraged. An-
drea Sankar, drawing on the memories of women who had participated in such 
events early in this century, describes the festival as sanctifying sisterly relations 
(1978:23-25). The 7:7 festival in the nineteenth century celebrated needlework, 
among other things, with embroidery exhibitions, needle-threading-in-the-dark 
contests, and dainty, rococo food offerings (Gray 1878, 1:261-63). The textile arts 
were not amusements for bored ladies, but the source of valuable objects for use, 
tribute, gift, and sale. Additional patronesses of women and needlework2 are 
common today- in the north, Mao Gugu (Bredon and Mitrophanow 1972:95); 
in Tuen Mun, Hong Kong, a female god who still receives needles and hanks of 
embroidery thread as votive offerings. 
These women's festivities were domestic, but women in Taiwan and Fujian 
took important roles in community ritual as well. In Jiaomei, Fujian, married 
2. And, completeness obliges me to add, of lavatories. 
180 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A ' S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
daughters were responsible for all (the women's view) or part (the men's view) of 
the upkeep of village temples, as Arthur Wolf notes: 
When a village temple was in need of repair, a meeting was called of all daugh-
ters who had married, and the wealthiest among them was asked to serve as 
head. The others then contributed to the best of their ability, the head making 
up the short-fall. ... wealthy families competed for the honor of their daugh-
ter-in-law serving as head because the amounts contributed were always 
posted .... the women living in a village did not contribute to the repair of 
the local temple; their responsibility was to the temples in their natal villages. 
(1980, fieldnotes) 
In Taiwan and the rest of the Chinese world, women still prepare the food for 
gods and guests and, in many communities, make offerings to gods and ancestors 
alike. Without their enthusiastic compliance in this highly valued component of 
festivity, ceremonies would be far less enjoyable and ritually adequate. 
Women made good use of the opportunities for autonomy, consumption, and 
direct access to supernatural power which folk religion offered. Through their 
massive and long-standing participation, sometimes the form and content of folk 
ideology were altered. Striking examples are revealed in the inappropriate intru-
sion of female gods into the heavenly bureaucracy (Sangren 1983; ]. Watson 1985). 
Guanyin and Mazu, imagined as self-sacrificing virgins, became immensely pop-
ular in late-imperial times, their cults spreading to many parts of China. Mazu 
was (and is) a patron of powerful landholding lineages in Guangzhou (Watson 
1985), but she was better known for her association with the Fujianese seagoing 
traders who dispersed her cult. To women, however, she, like Guanyin, was also 
seen as a compassionate mother. (Mothers care equally for all their children, not 
obliged as are Confucian fathers to make invidious distinctions among them.) 
These gods spoke symbolically for equality rather than hierarchy, for mercy 
rather than "justice;' and for women at least as much as for men. After many at-
tempts at suppression, officials promoted these troublesome gods to the heavenly 
hierarchy: Mazu was first made a Heavenly Concubine, then an Empress; 
Guanyin was sometimes ranked as a queen. Their temples and rites, with their 
masses of followers, thus came under at least some official supervision, at the cost 
of a major anomaly in the official version of popular culture. 
James Watson helpfully distinguishes between official and popular, propertied 
and propertyless, male and female versions of Mazu, showing that she scarcely 
seemed like the same deity to the different classes and categories of people who 
conjointly worshiped her. Significantly, "women's conceptions of the goddess did 
not seem to reflect their own (or their husbands') position in the social hierar-
chy" (1985:320). While for men and officials, Guanyin and Mazu became icons of 
social stability through hierarchy, for women, hierarchy was explicitly rejected in 
favor of universality. 
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
181 
Mazu's and Guanyin's maternalism, compassion, and universality are ex-
pressed most directly in their transactions with petitioners. Like all gods, they are 
believed to like to receive offerings and can be seen to receive them in abundance. 
But women in Taiwan say that approaching them "is like asking your mother for 
a favor. Mothers give you things just because they love you; they don't need to 
have presents all the time." This generosity is generally true of female gods who 
are approached in their own right, not simply as God Such-and-Such's Wife. The 
goddess most closely associated with actual human motherhood is particularly 
undemanding. The Lady Who Sends Children, Song Zi Niang Niang (sometimes 
Zhu Sheng Niang Niang) in Taiwan is an object of constant supplication, but she 
is not grandly housed or treated. I have never seen her images decked with ex-
pensive votive offerings, and never heard of a Taiwan community festival in her 
honor at which worshipers might be "taxed." As they say of Guanyin and Mazu, 
women claim that she expects only sincere devotion. In places as distant as Lao 
Shan in Shandong and Chengdu, Sichuan, women who had asked for a child 
made a thank-offering of an earthen doll after the birth (Graham 1961:129; Gates 
1987b:121). Near Beijing in the 1920s, mothers gave red eggs or shoes to thank 
Song Zi Niang Niang for a baby born safely. Though Xi Wang Mu's temple in Bei-
jing in the 1920s was crowded with women and children on her annual festival 
day, it was conspicuously small and unimposing, apparently because worshipers 
were not motivated, or required, to make material returns for the favors they 
asked. On Shandong's Tai Shan, a major pilgrimage site, the principal god in the 
1920s was Bi Xia Yuan, who received shoes, clay dolls, and cakes, as well as cash, 
from pilgrims (Bredon and Mitrophanow 1972:281, 481, 231-34). In the 1940s, 
travelers to Hua Shan in Shanxi photographed an altar drape embroidered with 
the donor's name (Morrison and Eberhard 1973: pl. 70). All these were almost 
cost-free gifts: women made shoes themselves out of scraps of cloth, while dozens 
of red eggs were the customary present made to women after childbirth, to 
strengthen them. Shoes and eggs, like dolls made of earth, were within most 
women's means. They contrast with the whole pigs, gold votive plaques, new im-
ages, and other substantial gifts that male participants in folk ritual often pre-
sented to gods who had a more business-like attitude. 
Though even widely worshiped female gods receive little wealth and hold no 
position in the imperial pantheon, they were sometimes elaborately imagined. 
The Song Zi Niang Niang of Cantonese women in the nineteenth century had 
twenty distinct attendants, one with the delightful duty of making children smile. 
Votaries offered her string, a cheap and simply obtained offering, tied round the 
necks of the infants the images held (Gray 1878, 1:163-64). In Beijing, nine Niang 
Niangs with different functions for women and children are described (Bredon 
and Mitrophanow 1972:281). 
Some rituals express expectations of compassion and mutual help among 
real women. Contemporary Taiwan prostitutes offer small cloth shoes to a col-
182 : 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
lective patron, a group of spirits of girls who died unmarried and whose fam-
ilies have sent their ritually anomalous tablets and ghosts to reside in a Bud-
dhist mortuary house. This collection of unwanted daughter-ghosts seems an 
appropriate source of sympathy for those prostituted, as women typically are, 
by their own parents. The women explained that their offerings of children's 
shoes are a substitute for bound-foot shoes because women in the yin world 
still have bound feet (A. Wolf 1974b:150 ), but their cheapness is characteristic 
of women's offerings to sympathetic female gods. In the 1920s, a woman who 
died in childbirth, a terrible enough event in reality, was punished with bloody 
torments in the Chinese afterworld. Under bells in many Zhejiang temples, 
women left paper tablets bearing the names of and prayers for mercy for those 
who had died this dreadful death (Day 1969:130). Before the revolution, in 
Shandong and Sichuan, women hoping to bear children took earth dolls left 
by new mothers at childbirth goddess shrines- a ritual transaction that ex-
presses equality and membership in a common community of women (San-
gren 1987:70-71). 
This minimal gift-giving reinforced and reasserted the idea that female gods 
were not greedy. This is not to suggest that the principal female gods had a dis-
taste for money; Guanyin lent money, on kindly terms, at at least one Guangzhou 
temple (Gray 1875:387), usually to "itinerant hawkers, petty tradesmen, barbers, 
and persons of such like occupations."3 A popular epithet for Guanyin was "Bank 
of Salvation" (Bredon and Mitrophanow 1972:182). Mazu images in Taiwan today 
are often loaded with gold votive plaques. Names of women donors to temples 
and celebrations are carved on temple pillars or cast into ritual implements 
everywhere in China, as Gray observed in the nineteenth century (1875:435, 538, 
554). Tudi Mu, spouse of the heavenly policeman Tudi Gong, takes the rap, in 
some Taiwanese communities, for a rapaciousness that may properly belong to 
him (Gates 1987b:145). She is an official's wife, and therefore greedy at least by 
marriage. But female gods' material relationships with their worshipers have 
been shaped by an economy in which women often have little to give. Women 
have forced into the pantheon an image of legitimate authority which is not cap-
italist-minded, hierarchical, or male. 
How have Chinese women represented themselves supernaturally such that 
the representation might assist action in their own behalf? Two themes, sexuality 
and motherhood (see Cahil11984, 1986, 1988), offer at least a partial answer. 
3· These symbolic "loans;' Gray notes, required the security of a slightly larger sum than was bor-
rowed. "On the corresponding day, in the following year, he repairs to this same shrine, to refund, 
with the addition of a few cash, the amount, which, in the preceding year, he borrowed. The citizens 
of Canton, who are in the humbler walks of life, consider that they are sure to be fortunate, when 
trading on a capital, a small portion of which has, in this manner, been borrowed from the goddess 
Koon-Yam" (Gray 1875:387). 
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
183 
THE YIN AND THE YANG 
The natural world is epitomized in Chinese popular (and esoteric) thought as 
the duality of yin and yang. The singular world, and all in it, is divided into yin 
and yang: absolute, uncreated, the nature of nature itself. These two categories, 
and the two-step/three-step dance of their logic, simply are. No one tries to 
change one for the other, although existing yangness and yinness can be modu-
lated through action and consumption. Yin and yang are never formulated as 
agentive, anthropomorphic gods with whom one can make deals. Philosophers 
for five thousand years have debated the meaning of this dialectic.4 To ordinary 
people, the most salient exemplification of the yin and the yang is the difference-
in-sameness of women and men, both human, but deeply unlike, whose relations 
center on biological reproduction. 
In anthropology, and especially in the anthropology of the 198os, we were too 
quickly persuaded to emphasize the bizarre, the exotic, in our subject matter 
and our explanations. We often paid "more attention to those systems of 
thought designed to obscure the world ... than to those systems of thought by 
which people know the world" (Brown 1991:155). By focusing on the female/ 
male-unity/opposition of yin and yang, I deliberately attach my argument to the 
most concrete and experiential of the commonest associations of yin/yang 
rather than to a more abstract and all-encompassing meaning, as Steven San-
gren (1987) does by attaching his argument to order/disorder. Order/disorder 
stands several steps removed from life's immediate experiences. More impor-
tant, it represents the asymmetric management concerns of hegemons rather 
than the more balanced power relations that folk ideology usually associates 
with the yin/yang metaphor. We yield too quickly to the dominant discourse by 
beginning with the most highly idealized -
and ideologized -
face of 
yin/yang. 
In explaining the abstraction of yin/yang, ordinary Chinese almost always 
begin with the unity/opposition of female/male. Although most people are far 
too delicate to say so, the interpenetration of the sexes in intercourse is one of the 
best metaphors available for the unity of yin/yang: moon/sun, dark/light, even 
ghost/human (or human/god) are iconically feeble by contrast. Discourse on sex-
uality was not edited out of popular ritual as it was from speech and writing, 
however. Most temples in Taiwan have a pair of sexed guardian lions, his genitals 
bulging and often painted bright red; hers, by contrast, are conspicuously con-
cealed. This overt reference to sexuality is defended from the criticism of crudity, 
and given fuller meaning, by the association of sexuality with animals and the 
natural, constant themes in Chinese iconography. 
4. The question of what yin and yang mean has prompted a vast literature. A particularly stimu-
lating recent contribution to it is Black 1986. 
184 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Simultaneously concealed and criticized as bestial, sexuality was reified di-
rectly in at least one popular form. Across the China mainland (I do not know of 
these in Taiwan), gods known as the Wu Sheng were widely known. In villages 
around Beijing, their small shrines were common, the gods themselves some-
times taking the form of foxes, badgers, weasels, and other petty vermin. As bur-
rowers in the female earth, they seemed lascivious, for, in V. R. Burkhardt's 
words, "during the stillness of the night, they overheard the secrets of Mother 
Earth" (1982, 3:64; see also Watters 1874). 
Gray saw a parallel expression of sexuality in the Heilung Tan temple near Bei-
jing. Emperors sometimes officiated at this temple to the Dragon King, giver of 
rain (1878, 1:148). Rain, dragon, and emperor were all fertilizing yang agents, pop-
ularly imagined in explicitly sexual ways: when the rain fell, north China peasants 
stayed indoors to avoid the "indecency" of witnessing heavenly intercourse (Bre-
don and Mitrophanow 1972:350). Images like those at Heilung Tan were common 
in north China, representing what Gray describes as "a reverence for the male 
and female principles of the universe" (1878, 1: 125-26n.1). The Wu Sheng were 
known in similar form in Guangdong5 and elsewhere: "Even the Throne was 
powerless to uproot these very old and well-beloved deities, though time after 
time protests were made against them, the last not so many years ago when a high 
official of Chekiang province denounced the Five Seers as workers of evil and au-
thors of a terrible plague" (1878, 1:160 ). Once a part of Ming emperors' sex edu-
cation (Mitamura 1970:114-15), they were classed by the Manchus as corrupt 
gods: early-twentieth-century observers state that "their worship is about the 
nearest attempt at the deification of sensuality found in China" (Bredon and 
Mitrophanow 1972:16). Their association with the tributary hierarchy that as-
serted itself as part of nature is underlined by the oddity that crepuscular foxes, 
redolent of ambivalence and liminality as they emerged from and entered the 
earth and changed into human form, were also strongly associated with yamens, 
where they protected official seals and received regular worship from mandarins 
(Doolittle 1966, 1:357, 288). 
Female sexuality was portrayed as dangerous to women themselves and to 
others." The Wu Sheng appeared to girls and women, "assuming strange forms 
5. The small brass figures of men and women, birds and beasts seen in a temple not far from Bei-
jing by John Bell, who traveled there in 1719-22, may also have represented the Wu Sheng. Dr. Bell was 
also unnecessarily discreet about details (1965:123). 
6. A rare anecdote about female sexuality in real life was recorded by a Western doctor, long resi-
dent in north China. On seeing him kiss his five-year-old daughter, a Chinese man friend reproved 
him: "We never kiss our daughters when they are so large; we may when they are very small, but not 
after they are three years old, because it is apt to excite in them bad emotions, which young girls 
should not know. Young girls should be kissed by no man until they are married and then, of course, 
only by their husbands" ( Coltman 1891:99 ). 
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
185 
and arousing evil thoughts. And they claimed as brides those who already had 
husbands" (Bredon and Mitrophanow 1972:168-69 ). Amorous women in stories 
frequently turned out to be dangerous half-animal spirits, such as fox-fairies. 
Sexual intercourse with fox-fairies was connected in popular imagination with a 
communicable "leprosy debt" that prevented reincarnation of the soul (Watters 
1874:63). The fox-fairy who "served" Zhu Xi in the legend of the epigraph to this 
chapter had to compete for his (apparently limited) favors with a frog-fairy, 
causing him much misery. These sexually demanding yin creatures died under 
mysterious circumstances in Zhu Xi's garden (Bredon and Mitrophanow 
1972:438).7 In the universally known Weaver-Cowherd story, even marital sexual 
love is punished and placed under the restriction of a yearly meeting when a 
young wife neglects her weaving in her attachment to her spouse. We are warned 
early in the tale that this relationship is too ardent to be tolerated. In some ver-
sions of the story, the herder gets his supernatural wife through the intervention 
of a magical animal that acts as go-between, and he persuades her to marry him 
by stealing her clothes while she bathes (Bredon and Mitrophanow 1972:372). 
Animal lust and nudity, incompatible with correct marital relations and wom-
anly duty, bode ill. 
The legendary patron deity of silkworms was apotheosized as the result of an 
extraordinary and ambiguous sexual career. Having promised to marry whoever 
retrieved her lost father, she found herself engaged to his faithful horse. She and 
her mother agreed to keep this promise, but her father objected and had the insis-
tent horse killed. Wrapped in her horse-husband's hide, the young woman soared 
into the heavens. There, the Pearly Emperor proclaimed both daughter and horse 
to be morally correct and transformed her into a goddess-silkworm. Although 
confirmed in her unusual sexual choice and openly worshiped by women who 
raised cocoons, she was not permitted to remain human (Gray 1875:615-17). 
Folklore attributes much negative power to women which derives from the 
pollution of menstruation and childbirth (Ahern 1975; Seaman 1981). The dangers 
of female pollution were taken very literally, at least in folk history. In a legendary 
siege of Linqing in 1774, defenders displayed simulated menstrual blood and 
naked prostitutes from their city wall to overcome White Lotus female and male 
rebels (Ching 1988:309-10 ). Later in the battle, the virginal rebel Wu San-niang 
seemed unstoppable: the struggle against her went on for hours until the Qing 
7· Zhu Xi is the subject of more than one apocryphal tale. He is mockingly accused not only of 
sexual feebleness and murder but also of inordinate pride and of superstition: "On the death of this 
great rationalist, his son went to the inner chamber, to find the coffin of his father suspended in the 
air several feet above the ground, without any visible support. Falling on his knees, the son besought 
the dead man to remember the principles he had taught all his life, and behold, the coffin gently and 
silently descended into its place" (Shryock 1931:46). Such stories must have amused many generations 
of Chinese women. 
186 
: 
C H 
I 
N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
troops feared she would escape when it became dark. An old soldier then coun-
tered her yin force by cutting the genitals from the body of a dead [male] rebel, 
and firing them from a cannon. San-niang fell to the ground, overcome (315-16). 
Female power of a positive kind is consistently coded as either asexual, anti-
sexual, or maternal. A great lady of the past -
beautiful, virtuous, wealthy, and 
apparently very strong indeed -
received credit in folklore for erecting a nun-
nery and temple on a mountain near the Mongolian border. Promising to build 
them of stone with her own hands in a single night, she challenged would-be 
suitors to construct a stone bridge overnight to win her in marriage. Only one 
man tried; he failed. She sent him away, and lived out her days in single blessed-
ness in her own nunnery (Bell1965:122). 
Another change on reproductive possibility is rung in the cult of Lady Lin-
shui, widely known among Chinese who hail from the basin of Fujian's Min 
River and chronicled recently by Brigitte Berthier (1988). "La dame-au-bord-de-
1' eau" is able to accomplish miracles through ritual training undertaken during 
her maidenhood. Once pregnant, however, she can save her locality from pun-
ishing drought only by abstracting and storing her fetus, intending ultimately to 
resume the pregnancy. Baulked by another woman -
sometimes her mother, 
sometimes her mother-in-law- she hemorrhages to death, becoming yet an-
other gynecological goddess instead of a healthy mother. 
The special and often supernatural qualities of women is emphasized in some 
stories by the unique abilities of their sons. Long bridges of very large stones in 
Fujian are popularly believed to have been built by a man mystically chosen 
while in the womb of a new bride; this special son received considerable super-
natural help in building the famous bridge. The mother is a key figure in the 
story, both in the remarkable nature of the pregnancy and in her determination 
to educate him for a special destiny (Dukes [1878?]:144-50). Bide, a very popu-
lar unofficial god, was the child of a spirit mother who conceived by being 
"overshadowed" by the sun. She gave birth to her supernatural boy through an 
incision in her side, thus avoiding the symbolic complications of vaginal deliv-
ery (Grap878, 1:158). 
The most powerful and widely worshiped female supernaturals, however, re-
mained virgins.8 The Taishan Niang Niang, vegetarian at three, refused to consort 
with the emperor and began to perform miracles (Overmyer 1984). Guanyin leg-
ends attribute her power to virginity, as do those of Mazu. For many Chinese 
women, Guanyin, who can do many different kinds of work and has the un-
bound feet of a woman who labors, is a celibate model for "strong, independent, 
and successful women;' according to Sankar (1978:310 ). Chinese female gods are 
virgin mothers, if they are mothers at all. The most powerful, such as Guanyin 
8. B. J. TerHaar offers a useful interpretation of the unmarried state of several popular Fujian su-
pernaturals, including both females and males (1990). 
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
187 
and Mazu, are represented as mothers who have never had sexual relations or 
borne children. Although virgin motherhood permits of much-complicated in-
terpretation, one meaning is relatively clear and overwhelmingly prominent 
among Chinese women I have known in Taiwan. Unsurprisingly, Guanyin and 
Mazu are women who have achieved an ideal existence: they became the mothers 
of a vast, adoring family without having to become daughters-in-law, wives, or 
the creatures of sexual desire. "That really would be like being in heaven;' a Tai-
wanese woman remarked. 
MODELS FOR CELIBACY 
In the previous chapter, we see commoners representing the heavenly bureau-
cracy as they would prefer the world to be, with even salvation commoditized 
and the source of social power revealed to lie with producers. Is the stress on au-
tonomy through celibacy in women's vision of the supernatural only a wish-ful-
filling fantasy, or did possibilities exist in this world for women to gain the 
security of a family without its oppression? 
Chinese women are profoundly ambivalent about marriage. In most times 
and places, it has been the only career open; most women surely wanted to 
marry. Prostitutes sang longingly for the security and respectability of married 
life (Ayscough 1938:94, 95-97). Given the low status and hard work of a new 
daughter-in-law, anxieties about childbirth, the widespread symbolic depreca-
tion of female sexuality, and the near-universal abomination of female genitals 
and their fluids, however, marriage was a fearsome thing. In some regions, 
women sang institutionalized bridal laments, such as that recorded for a Hong 
Kong boatwoman, in which marriage is equated with death. The verbal ex-
changes neatly capture the ambivalence of her transition: 
The bride initiates each sentence, addressing her handmaidens in turn, be-
wailing her sad fate, only to be answered by a reassuring sentence. The whole 
conversation is impromptu, misery from the bride, and cheerfulness from her 
companions. She says she is dying, and the first had better go to the coffin-
maker. The latter counters that she has just given her a thermos flask, and 
they'll all go for a picnic in the hills. A demand for the second to buy grave 
clothes is countered with a reminder of the iron for freshening up her party 
clothes. (Burkhardt 1982:85) 
Patrick Hase (1990:21) gives the following lament, also from Hong Kong: 9 
9· Other examples of bridal laments can be found in E. Anderson 1975, Blake 1978, E. Johnson 
1984 and 1988, and Xie Zhimin 1991. Bridal laments are best documented from the Guangdong area, 
but used to be common in Sichuan and Fujian as well. I have as yet been unable to transcribe any, 
however, because they are now seen as too subversive and/or indecent. 
188 
: 
C H 
I 
N A ' S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
Oh my mother, my mother!/ Be honest with yourself, think very carefully! 
Oh my mother, my mother!/ Your poor daughter is very young, I have been 
with you only a very short time. 
Oh my mother, my mother!/ There will be no-one to play games any more at 
your side. 
Oh my mother, my mother!/ From today, you won't have a daughter to worry 
about any more. 
Oh my mother, my mother!/ This poor girl is being dragged away to be 
married, so hard, so very hard! 
Oh my mother, my mother!/ Kill him, destroy him! He is like an evil official 
who destroys the country!/ 
They are ganging up together, forming a conspiracy, thinking of a trap! 
Oh my mother, my mother!/ They are coming today to rape this helpless girl./ 
You have betrayed me./ Your daughter is so sad! 
Oh my mother, my mother!/ Who would believe it?/ Today you have caused me 
great trouble. 
Oh my mother, my mother!/ One day you will wear yourself out when you think 
of me, your daughter,/ And of how you gave me up at the end of the year. 
Oh my mother, my mother! 
In discussing the problems of polygynous households, Gray observed that 
"many Chinese ladies are opposed to matrimony" (1879, 1:185). He gives numer-
ous examples of women in mid-nineteenth-century Guangzhou who refused 
marriage (1878, 1:185-86), principally to avoid the hostilities of polygynous 
households, where sexual jealousy and enforced hierarchy made women enemies. 
Young widows everywhere who refused remarriage (some even committed sui-
cide) could easily claim credit for their determined faithfulness to a dead spouse. 
Other interpretations are possible, however: suicide and virtuous chastity saved 
a woman from yet another forced marriage. Threat of suicide gave a young 
woman a powerful weapon against parents-in-law eager to be rid of her. A long 
wave of widow suicides appeared in Fujian in the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies (Doolittle 1966, 1:108-12; Mann 1987b) at a time when commercial expan-
sion may have been affecting kinship and gender roles -
in this case, 
constricting the already narrow range of women's options. 
Marriage resistance as an alternative for women was given ritual form in north 
China, where in legend a minor but frequently seen goddess actively opposes 
marriage for others as well as for herself. Interestingly, her brother plots to get her 
married, but fails. To foil marriages, she even employs a wicked henchman, who 
"disfigures and 'spoils' brides;' presumably deflowering them (Bredon and Mitro-
phanow 1972:419). 
Most of what we know of institutionalized marriage resistance comes from 
the Guangdong county of Shunde in the nineteenth century, when wages for silk 
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
: 189 
reelers made parents willing to keep daughters at home during the early years of 
their marriages or to allow them to live independently with other similarly 
minded women. Extensive sojourning abroad by Shunde men resulted there in a 
tradition of proxy marriages, in which wife and husband never met (Burkhardt 
1982:106); the tightly controlled use of sons' as well as of daughters' labor con-
tributed to the likelihood that women would live a nonmaritallife. Some women 
formed societies whose members vowed never to marry, and some killed them-
selves rather than break this vow. Authorities made strong efforts to crush the or-
ganization (Couling 1917:501). Outside observers in the nineteenth century 
associate this tradition with rumors of other forms that opposition to marriage 
may have taken among such women: 
Dark hints are given as to the methods used to escape matrimony. The sudden 
demise of betrothed husbands, or the abrupt ending of the newly-married 
husband's career suggest unlawful means for dissolving the bonds. When they 
submit to marriage they still maintain their powers of will. One of their de-
mands being that the husband must go to the wife's home to live, or else live 
without her company .... 
Those belonging to such an association are taught by the nuns, so it is said, 
to kill their husbands by saying certain charms or incantations, by taking hairs 
out of their husbands' queues for some certain hidden purposes, by procuring 
the bones of dead infants or children ... , and these latter are buried under 
the bed, fireplace, and family rice-jar. The societies to which such women be-
long are called Mai Fu Kau [mai fu chiao]) . ... These girls went about for-
merly with four ounces of arsenic, supplied by the nuns, who, it is said, not 
only used to charge them ten taels for it, but often cheated them; ... At the 
present day [ 1892] opium is carried on their persons, and they threaten to take 
their lives if forced to marry. (Ball1982:375-76) 
Marjorie Top ley has described this complex, which persisted in various forms 
until the collapse of the Guangdong silk industry in the 1920s, as a marriage re-
sistance movement (1975). She observes that domestic sericulture combined with 
the introduction of steam filatures and an export boom gave many women such 
high incomes that their parents supported them in creating what Andrea Sankar 
(1978) calls "interrupted residence" and Janice Stockard (1989) calls "delayed 
transfer" marriage as a local norm. She warns us (as do Sankar and Stockard) 
that "we must bear in mind that women all over Kwangtung traditionally worked 
outside their home, and by this century women in other provinces were also 
working in cash-earning occupations. Yet marriage resistance remained unique 
to one small area" ( 68). And she asks why this was so. The remainder of Top ley's 
article, the first section of Sankar's dissertation, Stockard's book, and a master's 
thesis by Wu Fongyi (1992) present the answer. The economic context was cru-
cial, but an already-existing tradition of income-earning work for women, sepa-
190 : 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
rate residences for unmarried girls, and a number of myths and celebrations pro-
vided a cosmological charter for marriage resistance. '0 
The virginity, chastity, and sisterly collective life of these independent women 
stood in clear opposition to the ideals of marriage. While delayed transfer mar-
riage was still a current custom, the coresident "sisters" created considerable 
group pressure for a young married woman to refuse sexual intercourse with her 
husband, as Sankar points out: "Sisters who broke the vow of celibacy and 
wanted to leave the sisterhood before the others had agreed to disband were ha-
rassed by other members of the group. The woman who had transgressed was cut 
off from the friendship of the other sisters:' Many women permanently remained 
apart from their husbands, using their wages to purchase substitutes; and per-
haps as many as one out of ten took vows that bound them never to marry and to 
renounce all claim to economic support from their paternal homes. Based on the 
accounts of her informants, Sankar concludes that in parts of the Pearl River 
delta, there existed "a subculture in which women saw marriage as a form of slav-
ery and regarded it as a humiliation" (1978:52, 20, 83, 117, 127, 141, 10 ). 
Maria Jaschok has recently found the memories of this tradition still green: 
Many women of the older generation whom I met in Hong Kong remembered 
the women of Shunde without prompting on my part: the pilot-history of fe-
male independence held alive by women in the southern parts of China .... 
Shunde constituted as much an important part of women's consciousness as 
the knowledge of the frequent occurrence of female infanticide in Guangdong 
and Fujian before liberation. "Shunde" and "female infanticide" constituted 
two opposites in a continuum of female life in traditional Chinese society. 
Neither may have come within the realm of experience of a particular woman, 
but they were no less potent in influencing her subjective identification of fe-
maleness. (1988:65) 
Another and much more widespread possibility for marriage resistance ex-
isted. Though a woman might not legitimately choose her own spouse or might 
refuse to marry the man her parents had chosen, she could refuse marriage alto-
gether by promising celibacy (Gray 1878, 1:131). Parents who cared for a daughter 
10. Both Sankar and Stockard object to the term "marriage resistance." Sankar is emphatic that 
the complex "does represent the result of a combination of historical, economic, and social factors, 
but it was also the natural and socially acceptable extension of a singular local culture" (1978:16). 
Stockard agrees, adding that such marriage resistance as occurred was directed "against the local de-
layed transfer marriage system" (1987:4). As this very system permitted not only delay of marriage but 
the option of buying one's self out of all marital obligations through the purchase of a substitute, 
Top ley's use of "marriage resistance" -
she does not offer "marriage refusal" or "marriage abolition" 
-
seems perfectly apt. The consequence of delta custom was resistance to marriage, although not its 
absolute abandonment. 
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
191 
and who could afford to pass up her brideprice might well accept her refusal to 
marry. The problem of her support remained, however. Thus few women could 
avail themselves of this customary loophole. 
Those who did so commonly entered either a formally constituted nunnery or 
a vegetarian hall. In older literature, the two are rarely distinguished; Sankar de-
scribes a variety of vegetarian halls in twentieth-century Hong Kong and their 
complex connections with both Buddhism and the Great Way of Former Heaven 
sect (1978). The freedom of women who led such lives contrasted markedly with 
the housebound lives of ordinary women. Nuns were highly visible as they went 
about collecting for charity or performing at women's funerals on unbound or let-
out feet. Individual nuns were often well known regionally for their piety and for 
the freedom it gave them. A "Miss Ch' en" of Weihaiwei, Shan dong, left her nun-
nery from 1628 to 1643, wandering as far as Beijing to collect funds for an image of 
Buddha in her home city (Johnston 1910:405). She would have traveled from nun-
nery to nunnery, relying on her openly professed chastity to protect her from the 
sexual harassment women usually met in the streets," and on the hospitality of sis-
ter nuns along the way. The small miracle, involving a tiny offering, which pre-
served her name in local history was less miraculous than her independence. 
Gray comments, in his usual kindly fashion, on the apparent happiness of 
nuns' lives: "At the celebration of the Chinese New Year festivals in 1860, I saw a 
party of nuns at a pic-nic in the pleasure grounds attached to one of the princi-
pal temples at Canton, and the zeal with which they entered into a little recre-
ation could not have been surpassed by a bevy of school-girls holiday-making in 
the green fields of merry England" (1878, 1:132-33). Sankar stresses the same qual-
ities of sociability, fun, and satisfaction in the lives of contemporary women liv-
ing in celibate sisterhoods, whether these were informal, organized as vegetarian 
halls, or conventual: 
Sisterhoods have been able to create for themselves the Chinese ideal of a 
golden old age. Their anomalous status on the fringes of society -
one which 
most Hong Kong Chinese clearly pity -
has given the spinsters economic 
and social freedom, something which few other Chinese women until recently 
could claim. Unfettered by the ties of family responsibilities and unhindered 
by intergenerational strife, tlley have established for themselves a peaceful, se-
cure and sometimes even luxurious retirement. The lives of the spinsters in 
most of the chai t'angs I visited were filled with companionship, compassion, 
and affection for one another. (1978:339-40) 
Not all women who took vows of celibacy remained celibate; certainly some 
were lesbian (Sankar 1978:52; Wu Fongyi 1992). The possibility that they might 
11. Village women in west Fujian told me that before the revolution women who ventured into the 
public market were roundly abused by men, and "They threw shit at us:' 
192 
: 
C H 
I 
N A 
S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
also engage in heterosexual relationships worried Chinese officials a good deal. 
Although the charges that nuns lived a sexual life were probably largely fabri-
cated, a suggestion exists that some temples offered the sexual services of some 
resident women to pilgrims and local residents. British officials in Hong Kong 
believed this of certain mixed-sex vegetarian halls early in this century, suggest-
ing they were little more than brothels (Sankar 1978:251). 
My recent visit to a Sichuan Daoist temple newly reopened for pilgrimages 
piqued my own suspicions as well. The young women in residence were ex-
tremely pretty and accommodating, contrasting dramatically with the plump, 
shaven, plainly dressed Buddhist nuns in the temple up the way. The astute head 
of these Buddhists was especially emphatic, I thought, about how one could see 
the "Buddha-nature" in their round, undecorated faces. "You can tell if someone 
is spiritual that way," she commented slyly. 
A novelette written around 1900 by the reform-minded Liu Tieyun (Liu E) 
uses a Daoist nun as the author's "ideal of an emancipated person" (Lin Yu-
tang 1936:v) and describes in non judgmental terms her convent surroundings. 
Some women were sold into convent life as children, free to leave it only after 
they had paid their debt, which they did by attracting donations. They had 
natural feet, but they kept their hair, dressed elegantly, used cosmetics, and at-
tended or entertained pilgrims. As long as a young woman remained a virgin, 
she could keep personal gifts given by visitors, relying on the temple to supply 
her with clothing suitable for her geishalike work and with all other needs. A 
girl who decided to abandon virginity would require her deflowerer to make a 
large donation;• 2 one who chose to marry would give her brideprice to the 
temple; one who simply decided to go adventuring, as the heroine of Liu's 
novelette planned to do, had first to buy herself out. If she remained in the 
temple after ceding her virginity, she would no longer have the right to refuse 
sexual intercourse to pilgrims who requested her company. Those who re-
mained after the age of thirty were likely to devote themselves to chastity and 
piety. Here again, we see that by giving up virginity, women, even in a convent, 
gave up control over their sexual destinies. The heroine, after a lengthy, jesuit-
ical calculation of what is both pure and economically advantageous, opts for 
12. An apparently factual account, "Diary of a Nun" describes the early-twentieth-century 
"dowries" of two sisters-in-law who enter the same convent. The young widow of the second woman's 
brother asks her parents-in-law to sell her original dowry to pay for her convent entry fee. Her 
mother-in-law prefers to keep the things and give the woman $1500 (in an unspecified currency). The 
daughter of the family, who becomes a nun against her parents' wishes, is given $woo, presumably 
out of family funds. This material appeared first in Chinese in a Buddhist periodical Hai Chao Yin 
(Sound of the tide), vol. 2, nos. 11-12, February 1923; it was translated by Y. Y. Tsu in the Journal of Re-
ligion 7:5-6 (October 1927): 612-61, and is reprinted in Laurence G. Thompson's The Chinese Way in 
Religion (1973:120-24). 
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
193 
celibacy and freedom, leaving the female audience to her story enraptured 
with her wisdom.'3 
Nunneries and other forms of ideally celibate sisterhoods existed on the 
fringes of society, a small but significant part of Chinese women's worlds. On 
Sichuan's Min Shan, nuns once picked the temples' famous teas. A nineteenth-
century observer in Chaozhou (Swatow), describes how numerous nuns in many 
nunneries supported themselves by the city's fashionable embroidery, sewing, 
spinning, and weaving, as well as by officiating at women's funerals, performing 
exorcisms, and chanting special petitions. The nuns were fine craftswomen, and 
"almost the only women who know how to read." In the area's extraordinarily ac-
tive market for little girls, nuns bought healthy children (for a pound sterling 
each), and taught them to read, weave, and embroider. Some Chaozhou nuns 
had as many as twenty such apprentices, who generally chose to take vows at fif-
teen rather than leave the comfortable and prosperous convents. The nuns often 
went on excursions to bring home boatloads of fruits and vegetables. They were 
"well-to-do in the world." "Their incomes are large and their lives easy. In gen-
eral, they appear strong, portly, and comfortable beyond other Chinese women" 
(Fielde 1887:72-74). Some nuns and devout laywomen lived on temple endow-
ments, wages from domestic work, and, perhaps, from silk reeling. 
Nunneries and laywomen's vegetarian halls were common in Guangzhou, 
small ones having ten to twenty inmates, and larger ones over eighty (Gray 1878, 
1:131). Both Buddhist and Daoist sects supported the ideal of such communities 
throughout China. It had a resilient pattern that very effectively met the needs of 
the single women who became factory workers or domestic servants under in-
dustrialization (Sankar 1978). In the 1990s, the city of Xiamen has more than a 
dozen, most of them reconstituted since the Cultural Revolution. They appear to 
flourish best where busy commodity markets make it possible for women to earn 
much of their own livings. 
Women's communities were highly vulnerable, however, to official interfer-
ence. The Qing code forbade the setting up of new "religious houses;' stipulating 
that founders were to be taken as state slaves and forfeit all property (Staunton 
13. I do not think that this story is intended as a critique ofbrothellike convents. The tale as trans-
lated by Lin Yu-tang under the English title A Nun ofTaishan is part of an early, serialized version of 
Liu Tieyun's celebrated Lao Can Yu fi. Though Liu's novel was satirical, the convent-as-brothel is pre-
sented entirely in passing, as background for a series of moral decisions leading to a better life. It con-
tains no attacks on women who decided differently from the chaste but calculating heroine. Lin's 
preface suggests no critical subtext to the tale, only admiration for Liu's happy, emancipated heroine. 
Harold Shadick refers to her as "a charming young nun" with a "strangely complex character," who 
illustrates Liu's idea of sexual, intellectual, and spiritual companionship "comparable to, though 
different from, Western romantic love" (1952:xvii). Although the story remains fiction, its details fit 
with many hints about nuns' lives which may have been largely censored from print. 
194 
C H 
I N 
A 
S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
1810:83). The commonness of small, independent vegetarian halls may be attrib-
utable in part to this decree, for women would have been more secure (if less in-
dependent) in the long-established, and usually larger, endowed convents 
attached to temples. The insecurity of all women's religious communities, how-
ever, was notorious. In 1688, the governor of Fujian "requested" that Buddhist 
nuns under thirty years old be returned to their parents (Vermeer 1990b:129 ); in 
the early eighteenth century, another Fujian governor ordered nuns to be mar-
ried off (Spence 1992b:127). Gray describes the largest nunnery in Guangzhou, 
with more than one hundred women and girls, as having been nearly closed 
down by city magistrates under the Daoguang emperor (1821-51) for immorality 
(1875:586). In 1871 in Guangzhou, a small Daoist sisterhood refused to contribute 
to a local artisans' fifth-month festival. The artisans accused the women of im-
morality, called on local elders to suppress the house, and drove them out with 
sticks and stones. Having paid up, they were allowed to return a few days later 
(Gray 1878, 1:104-5). Gray also describes a case in Wuchang, where the governor 
put a stop to "corruption" -
almost certainly this refers to sexual behavior -
in 
nunneries by disbanding them all. Some Daoist nuns escaped because they had 
retained their hair and could disguise themselves as laywomen. The Buddhists, 
conspicuously bald and perhaps too poor to afford bribes, were taken in larger 
numbers. The governor ordered the women's families to take them home, as oth-
erwise they would be handed over "to any eligible parties who might wish to have 
a wife" (1:133). This case was not particularly unusual; early in the twentieth cen-
tury, a north Fujian magistrate dissolved an "immoral" nunnery and sold the 
nuns in bags, by weight, at eighteen cash a catty (Darley 1917=164). 
Folk ideology helped women define their weak social and kin position as 
stemming from the economic and sexual pressures to marry, and isolated the 
contradictions that women faced in a patriarchal kinship system. Wives were 
portrayed as dependent, precariously situated, unclean; celibate women had in-
dependence, ritual power, purity. At the same time, popular belief reinforced the 
value of motherhood: mothers of loving, dutiful, tribute-presenting children 
were powerful and prosperous -
although conception and birth brought both 
physical and spiritual dangers. How to reproduce for one's self, rather than only 
for others, was perceived as the key dilemma by Chinese women. 
Folk ideology offered both a mystical and a mundane "solution" to this tangle, 
two routes to a life with children but without marriage: the virgin goddess and 
the nun. Some women did, and all women might, support themselves (and chil-
dren) and hence refuse marriage. That much was abundantly clear to the women 
of Shunde, Chaozhou, and the neighborhood of every Chinese nunnery. Celi-
bates, like goddesses, could become mothers by adoption or purchase. To mother 
children that one did not bear is, however, biologically untenable as a social 
norm: some women must suffer childbirth, if not marriage. For society, if not for 
the individual, biology sets material limits to the construction of culture along 
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men : 195 
the lines reflected in Chinese folk analyses of the feminine. In practice, the rarity 
of capital that lay outside patricorporate control meant that marriage, as well as 
motherhood, remained essential. Women thought their way through to imagin-
ing matriarchy, resisting marriage, and creating antipatriarchal intimacy among 
themselves. But they could not think their way out of biology's sole mechanism 
for the making of babies. Given their political economy, biology trapped women 
in the web of kinship and in naturalistic assumptions about gender. 
REPRODUCTIVITY AND WOMEN'S POWER 
A concern for issues of reproductivity predictably permeates folk images of 
women in China. Some connect women directly with petty capitalism and the re-
productivity of money. A striking recent example of this idea is the popularity of 
the money-seeking three-legged toad which swept Taiwan in the late 1980s. By 
1988, manufacturers of tourist souvenirs in Fujian were catering to their Taiwan 
customers' liking for representations of this legendary creature. In Taibei street 
markets, the toad was available in a multitude of forms: my souvenir of this craze 
is a rhinestone-studded vermilion container in toad shape, standing on a heap of 
money, with the traditional cash in its mouth. Toads were everywhere in Taibei 
for a few years, icons of a mentality based on the new gambling and numbers 
games (such as da jia le [Hu Tai-li 1986]) and the scandalously overinflated stock-
market. 
The toad's long-standing symbolic associations are overwhelmingly with 
riches and with yin -
female -
qualities. The three-legged toad seen in the 
shadows on the moon's surface is a woman, punished by animalization for dis-
loyalty to her husband. Extravagantly yin, she also symbolizes greed (Bredon 
and Mitrophanow 1972:412). The three-legged toad legendarily helped her mas-
ter, a money-spinning immortal, to find and keep wealth. A graphic represen-
tation from the pilgrimage site of Hua Shan in 1940s Shanxi shows her turning 
"into strings of cash the silvery moonbeams rippling across the seas" (Morrison 
and Eberhard 1973: fac. 82, pl. 67). This supernatural-and-frog couple are "in-
voked for success in commercial enterprises." Frog spirits had temples, espe-
cially in Zhejiang, where they could be petitioned for wealth. Even local 
officials worshiped there before assuming office (Bredon and Mitrophanow 
1972:166-67). 
Toads and frogs hold their place in popular imagination, perhaps, because of 
their self-transformations from tadpoles. This process reinforces the link be-
tween women and money. Women reproduce. So, in the appropriate political-
economic context, does money. Money-as-capital transforms itself into 
commodities and back again into money or simply magically becoming "greater 
than itself" through the miracle of interest. That women are to the PCMP as 
men are to the TMP, however, is the kind of structuralist accident endemic to 
196 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A ' S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
dualisms. The "women" and "capital" homology is a fragile one that would bear 
little argumentative weight. Yet, in interviews with small-business women in 
both Taibei and Chengdu in 1988, I found women, even those in partnership 
with their husbands, very willing to assert that women, in general, were better at 
business than men, or at least as good. Women's traditional "narrow-hearted-
ness" in family matters was their tendency to define implicit family contracts 
very strictly, demanding agnatic separation, insisting on their and their chil-
dren's full share of household resources, and following a code of balanced or 
even negative reciprocity with their husbands and in-laws. Hard bargaining in 
family exchanges was expressed by a prosperous nineteenth-century Shandong 
woman asked whether her husband might take a concubine: "I would just like to 
see my 'lao yeh' take another wife. I would make it hot for him and her. He dare 
not; for haven't I borne him five of the finest boys in the city?" (Coltman 
1891:99). 
This training in self-interest pays off when women have the opportunity to be-
come petty capitalists in their own right. The postindustrialization shift of both 
Taibei and Chengdu women from being extremely housebound and economi-
cally dependent is astonishing, adding a new dimension to the old stereotype that 
women are narrow-hearted. That women are seen as dose-fisted in money mat-
ters, however, does not contradict the image of goddesses as compassionate and 
universally loving: the Guanyins and the Mazus are mothers. Margery Wolf's con-
cept of the uterine family -
children bound to their mother by love and debt -
remains the essential metaphor. What a grasping woman takes via petty-capital-
ist interjia transfers, a loving mother offers to her children in open-handed giv-
ing. If she has done wrong, she did it unselfishly- for her children. The uterine 
family, giving great strength, also traps women in a web of kinship (and senti-
mentality) not of their own spinning. The greatest danger in that web was the 
combination of parental authority with commoditization, with the results that 
women themselves were bought and sold, as still happens under all Chinese 
regimes. 
Although women colluded in strengthening the kinship system that so insidi-
ously re-created their gender oppression, they often resisted more direct forms of 
control. Official and male attempts to hold power were sometimes met with flat 
refusals to obey parents, parents-in-law, husbands, and sons. Descriptions of 
women, and even little girls, who refused to do what they were told are rare, but 
impressive. A young girl wanting to go to church against her parents' will "set 
herself to sulk and starve, in true Chinese fashion, a method which often causes 
the offended and the offender to change places." She refused food until the par-
ents agreed (Darley 1917:34-35). Two women in Sichuan told me recently of their 
refusal, as girls, to remain footbound. "Every day when we went out to the fields, 
we'd take the bandages off. When we came home, they'd beat us, and put them 
back on. But we had to work, and we couldn't work properly with the bindings. 
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
: 
197 
So finally, our parents just let us go natural-footed." Shandong women have had 
particularly good reporters: both R. F. Johnston and Robert Coltman note exam-
ples of women's power in the home which, when it turned angry and sour, was 
highly visible. The ma-jie-di- "curse-the-street woman"- was "the kind of 
woman who by blows or threats drives her husband out of the house, follows him 
into the road, and there -
if he has sought safety in flight -
proceeds to pour 
torrents of abuse at the top of her voice upon her male and female neighbors and 
all and sundry passers-by" (Johnston 1910:201-2). "Women of the laboring classes 
often engage in street-fights; you can hear them for blocks away, and their lan-
guage is of the foulest and most disgusting imaginable" ( Coltman 1891:93). Shan-
dong women were not infrequently taken to law by male relatives who found 
them uncontrollable; one litigant who said in open court that he feared his wife 
claimed that "eight men out of ten are afraid of their wives" (Johnston 1910:197). 
Women refused to honor betrothal contracts if the fiance died, ran away from 
marriages into which they had been sold (204, 213, 214). Life histories of Shan-
dong women show the strength and straightforwardness for which this "tradi-
tional" region is famous (Pruitt 1967; Gates 1987b:n8-30 ). Sichuan men, too, say 
that most men fear their wives; Sichuanese women are renowned as strict house-
hold managers, strong partners, and formidable opponents in marital disputes. 
There and elsewhere, a governor's wife kept his seal, and a businessman's his keys. 
Businessmen often consulted their wives before concluding a bargain (Mrs. A. 
Little [ 1898] :121). The anecdotal literature for many Chinese cities, notably in the 
Hong Kong and Guangzhou region, argues for the strength of women in the 
home (also Mrs. Foster 1899:42-43, for Hangkou). So too does the embarrassed 
anxiety of many contemporary Chinese men in discussing this topic. A Hong 
Kong administrator summed up the paradoxical situation of the average farmer's 
wife, "who, being entirely at his mercy, rules him with a rod of iron" (Men pes 
1909:77). Women's strength in the battle of the sexes is given popular recognition 
in the image of the dragon trying to swallow the moon toad, which swells up its 
body and is thus unassimilable. The toad, however, is not strong enough to defeat 
the dragon; the struggle is eternal (Ayscough 1925:234). The "henpecked" hus-
band who "fears for his ears" -
pa erduo -
is a stereotype universally produc-
tive in China of much low humor.14 
Examples of women's resistance to male power are peppered through descrip-
tions of daily life as well as implicit in popular ideology. Under special economic 
14. Arthur Smith recorded an example of Chinese literary word-play suggesting the universality 
of anxiety over control by women: a formal examination-style essay on the theme of the hen-pecked 
husband made up entirely of phrases taken, wildly out of context, from the Confucian Four Books. 
The essay concludes: "Not able to command her, not willing to receive orders from her, cut off from 
all intercourse with her, offended against, and yet not contending, not revenging unreasonable con-
duct, lest I should have no posterity" (1965=169). 
198 
C H I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
circumstances, when women could offer abnormally large contributions to their 
parents' households and even support themselves, many refused marriage. Even 
under ordinary conditions, enough women lived as nuns to exemplify the auton-
omy that came of the renunciation of marriage, if not always of sex. The female 
gods whose popularity obliged officials to take notice of them attained that pop-
ularity in large part because women's enthusiasm for their rituals stood as evi-
dence for their power. The vision of power exercised in a compassionate and 
egalitarian way appealed as well to low-ranking men. The antibureaucratic, pop-
ulist strain in Chinese folk ideologies feeds into hopeful possibilities for Chinese 
political futures; women and the poor have had a voice. 
FOLK IDEOLOGY AS RESISTANCE 
Chinese commoners describe and enact their morally ambiguous cosmos in 
rituals promoting the local mutual reliance that enables them to fend off officials, 
enemy villagers, and gangsters and to form gangs to prey on others. They support 
the relationships within jia which permit the extraction of something much like 
surplus value from females and young males. They give a market town or a 
neighborhood a good name for well-made products and credit-worthiness. They 
widen the bonds of social relations. They entertain and amuse. They even create 
expectations of solidarity in true Durkheimian fashion. And they manufacture 
meanings, which often differ among social subjects. A satisfactorily polysemic 
symbol can unite many categories and classes of people in common action, as 
James L. Watson has shown for Mazu (1985:323). 
The function of folk religion as a tool for creating and organizing meaning is 
not its greatest achievement. The more material tasks accomplished through re-
ligious practice seem more significant and, to me, more interesting. People's ex-
periences are shaped, of course, by how they perceive and discuss the world 
around them, but that world exists very largely outside of individual or even of 
social control. Many consequences of action are unintended; and forty blows of 
the big bamboo will strip the skin from the most relativist bottom. In egalitarian, 
preclass societies with low workloads and little or no exploitation, people's ideo-
logical lives might possibly have been largely a form of meaning-production, the 
low-tech alternative to television or hermeneutics. But it was not so in China, 
where people struggled for survival, largely against other people. 
The point at which the currently fashionable insistence on the social produc-
tion of meaning ceases to be merely a sophomoric aperfU occurs when alternative 
meaning enables alternative action. What became different in Chinese life be-
cause commoners, and women, saw the cosmos as they did? Did ordinary Chi-
nese simply describe the social world of gods, ghosts, and ancestors as Arthur 
Wolf says it appeared from their vantage point -
a world of social powers with 
both positive and negative abilities -
or did they seek to change it? Did com-
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
: 199 
moners present a critique of the ruling class, and women of men? If it was a cri-
tique, did they act on it? Did they engage ideologically with the material world 
only by reflecting it, or was there a second act of engagement, a political act? 
The evidence presented above suggests the latter. Clearly, popular response to 
oppression, apart from occasional millenarian or ethnically organized rebellions 
and the initially counterhegemonic Communist revolution, did not create un-
bridgeable political ruptures in Chinese history. Popular response to oppression 
appears as determined resistance to hegemonic claims, as well as the subtle shap-
ing of these claims in, for example, the uneasy acceptance of female figures into 
the official pantheon and the persistence of various forms of marriage resistance. 
For a very different hierarchical encounter, Peter Worseley has definitively shown 
the involution of direct, confrontational resistance into mysticism and ritual in-
direction when oppressed people's attempts to assert their own interests and ide-
ology repeatedly fail (1968). The baroque explorations of power that make up 
Chinese folk ideology resulted in the production of a multitude of practices quite 
properly called superstition. Commoner and female assertiveness has had perva-
sive, positive consequences as well, however, which can be described here only in 
the broadest terms. One is the notable and virtually universal self-respect among 
ordinary Chinese people described by so many foreign travelers; the other is the 
paradoxical but genuine power of Chinese women. 
Neither of these should be expected. Official and much of popular ideology 
combined should have produced cringing obsequiousness to superiors in the 
one, and helpless passivity in the other. These behaviors can be found, but rarely 
represent an internalized acceptance of inferiority by Chinese people. Rather, 
deference is displayed on authoritative demand and performed to avoid punish-
ment. A sixteenth-century priest noted that Ming Chinese who had traveled to 
Manila "laughed at the Spaniards ... saying that if anyone had bowed ... on 
only one knee to a mandarin, he would have been soundly whipped" (quoted in 
Boxer 1953:286-87). Or these behaviors are offered as a sacrifice of abasement-
one sees this in temples -
a lowering of one's self from a normal, dignified po-
sition. The autobiography of a Shandong woman reduced at one time to beggary 
(Pruitt 1967) is an epitome of resilient self-esteem; life histories of other Chinese 
women and men of varying fortunes reveal the same qualities (Gates 1987b; He 
1993). Although the Chinese are not unique in this regard, it is astonishing how 
little real value Chinese working people attach to rulers' hierarchies of class 
worth. To find genuine acceptance of elitist ideals, one must go among those who 
benefit from them, notably scholar-bureaucrats of all recent regimes. 
Rulers allied with men were, I believe, more effective in persuading women 
that femaleness was inferior than rulers alone were in eroding commoner dignity. 
Given the key place that gender inequality played in maintaining the economic 
security of jia and the accumulation of petty capital, gender differences were less 
effectively questioned in popular ideology than were tributary relations. 
200 
: 
C H I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Women's strategy of capitalizing on the apparent "naturalness" of gender differ-
ences restricted the scope of their power to modify kinship roles in a political 
economy in which kinship was already the creature of class interests. 
Much of what has been argued in these two chapters about the ambivalence 
with which folk belief depicts hierarchy, and the clarity with which it reveals mul-
tiple sources of social power, suggests that another layer of meaning is visible in 
the popular description of the cosmos. We need not venture into metaphysics to 
reveal it. Punishment from husbands and parents, crushing cruelty inflicted by the 
state, and physical danger from neighboring villages were real, material experi-
ences, as were the extraction of resources through these means. Although neigh-
boring strangers could be damned as monsters or ethnic aliens, and although 
women could find ways to claim power from the kinship status forced on them, 
attacks, even verbal ones, on men, parents, and bureaucrats were fearsomely risky. 
The meaning of ritual ambiguity, of transformations of "good" into "bad," god 
into ghost, virgin into mother need not be sought in profoundly complex and ex-
tremely slippery analytic constructs. Chinese people risked real danger if they too-
lucidly criticized the cosmos. The world as commoners experienced it brought 
them evil as well as good from those set in authority over them. Commoners and 
women had good reason to fear their rulers' vision of "order;' as well as occasional 
reasons to be grateful for them. 
NATURAL GENDER 
Gender, naturalized as sex, is harder to criticize than class naturalized as the 
inequality of parent and child. From a materialist perspective, this should be so. 
The equation between the temporary obedience/supervision required of young 
child and adult parent and the permanent submission/domination of subaltern 
and hegemonic classes has no biological basis. Gender, by contrast, is constructed 
in part, though not in whole, out of differences in sexual biology. 
Feminist analyses of gender grow increasingly invaginated as most feminists 
seek to remove socially constructed gender entirely from any dependence on the 
idea of biological sex. Sylvia Yanagisako and Jane Collier lament that "it is im-
possible, of course, to know what gender or kinship would mean if they are to be 
entirely disconnected from sex and biological reproduction." They concede that 
although "heterosexual intercourse, pregnancy, and parturition are involved in 
human reproduction, it is also apparent that producing humans entails more 
than this" (1987:34, 31). Yet they conclude that sexual differences are of no rele-
vance whatsoever to our understanding of how gender is constructed. This posi-
tion seems inconsistent with historical materialist understanding. Surely the 
material world includes the physical human body of which mind, and meanings, 
are only aspects. Biology is not everything in producing human beings, but it is 
not nothing either. 
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
201 
In the concrete instance of China, I see the "meaning" of femaleness as the in-
tersection of the invariant biology of menstruation, conception, birth, and lacta-
tion with the operation of a historically constructed political economy. Chinese 
women were positioned economically, socially, and ideologically to be unable to 
refuse childbearing and its costs without permanently rejecting sexual inter-
course. Even this doubtful privilege was often denied them. Under those circum-
stances, biology was destiny; gender was largely about sex. The folk perception of 
gender as absolutely natural seems, to me, absolutely natural, and not far wrong. 
The Chinese naturalizing of gender was not simply one among any number of 
possible gender constructions. Like all other peoples, they have imagined a great 
many unlikely things, and gone on to fetishize them. Contrary to the inferences 
of extreme cultural constructionists, however, the Chinese did not invent sex. 
Naturalistic assumptions concerning gender produced contradiction as well 
as clarity. The tangled threads of naturalized gender were not a filmy mental veil 
to be shredded by the kind of deconstruction that reveals emperors as thugs. 
Pregnancy is not imagined into existence any more than are birth, lactation, and 
menstruation. Conceptualized in a variety of ways in various cultures, these real-
world processes are not purely socially constructed entities. Gods, virtue, and 
class are products of imagination, projections of social abstractions, inventions 
of unusual minds or cultural ferment. Pregnancy, childbirth, lactation, and men-
struation are part of the natural, material world, with a share in constructing us. 
As Emily Martin has pointed out, "because of the different relationship men and 
women have to their bodies, the different involvement they have in the biological 
events of birth and death, and the different kinds of work they do, each gender 
has evolved a separate view of what life and death mean and how they interrelate" 
(1988:168). 
The immense gratitude for contraception and abortion that women express in 
Taiwan and China comes not from having had their consciousness raised but 
from having had their birthrates lowered. Their ideological flexibility about birth 
control seems, at first, to be startlingly counterintuitive. In all current Chinese so-
cieties, under whatever official regime, as soon as political economy, national 
policy, and the availability of contraceptives permitted it, Chinese women dived 
into the most dramatic fertility decline the world has ever seen. Many of them, as 
in Taiwan, which has never forced birth control, did so absolutely voluntarily. 
Women did not rear large numbers of children as an end in itself, as popular dis-
course suggests. They bore them for their own security and to meet implicit fam-
ily obligations. When they became able to meet those needs in less demanding 
ways, birthrates plummeted without an instant of cultural braking. 
Yet I do not see a social-constructionist position toward gender emerging in 
folk ideology, or even among Chinese feminists. Although births can now bema-
nipulated to fit low-labor-demand/high-cost-of-children regimes of economic 
development, women still marry principally to establish uterine families, even if 
202 
: 
C H 
I 
N A 
S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
these are small. Under the TMP/PCMP system, biological reproduction is 
women's only absolute material monopoly and her best connection to the re-
sources that men still tap more effectively. A naturalizing gender stance remains 
inevitable. The yin and the yang will persist longer, and across a broader class 
spectrum, than all other elements of folk ideology because they are rooted in a 
reproductive asymmetry that even modern medicine alters only marginally. 
Folk Ideologies: Women and Men 
203 
Petty Capitalism 
in Taiwan 
In public it was compulsory to show outward signs of loyalty to the party. 
Loyalty to the Generalissimo was the only criterion of patriotism ... . 
Even the application for a barber's license or a driver's license required a 
written pledge to these loyalties.- Peng Ming-min, 1972 
No, we didn't put out offerings when the Old President died; we've never 
been very religious. A lot of people did, though. My daughters and I 
cried. He was not really popular with us Taiwanese, you know, but even 
if no one wanted him as president, we were used to him. Now that there 
is more than one party, the Legislative Assembly is full of businessmen. 
The quarrelling is terrible! There's such a thing as too much freedom. 
-
Kho Chun-Kim, a Taibei shopkeeper, 1988 
The initial impetus for this book was my wish to understand in 
theoretical terms the economic success Taiwan had achieved by the 1980s, and to 
relate that success to contemporaneous changes in China. This search has re-
sulted in a book that looks deeper both into history and into contemporary 
processes of social reproduction than I had expected. Taiwan's economic "mira~ 
de" has become (perhaps appropriately, but also somewhat to my regret) a rela-
tively minor issue in its making. 
The value of conceiving of Chinese political economies as structured by the 
two modes of production on which I have thus far concentrated lies not only in 
the possibilities it presents for the interpretation of the past. Such a view of his-
tory also illuminates the present and, perhaps, adumbrates the likely pattern of 
the future. The book is no longer only about recent events in Taiwan, but it 
would be incomplete without at least a brief account of how Taiwan's people have 
come to their present state of relative abundance, and of their role in this process. 
By implication, and by an even briefer explicit analysis, I relate this history to the 
relatively slow expansion of wealth in China. 
204 
Many academics interested in China but unable to research there have focused 
on Taiwan. Fascinated by one of the rare post-World War II examples of genuine 
development, or, eager for an example proving that sufficiently fervent anticommu-
nism will do the capitalist trick, they have written volubly about Taiwan's changing 
economy. The best of this large, generally highly ideological, and often very trying 
literature is summarized, interpreted, and related to Fernando H. Cardoso and Enzo 
Faletto's version of dependency theory (1979) by Thomas B. Gold in his State and 
Society in the Taiwan Miracle (1986). Gold's position now is widely accepted. 
His central thesis is that a nearly autonomous "party-state ... effectively led 
sustained economic development through several crises and maintained stability 
in the bargain" (122). He shapes these claims of superhuman competence by pe-
riodizing Taiwan's recent history to show Guomindang leadership cleverly extri-
cating the economy from one difficulty after another. A "chaotic interregnum" 
lasted from the surrender of the island by the Japanese in 1945 until "rehabilita-
tion and import-substitution industrialization, 1950-1959." Led by an emerging 
body of technocrats and pushed by considerable American pressure, production 
shifted to "export orientation and political quiet, 1960-73." This was followed by 
"industrial upgrading and the emergence of a political opposition, 1973-1983:' 
Here the technocrats, freed (with the death in 1975 of Jiang Kaishek) from the 
heavy hand of the past, began to steer an increasingly complex economy to com-
petitive status in the world capitalist economy, while that complexity expressed 
itself in increased demand for greater political pluralism. The theme of rigorous 
state control not only of the economy but of social organization, education, and 
all forms of counterhegemonic political expression runs through all these chap-
ters. This is the "stability" that, together with GMD economic savvy, has made 
the "miracle" possible. 
Gold wisely avoids the chorus of enthusiasm for "growth with equity" which 
burst forth after the publication of John C. H. Fei, Gustav Ranis, and Shirley 
W. Y. Kuo's 1979 book of that title. The figures on which their claims of increased 
equality were based were drawn from highly suspect income figures. Income 
figures, derived mostly from tax documents, are always suspect, but especially so 
in systems with large untaxed, "underground" economies like Taiwan's. Even data 
based on income statistics, however, show that the reported gap between rich and 
poor widened abruptly in the 1980s. These figures reflect both real change and 
better information. The richest fifth of the population had 7-3 times the income 
of the poorest fifth in 1986, up from a reported low of 4.17 in the 1970s (China 
Post 6 June 1988:1). 
Without exploring its implications or suitability, Gold adopts a cautious semi-
Marxist, semi-Weberian terminology in which Taiwan was precapitalist before 
the arrival of the Japanese (18) and has been capitalist from then till now. Beneath 
his argument we see the familiar functionalist distinction between polity (an au-
tonomous state that moves the economy but is not of it) and economy (mostly 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
: 
205 
local capitalists and transnational corporations, who push for political changes 
primarily to lower their costs of doing business). 
We can see the capitalists' motivations clearly enough. But why did this im-
mensely powerful state do what it did to expand Taiwan's economy, especially if 
by doing so it sowed the seeds of its own destruction in the political liberalization 
of the 198os? Had the GMD state become a captive of capitalist interests, too 
weak to resist their expanded power? Quite rightly, I suggest, Gold thinks not. 
The state "acted as if it reflected a capitalist -led pact of domination, but in reality 
it did not absorb capitalists into the political elite. State cadres were a profes-
sional, self-reproducing stratum" ( 128). 
Gold's argument, like many in this genre, is weakened by its stress on elites 
and leadership as major factors in social change. One need not be a Marxist to re-
alize that a leader with no followers is no leader, that even powerful hegemonic 
claims can be resisted and subverted unless leadership articulates something of 
value to the led. Propagandize and intimidate as they might, for example, the 
GMD never persuaded Taiwanese to take seriously the "sacred mission" to retake 
the mainland. Children taught this notion at school found ridicule rather than 
support for it at home. We must look beyond the accomplishments of a few able 
men to the contributions not only of Taiwan's people in general but of other sig-
nificant classes. By seeing beyond the political surface, we learn how the economy 
survived the overburden of barbarous, corrupt, incompetent, and merely weary 
state functionaries dumped on it in the 1940s and 1950s. The most salient of these 
class actors were not the technocrats, but the petty capitalists. They kept the is-
land afloat for twenty years while the GMD paid off its loyalists and learned how 
to domesticate to its purposes not just petty but multinational capitalism. In the 
following account of the GMD's history in Taiwan, I stress the continuities of ac-
tion between this and other Chinese states, continuities that reveal the persistent 
reproduction of a characteristic TMP logic. 
THE GMD AS TMP 
Taiwan shows us a part of the Chinese world with a strong petty-capitalist 
and weak tributary history transformed into an ideal-typical tributary state by 
the GMD Mainlander apparatchiki during its first two decades in power there. 
Since 1965, it has shown us how petty capitalists can ally and expand with 
multinational capitalism without being drained dry by capitalist extractive effi-
ciency. In the late 1980s, after martial law was at last lifted, the petty-capital-
ist/capitalist alliance grew strong enough to challenge GMD one-party rule and 
to attack key institutions of the Jiang family's tributary mode. Martial law was 
finally lifted in 1988. 
Taiwan was never well integrated into the Chinese polity, but its history is the 
history of regional petty capitalism. It was brought into marketing circuits first, 
206 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A ' S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
briefly, by Europeans, then as the "flying territory" of Fujianese patricorporations 
that dominated a coastal trading zone running from Nagasaki to Manila and the 
ports of mainland southeast Asia. Taiwan's people, Aborigine and Han, produced 
mountain products, rice, sugar, and tea for export through networks of landlord-
merchants, and they ran their own rough frontier politics. After 1895, Japanese 
capitalists and state institutions were even more efficient than Fujian-based petty 
capitalists in monopolizing commerce and extracting surplus. When interna-
tional politicians gave the island to Jiang Kaishek's GMD in 1945, China itself was 
more a congeries of warlords than a nation. After 1949, the political Taiwan 
Straits that had always separated the island from the continent widened immea-
surably as economic ties were cleanly severed. 
The GMD, though they had lost the war, came to Taiwan under enviable cir-
cumstances. By 1950, approximately two million immigrants had followed it to 
Taiwan, virtually all of them state employees or their dependents, willy-nilly loy-
alists. The new government had at its disposal a Japanese-built infrastructure 
better than that available for any comparable region in China. It had what was 
left of the national treasury (approximately $400 million in gold) and was soon 
to receive an average of U.S.$8o million per year over the eighteen fiscal years 
1951-1968 from the U.S. government (Jacoby 1967:38). The six million local peo-
ple had been thoroughly cowed by the violent occupation of their island since 
1945 and the political pogroms of 1947 and the early 1950s. 
The GMD began as, and has continued to be, a major economic actor in post-
war Taiwan. In the mid 1960s, Japan-based supporters of Taiwanese indepen-
dence summarized a pattern that began to erode only in the late 198os: 
The powerful Kuomintang holds a firm grip over the entire administrative 
system. KMT Central Headquarters controls the Central Government 
through Party branches placed in various sections, such as those concerned 
with highway communications, industry, etc. The Special Party Branch ... is 
in charge of supervising the Nationalist Army. Furthermore, the Taiwan 
Provincial Party Branch consists of 21 county and city branches, and there are 
380 district main cells, known as "People's Service Centers." ... 
It is believed that the amount of money spent every year by the refugee 
officials for the various Kuomintang functions comes to some one billion 
yuan ... or one seventh of the total national revenues. On top of this, the Na-
tional Treasury provides operating expenses for the Party and the political de-
partment in the army takes its share out of the military expenses. County and 
city Party branches take part of the local budget. Moreover, the Kuomintang 
owns all of the private properties, factories, theatres, radio stations and hotels 
left by the Japanese in 1945. Party officials have also made an illicit fortune by 
taking advantage of foreign exchange regulations and importing contraband 
goods. (Formosan Quarterly 1963=106) 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
207 
Through the accidents of history and of U.S. aid, Jiang Kaishek was Taiwan's 
strongest Chinese emperor, with powers undreamed-of by his heaven-sponsored 
predecessors. For almost twenty years -
from 1945 until his gradual separation 
from economic decision making around 1965 -
he ran a tributary state in Taiwan. 
His reign came complete with an imperial style of life, the maintenance of a state 
cult (Confucius and suicidally chaste women figure largely in the annual sacrifices 
his state supported), and a funeral that Qin Shi Huangdi would have respected. 
The GMD government modified its political-economic program only mar-
ginally and reluctantly under the pressure of its capitalist patrons; rulers knew 
full well that foreign capital would bring disruptive external influence and social 
change. Paradoxically, however, their policies became a forcing-house for petty 
capitalism as they yielded to pressures first for land reform (in the early 1950s) 
and then for the admission of multinationals in 1965. The large petty-capitalist 
class supported itself as an auxiliary to the tributary system, but remained poor. 
Most accumulation was siphoned off as tribute in taxes, forced contributions, 
and the confiscation of profitable enterprises. 
Until petty capitalism was able to ally itself with the more productive capitalist 
mode of production in the 1960s, Taiwan remained a sociological coelacanth: a 
modern tributary state. Up to one-fourth of the population depended directly on 
state employment, funded by taxation, forced contributions, confiscations, and 
foreign aid. Except for limited petty-capitalist growth, the economy was static, the 
polity rigidly hieratic, and the population politically intimidated. Through eco-
nomic controls and the terrorism of the state, this period in Taiwan was almost a 
laboratory experiment in the relationships between the two traditional Chinese 
modes of production. 
Tributary modes are not simply corrupt or deviant forms of a Weberian ratio-
nal-bureaucratic state. They have an ideology, a structure, and a purpose very 
different from the capitalist democracies that have grown, uniquely, out of a 
north Atlantic origin in the past five hundred years. People- such as the Tai-
wanese under Japanese rule -
who have experienced more rational bureaucratic 
systems and the relative equality of the market as a condition of political life are 
likely to see tributary modes as perversions of something they are not. This view 
is understandable, but not helpful to analysis. 
In Taiwan, employment in the GMD government brought a dignified archi-
tectural "work" setting, political separation from commoners, leisure, a modest 
salary, and the opportunity to receive fees, meals, and reciprocal favors from peo-
ple seeking official services. "Professional courtesy" was widely extended within 
the ruling class: functions a commoner might have to pay for were performed 
free for properly introduced official colleagues and their kin. The right to partic-
ipate in political rituals -
ambassadorial service, official banquets, television ap-
pearances, election to office, academic conferences -
with all the attendant 
travel, special food and lodging, gifts, cars and drivers, and the like were others. 
208 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
These were not trivial matters; a well-placed official found nearly all his subsis-
tence needs met through "gifts" even if he were high-minded enough to refuse 
cash. The leisure offered by such "jobs" was also attractive. Into the 1970s, gov-
ernment offices were full of people with little to do but drink tea and disentangle 
the latest line from the newspapers. One did not become an official to work; work 
was for underlings. The purpose of becoming an official was to live the life of an 
official; and a very nice life it was, until one got one's politics wrong. 
Most state employees, of course, were not officials or military officers. They 
were clerical workers, letter carriers, manual laborers in state enterprises, school-
teachers, janitors, and the like. They too were employed in large numbers, but for 
low salaries and with few opportunities to sell their services to the public. They 
engaged in an archaic exchange of service and ideological loyalty in return for 
minimal salaries, food (rice, cooking oil, salt, and fuel), clothing (for the mili-
tary), shelter (many government units housed employees), a dilute political pro-
tection, occasional feasts and political celebrations, and symbolic gifts (awards, 
commendations, small pieces of jewelry). 
Tributary rulers have three sources of material support: direct levies on the 
population through taxation and conscription; production by state employees 
using state resources; and, through their universalistic claims on commoner loy-
alty, erratic demands on wealthy commoners. Taxes and conscription are near-
universals of class society; they reveal nothing new about tributary modes. State 
production is dealt with below. 
Special levies, however, should be briefly mentioned here. They have the au-
thentic tributary quality, made to meet emergencies, to demonstrate power, or to 
limit social mobility. Although irregular, they are normal; although disliked, they 
are officially legitimate. Under the GMD, the Taiwanese, accustomed to the more 
regular and impersonal methods of resource extraction used by the Japanese, saw 
them as corrupt. When the GMD arrived in Taiwan, the confiscation of success-
ful businesses and the squeeze on the rich for which they had been famous on the 
mainland continued. The outstretched GMD hand collected gold bars from mil-
lionaires and pennies from primary schoolchildren. A child's failure to bring in 
her levy "to buy an airplane to retake the mainland" brought imputations of dis-
loyalty against her family; businesspeople were squeezed by party cadres and gov-
ernment officials against the background of threats to cut off raw materials or 
foreign exchange. 
Both Taiwanese and American critics of the GMD assumed that it was unable 
to approximate the capitalist nation-state ideal for an endless list of reasons: be-
cause of the war with the Communists, because of incompetence, because of in-
dividual greed, because U.S. aid was not great enough, and so forth. These critics 
were wrong. Under Jiang Kaishek, the GMD had its own purposes, and they were 
those of a TMP: to extract surplus, to employ the personnel needed to manage 
the extraction, to legitimate their actions through ideology, and thus to govern. 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan : 
209 
TRIBUTARY STASIS, 1945-65 
During the first fifteen years of GMD rule, Taiwan seemed well on the way to 
underdevelopment; only after twenty, by about 1965, did an expansionary trend 
strong enough to bring real benefits to ordinary people seem certain. Not till1956 
did Taiwan's people reattain their prewar level of real per-capita income (Jacoby 
1967:89). By 1958, the rising economist K. T. Li, putting the best face on a difficult 
situation, described the economic situation as "stagnant" and concluded that 
"the past development program has come to the end of its usefulness and a 
change in direction is in order" (Li 1959:2, 21). By 1959, production of cash crops 
for export (tea, sugar cane, bananas, pineapples, citronella) had failed to regain 
1937-39levels, while more and more land was being devoted to intensively grown 
crops of such staples as rice, sweet potatoes, and vegetables (R. H. M. Jones 
1959:585). Nonofficial publications repeated the same criticisms that had ap-
peared regularly in the foreign (and the critical local) press for a decade: inflation 
was not under control (it averaged 35 percent a year in both 1959 and 1960, ac-
cording to a critical source [Liau Kianliong 1963:2] ); the balance of payments was 
extremely unfavorable; public industry was corrupt and unproductive while pri-
vate enterprise strangled in red tape or starved for capital; a huge military and 
administrative budget drained Taiwan of all surplus, simultaneously preventing 
further development and creating a war climate that frightened away investors. 
The island's economy was losing ground to its rising population and to the ex-
ternally oriented policies of its government. 
The years from 1945 to 1949 had been particularly devastating. Taiwan's war-
damaged industries were mostly dependent on an agricultural system that had 
been overstrained to meet Japan's food needs during the 1940s and that now had 
lost its primary outlets. GMD policy in Taiwan, similar to its policy elsewhere in 
China, ostensibly placed all resources in the service of the war against the Com-
munists, while in fact corruptly diverting many of them to private pockets. 
Legally and illegally, for the mainland war or for private gain, products, raw ma-
terials, even the machinery of production and communication were dispatched 
from Taiwan (see, e.g., Kerr 1965:97-136). By the time the entire GMD state ar-
rived in 1949-50, the infrastructure was more deeply damaged than at the end of 
the war. It is not surprising that GMD supporters prefer to omit data for these 
years from their analyses of Taiwan's economic miracle; they reveal significant 
declines in virtually every area. Taiwanese standards of living and expectations 
for the future plummeted as government incompetence and venality, epidemics, 
unemployment, inflation, and a process economists fastidiously call "disinvest-
ment" undermined its formerly productive economy. Effective reconstruction 
was limited to two key areas: the reestablishment of Japanese transportation and 
communications systems, as harbors, shipping facilities, and railroads were 
cleared of wartime damage, and the rehabilitation of electric-power-generating 
210 
: 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
capacity, back to one-tenth of its peak prewar output by 1951 (Riggs 1952:95). Like 
most gains now attributed to GMD leadership, electrical-power rehabilitation 
was accomplished with much American aid. Westinghouse had capital in the pre-
viously Japanese utility, and wanted a return on it. 
In these years, the Taiwanese often bore the brunt of Mainlander anti-Japa-
nese sentiment and lived as if under an army of foreign occupation. The event 
that assured the GMD of power to create an economy of its own choosing oc-
curred on and after 28 February 1947, when an organized Taiwanese uprising 
brought reprisals: the massacre of at least twenty thousand Taiwanese, the in car-
ceration of thousands more, and the implementation of harsh measures for the 
control of future dissidence. Riggs (1952:59 ), citing Joshua Liao as authority, says 
another thousand oppositionists were arrested after Jiang Kaishek's arrival in 
1949, and many others fled to Japan -
perhaps a thousand a month in 1949 
(Kerr 1965:460) .1 
In the Taibei neighborhood where I lived in the late 196os and mid 1970s, sev-
eral dozen traditionally envisioned ghosts were conspicuous not only by their 
numbers but by the apparent vagueness of their origins. Unlike most local ghosts, 
these had no graves or tablets, only a mysterious being. Years later, a careless 
teenager, to her family's embarrassment, let slip to me the hint that told the story. 
In 1947, soldiers had shot "dozens" of men, whose bodies tumbled over an em-
bankment to float down Xindian Creek. No one had ever performed the cere-
mony that returns such ghosts to their proper resting places -
family altars and 
family tombs. No one had dared erect an altar for their propitiation. Taiwan is 
full of such ghosts, haunting neighborhoods and memories, some of later date 
and of other ethnic origins. 
Mainlanders deemed disloyal to Jiang were purged in a wave of imprison-
ments and dismissals after 1950 (Riggs 1952:41; Kerr 1965: 393-95, 422-24). In-
formal battles between Taiwanese and Mainlanders, and among Mainlander 
factions, continued for years: twelve Taiwanese soldiers were reported by Tai-
wanese nationalists outside the island to have machine-gunned two hundred 
Mainlander soldiers on 28 January 1964, perhaps in retaliation for the two-hun-
1. George H. Kerr, a USIS employee familiar with Taiwan, and present during the 1947 uprising, 
gives an account of this explosive result of GMD rule in his widely available 1965 book, Formosa Be-
trayed. Other English-language sources (e.g. Riggs 1952:46-47) usually relied heavily on Kerr's earlier 
articles "Formosa's Return to China" (1947a) and "Formosa: The March Massacres" (1947b). Chinese-
and japanese-language readers have had available the compendious Taiwan ren sibai nian shi, by the 
pseudonymous Shi Ming, since 1979. Since the press liberalization of the late 1980s, a torrent of schol-
arship has appeared on the February 28 massacres and their aftermath, confirming long-circulated 
oral histories and showing that the scrappy contemporary record seriously underestimated the 
human cost of this event. For a conservative English-language source based on GMD archives, see Lai 
Jeh-hang eta!. 1991. 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
211 
dred-household village nearly wiped out by a platoon of armed soldiers the pre-
vious December (Independent Formosa 3:10-11). 
With the GMD defeat in China and the arrival of its government, armies, and 
civilian followers in 1949-50, it could no longer drain Taiwan to support the 
mainland directly. After the Korean War began in 1950, the GMD received in-
creased aid and political pressure from the United States. GMD officials began to 
effect improvements both in the economy and in their relationships with the 
local population. This 1950s reconstruction, including land reform, restored basic 
functions, created little growth, and clearly reveal the GMD's political-economic 
goals. Taiwan was to provide comfortable sinecures for Jiang loyalists. Perhaps, in 
the future, the mainland might be retaken. That mainland recovery was not an 
urgent matter is clear, for Jiang refused to develop the economy in order to sup-
port such action. It may well have been that the GMD government "prefer[red] 
the importation of consumer goods which can be either stockpiled or sold within 
the economy, the proceeds to be used toward increasing the military budget" 
(New York Times, 5 September 1960, 4:1), and that it feared that "any economic 
improvement at the expense of the military" would favor indigenous Taiwanese 
(New York Times 3 Aprili96o, sec. 19:3). 
The excess of consumption over production in the early decades can be laid 
at the door of the military, which absorbed great quantities of government rev-
enues and foreign aid. They were chided for this in 1961, when in a startlingly 
honest critique in Taibei, Roy E. James, deputy director of the U.S. Interna-
tional Cooperation Administration, estimated that military spending ac-
counted for So percent of the budget- "probably the highest rate in the 
world" (New York Times, 23 January 1961, sec. 4:7). This massive expenditure on 
affairs of state, especially on the maintenance of a huge population of state de-
pendents, was not only a historical oddity, the result of Jiang's expulsion from 
China. It was consistent with and characteristic of the goals of tributary 
economies generally. 
The creation of what was almost a parody of a tributary officialdom in Taiwan 
resulted in part from the GMD's need to employ as many as possible of the im-
migrants it had brought from the mainland. Initially, GMD leaders chose to limit 
their support of soldiers and their dependents in Taiwan: twenty-five thousand 
recently arrived troops died of disease in 1950 and 1951 (Riggs 1952:18); survivors 
remember handsful of rice bran as rations, no shelter or bedding, and brutal 
treatment by their officers compounding the lack of medical care and sanitary 
arrangements. Most of the men under arms were kept on (at near-starvation 
wages- U.S.$19 total expenditure per month per man in 1950 [Riggs 1952:112] ), 
though 15o,ooo were simply demobilized to live as best they could in the ravaged 
economy (Kerr 1965:385). The U.S. gift of $42 million made during the 1950s to 
ease this transition seems to have accomplished little for the discharged men 
(Riggs [n.d.)). 
212 : 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
The choice between leaving and staying in the army was a grim one. A 1959 vi-
gnette is a response to the "Army-as-Family Campaign" organized to generate 
votes for Jiang Kaishek. The author objects that 
in Formosa there are some ... "wise men," who try to convince us ignorant cit-
izens that the army is a family. They say: "You are all as brothers to each other 
and as sons to superior officers. And President Chiang Kai-shek is your father." 
... The army and the family are poles apart .... What those "wise men" are 
trying to do is to conceal all the hard aspects of army life by making us home-
less idiots believe that the army is a family "full of warmth:' Doubtless we are 
idiots. We are deceived easily and often we do not know that we are being de-
ceived. But we are the ones who for many years have defended the frontline 
against the communists. Most of us are in our 40's now and we know what the 
army is and what the family is, just as we know the difference between killing 
enemies in battle and murdering innocent persons. (Hsiao Jen-chian 1963:118) 
Another piece, from 1958, is the suicide announcement of a young discharged 
Shandongnese whose soy-soup stand was arbitrarily closed down by Taibei po-
lice, leaving him ruined and despairing. He addresses his friends: 
Do I belong to the country really? Whom does the government ask to carry 
out a counterattack? Those wearing suits or those wearing the uniform of low-
class soldiers? A communist slogan goes: "If there is a bowl of rice, let's eat to-
gether." Our slogan is: "The Three People's Principles guarantee our life." It 
sounds fine, indeed. But what is the use of such a slogan if it never is realized? 
It is as though we cannot eat a bowl of rice that is in front of us. What harm 
does my [soy-soup] stand do to the government? I know that there are hun-
dreds and thousands of poor people, such as peddlers and day workers, living 
on the verge of starvation. (Chang Chen-kuei 1963=127-28) 
When more and more discharged veterans appeared on the streets as peddlers, 
Taibei police found ample opportunity to shake their old comrades down. In 
1960, another veteran complained in a newspaper that he had just spent 
NT$2,500 of his NT$7,150 severance pay on an ice-cream cart and was briskly 
fined a total of NT$124 by the Second Police Branch Bureau, the Changsha Street 
Police Office, the Fifth Police Branch Bureau, the Poai Road Police Office, the 
Eight Police Branch Bureau, and the Siyuan Road Police Office (Chen Chi-yu 
1963=125-27). In later years, few would dare to criticize so openly. 
Some army men wanted to leave the service and were not permitted to do so; 
others would have remained in but were deemed useless and discharged. "I 
nearly went blind from bad food;' one veteran told me. "When I was too sick for 
them to use me, they threw me away." 
Having "thrown away" the weakest and least skilled, the GMD sought to make 
as many immigrants as possible into state employees. Many former soldiers were 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
: 
213 
employed in state enterprises and organizations, often at levels far beyond their 
capacity but in many cases as poorly paid door watchers or janitors. Schools, post 
offices, and other labor-intensive public services expanded. A semipublic con-
struction company that built many of Taiwan's postwar roads, bridges, and nu-
clear installations was formed to employ retired military men. Increasingly 
through the late 1940s into the late 1960s, more and more people on the public 
payroll were Mainlanders (Gates 1981:257). Except for the ruling elite, however, 
the tributary economy provided public servants with sparse support. 
Until the industrial boom of the mid 1960s, however, even the security and 
small benefits of state employment offered clear advantages compared with the 
risk of those in the private sector. In early decades of the new regime, state-sup-
plied rice was a symbol and a realistic expression of the nurturance from which 
the Chinese tributary state traditionally drew its legitimacy. Being fed had real 
meaning for those who lived on the government's peiji: "We eat the country's 
rice; how could we criticize the president?" people patiently explained to me. 
State production, another continuity with the past, remained central to GMD 
political economy. That production apparently had two goals: to produce goods 
directly for the state's use and to employ large numbers of people, thus retaining 
their loyalty. Some of these enterprises were new, but others were GMD-appro-
priated Japanese companies. The state (or party- it was rarely clear which) ran 
the railways, electrical-power-generation system, telecommunications, and 
broadcasting network. It monopolized cement, metals, and petroleum produc-
tion. It monopsonized sugar through a corporation that refined cane bought 
largely from household producers, and almost monopsonized rice by requiring 
that farm taxes be paid in it and that fertilizer be bartered for it. Sometimes the 
state operated more indirectly. Numazaki Ichiro notes that in the 1950s textiles 
were produced on a kind of "putting-out system" in which the state received, for 
example, raw cotton as U.S. aid and assigned it to private producers for process-
ing on commission (1991:110). 
Part of the small increases in production of the 1950s occurred in sectors from 
which the GMD could easily draw a profit, such as salt and timber. Profitable en-
terprises were taken over by the GMD, as they had been in GMD days on the 
mainland (Lee Bing 1952:16-17). Sugar production especially was supervised, with 
quotas set for 22o,ooo households. Including the twenty-five thousand state fac-
tory and office workers, a little over a million people- dose to one-tenth of the 
population- were involved in sugar production (Lee Bing 1952:116). 
By 1954, the state owned the following major enterprises: Chinese Petroleum 
Corporation, Taiwan Aluminum Corporation, Taiwan Gold and Copper Mining 
Administration, Hsinchu Coal Mining Administration, Taiwan Steel Works, Tai-
wan Salt Works, China Textile Industries Corporation, Taiwan Power Company, 
Taiwan Sugar Corporation (with 30 sugar mills, 41,888 hectares of cane farm, and 
3,247 km of railroad), Taiwan Cement Corporation, Taiwan Fertilizer Corpora-
214: CHINAS 
MOTOR 
tion, Taiwan Alkali Company, Taiwan Paper and Pulp Corporation, Taiwan Ship-
building Corporation, Taiwan Machinery Corporation, Taiwan Industrial and 
Mining Corporation (with a metallurgical and mining division, a chemical divi-
sion, a textile division, and an engineering division), Taiwan Agricultural and 
Forestry Development Corporation (tea, pineapples, marine products, and live-
stock), Taiwan Tobacco and Wine Monopoly Bureau, Taiwan Agricultural Chem-
ical Works, and Taiwan Camphor Bureau. They employed a total of 84,300 
people, contrasted with 12o,ooo employed by registered private industries, mostly 
very small in scale (Far Eastern Economic Review 16 [1954] :210 ). 
This group of public enterprises made up a very large proportion of Taiwan's 
modern productive capacity. They turned over their profits to the government 
(Chen Cheng 1953:809). Profits from some enterprises were relatively large com-
ponents of state-generated revenue. In 1952, for example, the Wine and Tobacco 
Monopoly Bureau turned in NT$421 million in profits, much more than the 
NT$162,702,172 for all state taxes, fees, and fines in that year (Chen Cheng 
1953:809). In 1953, the Tobacco and Wine Monopoly revenues amounted to 40 
percent of provincial-level government revenues. Profits from all government en-
terprises, properties, and monopolies continued to supply roughly one-fourth of 
central government revenues throughout the 1950s, 196os, and early 1970s (Tai-
wan, DGBAS 1974, Table 78:298-99). 
Many state enterprises were not particularly profitable over time, however, 
often producing expensive goods of poor quality. Pineapples, which the Japanese 
had begun to grow and can as early as 1901, were grown more cheaply by individ-
ual farmers than by the big (hence, public) companies (Far Eastern Economic Re-
view 15 [1953]: 86). The salt monopoly was criticized for its low productivity (Far 
Eastern Economic Review 14 [1953l:365-55). Textiles, produced privately but 
largely under government contract for military uniforms, were of such poor 
quality in the late 1940s and early 1950s that they were not fit for export (Pan 
Yang-shan 1954:859). To Mainlanders recently arrived from war zones, these defi-
ciencies might have seemed understandable; to Taiwanese, who inevitably com-
pared these results with those of the Japanese, state industry was an outrageous 
joke. 
Through its economic and political dominance, the government through the 
1940s and 1950s was able to control the prices paid for many major goods and ser-
vices produced by the private sector. Rice, sugar, and fertilizer prices were set and 
manipulated, and sugar sales paid for, sometimes, in low-interest government 
bonds rather than in cash (Far Eastern Economic Review 15 [1953l:372). Profits 
were taken by state importing and exporting companies to the detriment of con-
sumers, while foreign-exchange rates and quotas were manipulated to the ad-
vantage of big (hence state) firms (H. K. Kao 1954:45). Decisions to import or to 
produce goods locally during this period were probably colored by the fact that 
the government could freely set profit levels for itself on imports. 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
215 
If the GMD had reinvested the resources drawn from Taiwan production into 
industrialization, infrastructure, or social needs, its extractions might have been 
viewed more favorably by local people and by the world. Profits from state eco-
nomic activities, however, were not much used in this fashion but rather found 
their way through corruption into private pockets or into the unproductive main-
tenance of enormous tributary circuits. The GMD's success in making Taiwan's 
products pay its administrative and military costs was mixed. Its state enterprises 
were frequently criticized as money losers, run simply as well-paid retirement 
homes for surplus Mainlanders. 2 Premier Chen Cheng told the Legislative Yuan in 
1953 that "in respect to personnel remunerations and administrative expenses of 
the [state] industries, criticisms have been especially rife" (Chen Cheng 1953:809). 
The large numbers of immigrants given work in these enterprises, especially 
after 1949, were heavily weighted with supernumerary managerial personnel with 
high salaries and important perquisites. Not only were these managers numerous 
and expensive, they were often ignorant of the operations and techniques they 
were to supervise and could not talk to their subordinates: virtually none knew 
Japanese, few knew Taiwanese, and some did not even speak Mandarin. They 
could not read the files and technical manuals, which were written in Japanese, 
the technical language for government bureaus. In the late 196os and early 1970s, 
government offices often operated on a two-tier system: Mainlander "supervi-
sors"with very little to do except prepare personnel reports and Taiwanese tech-
nical and clerical workers -
these discussed fine points in Japanese with each 
other and transferred instructions to manual workers or the public in Taiwanese.1 
The strongest and most efficient of the state enterprises through the mid 1950s 
were the Taiwan Power Company and the Taiwan Sugar Corporation, both of 
which were targeted for special aid, including large loans, from the United States.4 
2. One must be cautious of such criticism: much of it was motivated by indigenous and foreign 
capitalists who resented any interference with a free market. Such critics objected even more strongly 
to the state enterprises that succeeded. 
3· The use of Japanese as a technical language for government bureaus was reproduced for 
decades at some universities and training institutes. Virtually the entire library collection on trans-
portation (railroads, etc.) at Chenggong University in the mid 1970s, for example, was in Japanese, 
most of it dating to the Japanese period. Such small discoveries, so frequent in the years I taught in 
official agencies, convinced me that in the early decades the GMD had no real interest in improving 
transport, or anything else. Had it been otherwise, might they not have translated some of the rail-
road-maintenance manuals? If, in the mid 1970s, the National Teacher's University had really wanted 
to upgrade the middle-school English-teaching program, might they not have hired a Chinese-speak-
ing specialist in teaching English as a foreign language instead of a non-Chinese-speaking specialist 
in African languages, as they in fact did? 
4· Characteristically, the U.S. government, while willing to give huge sums derived from taxes to 
Taiwan, was not willing to injure American sugar interests by purchasing the island's major export 
commodity. The U.S. embargo on Taiwan sugar set up in 1934 was reinforced in 1948 (J. Y. Yang 
216 
C H I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Sugar production reemerged after a 1947 loan of US$5 million for the repair of 
damaged refineries and railroads (Lee Bing 1952:16). Hydroelectric-power pro-
duction was brought back to something approaching prewar levels with internal 
funds, and U.S. aid in 1950 greatly expanded it, with the Taiwan Power Company 
receiving by far the biggest share of U.S. aid to Taiwan at that time (Far Eastern 
Economic Review 1954, 17:529 ). 
GMD currency policies (with a little help from those of the Japanese) had pro-
duced insane levels of inflation in areas under GMD control after 1937, so that a 
rich man's bank account was virtually worthless by 1948 (Kann 1955:592-93). Al-
though the GMD sharply curbed these disastrous policies after it moved to Tai-
wan, inflation remained a problem there until the economy began to improve in 
the 1960s. A Morgan Guaranty Survey of 1961 called current rates of inflation and 
interest high -
bank interest was then 2 percent per month, while private rates 
were three to 4 percent per month (1962:49). 
The economic policies institutionalized in the 1950s were perpetuated with lit-
tle change well into the 1960s; some lasted longer. During the GMD's first twenty-
five years in Taiwan, state production and distribution did astonishingly little to 
develop the economy, but they did enable GMD rulers to establish themselves in 
a position of absolute dominance over virtually every aspect of the political econ-
omy and social life. The GMD was following the characteristic pattern of a Chi-
nese tributary state: ensuring loyalty through permitting an official class to skim 
from the populace, assuring the production of strategic goods such as arms, and 
monopolizing relatively profitable commodity production, using a labor force of 
state employees kept captive by their political isolation from the commoners. Al-
though outsiders saw this system as corrupt, such highly paid sinecures -
not 
doth or tires or electricity -
are what rulers expected their tributary mode to 
produce. Obviously, among the multitude of government employees, many had 
other visions for GMD Taiwan, even in its first decades; I have met many. But 
they were not in charge. 
In 1963, just before the new economic policies began to create real growth, a 
Taiwanese nationalist summarized the nearly thirty years since the peak of Japa-
nese-managed prosperity: 
1953:274). I observed a parallel case in the early 1960s, while attending the University of Hawaii. Tai-
wan graduate students sent by their government to the U.S.-government-sponsored East-West Cen-
ter at the University of Hawaii were refused permission to study pineapple production methods at the 
university's Pineapple Research Institute, which was supported by the Dole Corporation. Here again, 
American capitalist interests outweighed Taiwan's urgent need to expand the exportability of its few 
commercial crops. In retrospect, the U.S. resistance to promoting foreign tropical crops probably 
went far to prevent a Puerto Ricanization of Taiwan's economy. In the decades before Taiwan's indus-
trial expansion, however, it must have appeared as the height of insincerity and unhelpfulness to the 
farming population. 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
217 
In 1936 and thereabout Formosa enjoyed a fairly prosperous economy ... per-
haps the highest in the prewar days. One Japanese yen (¥) at that time had the 
economic value equivalent to the present one U.S. dollar ... , 
First, the agricultural production amounted to about ¥400 million, of 
which rice and sugar took up 75%. On the other hand, the industrial produc-
tion amounted only to approximately ¥180 million. This was mainly sugar 
refinery production. Others included only electric power and cement. The rest 
[of the economy], including the mining, fisheries, service industries, trans-
portation, payments for public servants, etc. totalled only about ¥120 million . 
. . . All combined, they amounted to about ¥700 million ... about $700 mil-
lion in terms of present value. 
The national product of Formosa in 1961 ... amounted to about $1,000 
million ... an increase of only $300 million ... only 43% in 25 years. The an-
nual average economic growth rate had been only 1.7%. On the other hand, 
during the same period the population increased from about 6,ooo,ooo to 
about n,ooo,ooo, an increase of 83%. This means that the annual average 
growth rate was about 3.3%, which corresponds to twice the economic growth 
rate. In other words, the living standard in Formosa had declined at an annual 
rate of about 1.6%. (Liau 1963:1) 
This is a very different picture from that commonly presented of the GMD eco-
nomic trajectory. Much of the literature analyzing Taiwan's economic develop-
ment depends all too heavily on official statistics, which are as suspect for early 
GMD years in Taiwan now as they were when they were published. Much of that 
literature begins their statistical series with 1950, ignoring the disastrous initial 
period from which ordinary people recovered only after another decade of min-
imal growth. Years of formal and informal interviewing about the conditions of 
life for working-class people convince me that Liau Kianlong -
who sees pro-
gressive impoverishment -
is more precise than K. T. Li -
who simply sees 
stagnation. Both are substantially more accurate than the Joy Luck Club5 of re-
cent analysts who so tactfully ignore what happened to the economy when the 
GMD ran its least-encumbered tributary state. 
LAND REFORM 
Taiwan's famous land reform -
which began with rent reduction in 1951, 
sold 864,583 acres of public and private land to 217,653 tenant households by 
1958 (Cheng and Cheng 1961:81-82) and compensated the expropriated land-
lords with government bonds -
is often held up as a model. Yet its conse-
s. Radical analyses of Taiwan's economy were rare until martial law was lifted; see Jan Lin 1989 for a 
strong and useful critique, and Ka and Selden 1986 for an insightful comparison of Taiwan with China. 
218: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
quences need careful interpretation. Land reform had become a necessity, 
though not one that rural people then, or later, had the power to demand 
(Hsiao Hsin-huang 1981:292). War and the years since 1945 had reduced the 
countryside to unproductive poverty. Rents that had been controlled by the 
Japanese increased sharply after the GMD takeover. George Kerr remarks, iron-
ically, "The exorbitant rents being so handsomely reduced in 1951 had been ex-
acted from the Formosan peasant after the Chinese took control in 1945" 
( 1965:420). 
A survey of farm income before land reform noted four "basic economic 
problems. Firstly, ... most of the farm products produced by Taiwan farmers 
were consumed by farm families. Secondly, farmers were short of disposable cash 
income to buy manufactured goods, especially daily necessities. Thirdly, it was 
impossible for most farmers to make any systematic plans for permanent im-
provement of their farms. Fourthly ... off-farm employment opportunities ... 
to earn cash money were limited" (Far Eastern Economic Review 18 [1955] :730 ). 
Although after the disastrous year of 1946 and before land reform there had 
been large percentage gains in agricultural output, there were few improvements 
in farming or in rural standards of living when compared to the realities of life 
under the Japanese. According to Fred W. Riggs (1952:no), the sweet-potato crop 
reached 2.36 million tons in 1951, compared to a peak of 1.77 million tons in 1937. 
Most of this increase was due to the unavailability of rice at affordable prices. Tai-
wan rice production under the Japanese depended on generous inputs of fertiliz-
ers and careful macrolevel management of irrigation that the GMD was unable 
to supply. People ate sweet potatoes instead- and resented the drop in their 
standard of living. 
Although land reform significantly influenced Taiwan's potential for industri-
alization and certainly affected the economy and society in far-reaching ways, it 
had only limited success in creating a varied and productive agriculture and a 
prosperous life for the rural population. Martin C. Yang, surveying rural atti-
tudes in 1970, provided an early, positive study of the social consequences of the 
reform. He observed that "in the minds of most farm people, 'living' meant food 
consumption. 'Good living' meant adequate and superior foods and 'poor living' 
meant the opposite." Ten years after land reform, of new owner-operators of fam-
ily farms, 55 percent ate pure polished rice as their daily staple (27 percent had 
done so during the worst of GMD times), and 9 percent ate meat and fish with 
most meals (3 percent had done so just prior to land reform) (1970:275, 285, 286). 
Yang's study is full of such inconclusive "proofs" of the success of land reform as 
the following: "When former tenants were asked in the survey whether the im-
provements in their food consumption had any relationship to land reform, 
about 6o percent of the 1,250 households answered this question, and more than 
90 percent of the answers were affirmative" (342-43). That is, only about one-half 
of the sample stated that they ate better because of land reform! Of the surveyed 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan : 
219 
1,250 former tenants, about 6o percent neither built nor repaired houses; nearly 
6o percent of those queried as to whether land reform had affected the installa-
tion of electric light in their houses replied negatively (30, 349). Wang Sung-hsing 
and Raymond Apthorpe attribute most of the post-land-reform improvements 
to nonfarm and remittance income from young family members in outside in-
dustry (1974:13-14). By the mid 196os, it is generally agreed, agriculture had 
begun to stagnate, and from an export point of view, to become "a net drain on 
the economy" (Thorbecke 1979:139; see also Ho 1978:155). 
Some difficulties in agriculture resulted from GMD policies that lay outside 
the sphere of land reform proper. A striking and little-studied example was the 
rape of Taiwan's virgin forests, including reckless cutting of cypress and other 
logs of one to two meters in diameter, each with a market value of several thou-
sand postwar dollars. After 1949, according to the pseudonymous Lim Simtai, 
GMD officials in control of Taiwan's Ministry of Forests allied with military 
rulers, "in preparation for their moonlight flitting in case their stay in Formosa 
should become precarious," deforested whole mountainsides (1964:8). They 
justified what were almost certainly black-market sales to Japan and Korea as 
necessary to national defense. On one occasion, they insisted on procuring sev-
eral dozen thousand board feet of cypress for military use in Quemoy and Matsu. 
When a responsible Taiwanese forestry official argued for the use of less valuable 
wood and for precautions against erosion and flooding in Taiwan's mountainous 
interior, he was told to "shut up" -
and the logging proceeded. The official, Mr. 
Khu Khimtong, who proved extremely resistant to military demands for timber, 
apparently was assassinated in 1957. The fearful predictions of well-trained Tai-
wanese forestry officials appear to have come true in the disastrous floods of 1959 
and 1960 (Lim Simtai 1964:10-12). 
Although land reform enabled a few landlords to prosper as industrial cap-
italists on the stocks they received in compensation for giving up their land, 
many of them became small family farmers. Landlords were compensated for 
property in excess of 7.2 acres. Seventy percent of the compensation was in 
land bonds (which paid 4 percent annual interest over ten years) and 30 per-
cent was in stock in four state enterprises (Taiwan Cement Corporation, Tai-
wan Pulp and Paper Corporation, Taiwan Industrial and Mining Corporation, 
and Taiwan Agricultural, and Forestry Development Corporation, which be-
came joint public/private corporations thereafter); the bonds and stock were 
valued at a rate of two and one-half times the annual yield of the fields sur-
rendered. Because paddy fields were worth four to six times annual yield, 
Samuel P. S. Ho calculates a net wealth-redistribution effect of about 13 per-
cent of the 1952 gross national product (Ho 1978:268); also, the fact that land-
bond interest was far below market value resulted in substantial wealth 
redistribution among Taiwanese. 
Land reform also affected professional and business families. Kerr notes that 
220: CHINAS 
MOTOR 
for thousands of [former landlord] Formosans the Land-to-the-Tiller pro-
gram brought a sharp reduction in their modest standards of living .... be-
fore 1945, ... there were many who had enough income to support them in 
comfort at home, to invest in small shops or businesses in the towns, and to 
send bright sons and daughters on to higher schools .... Many suspect that 
the program was designed as much to destroy the emergent middle class (the 
class which produced the leaders of 1947) as it was to aid the landless peasant. 
(1965:420) 
With land reform, rich petty-capitalist Taiwanese nearly vanished, but owner-
operators grew in numbers. Land reform eliminated many landlords and tenants, 
turning both into owner-operators of farms, shops, and factories. The formerly 
rich, ruined economically or politically or both, took jobs as cram schoolteachers 
and in small businesses. The most important long-term result of reform was the 
expansion of the owner-operator segment of the petty-capitalist class. 
1960s TO 1980s: WHAT TRIBUTARY LIBERALIZATION 
BOUGHT IN PROSPERITY SETTLEMENT 
In 1959, embarrassed by the apparent successes in China of the Great Leap, 
pressured by mounting population, and threatened with a cutoff of U.S. aid, the 
GMD altered its economic regulations to admit foreign capital. Foreign capital-
ists, however, were slow to feel the charm of this two-time-loser government. 
Only in the mid 1960s did change begin to affect the lives of ordinary people. The 
coming boom was based on three stimuli: foreign capital (which operated rela-
tively freely), the world's first export-processing zone, and new state spending on 
infrastructure. Corporate development inside and outside of the zone was closely 
managed by officials, who offered factories, land, transport facilities, duty-free 
status for raw materials, energy, procedural convenience, and labor peace in re-
turn for capital, raw materials and technology. Zone products were for export 
only, and its manufacturers did not subcontract out to lesser shops. They pro-
vided short-term, low-wage, low-skill jobs for young people and for the small 
businesses the new workers patronized. The opening into Taiwanese society for 
roughriding capitalism's typical effects was narrowed by state power and parental 
decision making over the new young laborers. 
The post-196os liberalization has been amply documented. It brought many 
positive consequences for the majority of islanders. Yet it should not be over-
praised, anachronized, or attributed to the leadership of a few elite actors. As the 
previous section makes clear, people were worse off by the end of the first twenty 
years of GMD rule than they had been before the war, if only because petty-cap-
italist desperation for home-raised labor had fueled a demographic explosion. 
Rather than repeat statistics about the tightly controlled "liberalizing" decades 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan : 
221 
from the mid 1960s to the mid 1980s, I offer an ethnographer's description of the 
material circumstances of daily life in a Taibei neighborhood of petty-capitalist 
and laborer households. What reached the populace, I would argue, tells the 
quality of the development. 
From September 1968 to January 1970 I lived on the fringes of a two-hun-
dred-household neighborhood I call Prosperity Settlement, a pseudonym for 
a submerged village fast becoming just one more long block of Roosevelt Road 
near the city's expanding boundary. Though well situated for transport and 
small business since early Japanese times, my urban neighbors differed little in 
their consumption standards from middling rural folk: dirt floors; outdoor 
privies; cooking on tiny charcoal pots; cold-water hand laundry by the road-
side; the most minimal use of electricity (a couple of low-watt bulbs to light 
their myopic children's studies; an electric fan for the comfort of guests; TV 
for the local elite). Only a few large stores downtown carried ready-made 
clothing -
one size fit nobody. Food, bought daily, was fresh and delicious, 
better than before in quality and quantity, but elemental; one carried one's 
naked dinner fish home on the bus, hanging from a straw string. Except for 
cheap fabrics and washtubs made of government-monopolized petroleum 
feedstocks, most people owned virtually nothing they could not have pur-
chased in the Ming. 
I returned to live in the settlement for the academic year 1974-75. In the mid 
1970s, and even in the early 1980s, Taiwan still held many neighborhoods in 
which people's lives had been less changed by liberalization than had Prosperity 
Settlement. What produced the steady earnings, savings, schoolings, and im-
provements in life these people were now able to obtain seemed mostly to come 
not from the opening to corporate capital but to increased state spending and to 
petty-capitalist enterprise itself. 
CAPITALISM AND PETTY CAPITALISM 
UNDER LIBERALIZATION 
The local owners of many of Taiwan's largest private firms make up an ex-
tremely influential class. The ownership and management relations of this upper 
crust has been analyzed by Lindy Li Mark (1972), Robert Silin (1972, 1976), and 
Numazaki Ichiro (1986, 1991). Through complex, particularistic, and predomi-
nantly patrilineal connections among private firms, and between private and 
public enterprises, this indigenous bourgeoisie has emerged as a self-conscious 
class with its own kin and cultural circles, "a network of socially-organized capi-
talists." Such firms, subordinated in major matters to state control, monopolize 
the resources (money capital, energy, petroleum feedstocks, and other raw mate-
rials) on which the small and medium businesses produce the export commodi-
ties for which Taiwan is famous (Numazaki 1991:335, 82). Their strength lies, 
222 
: 
C H I 
N A 
S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
however, in the relationships among them -
Numazaki calls them "alliances of 
partnerships" in "banana-bunch" shapes -
and in their unwilling but ultimately 
productive division of labor with the state. 
Are such firms and their regional precursors properly called capitalist, or 
can we perceive their dynamics more clearly by identifying them as petty cap-
italist? Have east Asians begun to outcompete Europeans and Americans be-
cause their congeries of systems is distinctive enough for its own label? In both 
Europe/North America and east Asia, large private firms differ in relations of 
production, management style, relationships of firms to states, and ideology. 
Yet it is equally true that the various Chinese societies -
even China itself, at 
this writing- are deeply involved in the world capitalist system. Does en-
gagement with a powerful world capitalism by definition convert class rela-
tions within specific countries into capitalist relations? Or are class identities 
sometimes best understood from a perspective inside those countries? The test 
may be a historical one: if our puzzling petty capitalists begin to act as inde-
pendently of national interests and regulations as global capitalists now do, we 
may identify them as east Asian capitalists, pure and simple. As I have already 
made clear, however, I see these rich, powerful families as still very much con-
strained in tributary frameworks, and thus "petty" capitalists -
no disrespect 
intended. 
In the lumping and splitting of contemporary modes of production, it is 
helpful to consult David Harvey's influential interpretation of what is some-
times seen as an entirely new phase in advanced capitalism; he labels it "flexible 
accumulation:' Harvey, too well grounded in theory to imagine more novelty 
than is actually present in "postmodernity;' insists this is "a shift in the way in 
which capitalism is working these days" (1989:189, 112, 179). Flexible accumula-
tion is a form of capitalism in Harvey's view, but he describes characteristics 
that I believe resemble those of petty capitalism in a number of ways: it is 
growth-oriented; in it, "growth is always predicated on a gap between what 
labour gets and what it creates"; it is "technologically and organizationally dy-
namic" (180 ); its "new production technologies and co-ordinating forms of or-
ganization have permitted the revival of domestic, familial, and paternalistic 
labour systems" and other "eclectic" labor practices" (187); in it, capitalism's in-
herent overaccumulation problem is managed at the macroeconomic level, in 
largely state circuits (181-82); and, in its east Asian form, "dominant or even 
subordinate classes have aggressively inserted themselves into" capitalism (183). 
Harvey barely acknowledges that flexible accumulation was inspired by, and 
often in direct imitation of, east Asian systems. "Just-in-time" industrial pro-
duction depends on the small-family-firm subcontracting system; the pseudo-
familistic relations of production in large and small firms are supported by 
patriarchally minded states. The "flexibility" of these systems comes from the 
capacity of large firms to exploit and lay off small ones, and of small firms to 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
: 
223 
manipulate both hired and family labor, sometimes through the "hirings" and 
"firings" of marriage and adoption. The West did not borrow petty-capitalist 
organizational mechanisms until east Asia began to outcompete Fordist pro-
duction. For east Asians, "domestic, familial, and paternalistic labour systems" 
were not "revived" in the mid-twentieth century; they are an autochthonous 
east Asian mode of labor regulation. Some Third World "informal economies" 
increasingly overlap with flexible accumulation systems. One observer has sug-
gested that a mid-twentieth-century rise in state spending and economic power 
is more responsible than capitalism for the emergence, reemergence, and/or 
persistence of these generic petty modes (Hart 1992). Such an interpretation fits 
easily into my paradigm of petty capitalism as a dialectical response to tribu-
tary relations before it became an adjunct of capitalism. 
The fortune-cookie summary of the distinction between capitalism and petty 
capitalism still reads that, in capitalism, legally distinguished individuals con-
front the market; in petty capitalism, state-defined households do.6 The Chinese 
tributary context shaped distinctive petty-capitalist practices that protect busi-
ness people against powerful states; that, as one writer states, make use of labor 
where "the circulation of labour power as a commodity is subject to politico-
legal constraints which restrict the individual's ability to determine the allocation 
of his/her labour power subject to the conditions of the market" (Miles 1987:32); 
and that depend on complex particularistic networks among firms and between 
petty-capitalist and tributary circuits as essential relations of production. These 
are as apparent in very small firms as in very large ones. Whether to identify big 
Taiwan companies as capitalist or petty capitalist must depend on definitions that 
best align with the totality of their relations of production, including the center 
of gravity of class hegemony. 
An important difference exists between very large and very small Taiwan 
firms. Emerging only after the capitalist intrusions of the 1960s (Numazaki 
1991:359 ), large firms form clusters that monopolize "upstream" production, that 
is, they supply technologically sophisticated raw materials principally to the is-
land's small firms, which produce mainly for export. Numazaki notes that the 
"export sector is the only market that came close to [a] 'laissez-faire' market 
under the Nationalist rule" (1991:84). This elite is an upper class within the 
PCMP, different in many ways from the shirtsleeves, owner-operator, ideal-typi-
cal petty capitalist. Yet like the smaller owner-operators, Taiwan's tycoons run 
6. A large and important literature explores the persistence in capitalist societies of kinship rela-
tionships that exploit people, notably married women, in ways that serve capitalist accumulation. 
Janet Thomas reviews this literature (1988), and Jean Larson Pyle (1990) offers an extraordinarily in-
teresting case study of a Western, capitalist country (Ireland) that is positively Confucian in its struc-
tural positioning of women. Yet such tendencies are residual more than integral to capitalist 
functioning, and they do not apply to adult children. 
224: CHINAS 
MOTOR 
family-headed businesses and depend heavily on informal networks of partner-
ship and credit rather than on law and the state's banking system. This says to me 
that they do not believe that they control the state. In the traditional Marxist ex-
aggeration, a capitalist class obliges the state to act as its executive committee. 
Chinese petty capitalists relate to the state as they would to a powerful gang run-
ning the local protection racket. Can we say that these networking financiers, in-
dustrialists, and merchants are capitalists because of their connection with world 
capitalism, but that their class power is insufficient to convert Taiwan's tributary 
system to a capitalist one? If we do, has the analysis become more precise, or 
merely more sophistical? Identifying Taiwan's entrepreneurial elite as capitalist or 
petty capitalist does not concern me as much as understanding Chinese social 
formations as wholes, and as seeing more clearly the continuing role of owner-
operator petty capitalists as a large, productive, and essential class, structurally 
resistant to both proletarianization and gender equality. 
Like all classes, petty capitalists come into being through interaction with 
other classes. Petty capitalists are both workers and owner-employers. Most sons 
and daughters of the petty bourgeoisie work, in their youth at least, for their own 
families, for other petty-capitalist families, or in large-scale industry and com-
merce (Gates 1979; Stites 1982; Harrell 1987; Niehoff1987; Salaff1988; Skoggard 
1993). The occupational goal of many of these young people is to have a small 
business of their own; many, by their thirties or forties, attain it. The petty-capi-
talist class reproduces itself, but it contributes as well to a part-time proletariat 
that serves big industry. 
Petty capitalists' relationships with their nonkin hired workers have been ex-
plored, but much remains to be learned (Salaff1988; Chen Ping-chen [in press]; 
Shieh Gwo-shyong 1992; Ka 1993; Skoggard 1993). Workers form a continuum 
from unpaid sons who are future owners through completely unrelated persons 
who are harshly exploited. Membership in such household work groups offers ex-
periences of both exploitation and protection, the mixture always more personal-
istic than that of corporate capitalism. Wages are often lower than in the largest 
factories, and surroundings more unpleasant, yet the "family-like" atmosphere 
owners profess to encourage is not entirely a fiction. Employers who hold workers 
to long hours and extraordinary effort to meet a deadline can sometimes be gen-
erous about time off for family emergencies and the like. Working in a small en-
terprise can often shorten commuting times and lessen transportation costs. 
Often meals are supplied at the workplace. Young women workers are probably 
more secure against sexual harassment in a shop where the owner's relatives come 
and go than on a larger, more impersonal shop floor. And in such small busi-
nesses, the alert young worker has many chances to learn her employer's skills and 
business secrets against the day when she may start her own business. 
Such personalism is partly a matter of scale. Impersonality between owner 
and worker almost necessarily characterizes the wage relationship in large capi-
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
: 
225 
talist firms. Capitalist corporations often are laced tightly at the top with kin and 
other intimate ties, but these do not extend far down the layers of hierarchy. Nor 
do workers always want them to. Western labor history stresses the narrowing of 
the connection between capitalist and proletarian as conducive both to greater 
exploitation by capital and greater "liberty" by labor (E. P. Thompson 1966). The 
personalism that seems inherent in top levels of capitalist corporations encom-
passes all the personnel of owner-operator businesses. In them, hired hands, 
family workers, and household-head bosses play off personalism and rationality 
to very different ends. 
The newness of large-scale industry in Taiwan, the pattern of individual 
movement into and then out of the wage-labor work force, and the relative ease 
with which families can establish small businesses make the distinction between 
petty capitalist and proletarian an extremely permeable one. It remains more an 
analytical device than a sharp line of objective demarcation; subjectively, there is 
little that could be described as class consciousness to separate the two. For some 
purposes, it is appropriate to lump those who labor on their own or others' small 
capitals as "working class." As is suggested below, however, the political visions 
that move this Chinese "working class" are remote from those associated, at least 
ideally in the West, with a proletariat. 
Contemporary Taiwan petty capitalists owe their existence to both the tribu-
tary and the capitalist segments of the economy, producing and distributing 
goods and services the state and large private enterprises have not wanted or 
been able to capture. Big business, whether state or private, has readier access to 
large pools of capital through the formal banking institutions, international 
loans, and so forth. It can offer labor slightly higher wages because of the greater 
capital intensiveness of its production methods. It is logical to expect that small 
capitals would be swallowed by big ones, a process resulting in production mo-
nopolies, proletarianization, and the near-disappearance of petty capitalism; in-
deed, this disappearance has been regularly predicted by analysts on both left 
and right for decades. Yet in Taiwan, as in Hong Kong, Singapore, and elsewhere 
in Chinese east Asia, it has not occurred. Petty capitalism facilitates the embrace 
with capitalism while making that intercourse less like rape. Given the right po-
litical-economic environment, petty capitalists have proved themselves good at 
competition with foreign firms, of production of both simple and complex 
goods, of effective import-export activity, of creating flexible financial institu-
tions, and of accumulating capital in a pattern in which very large numbers of 
families can participate. 
Petty capitalism can also grow despite capitalist competition because the state 
both supports its institutions and provides it with a market alternative to that 
supplied by capitalist production. Petty capitalists produce not only in tandem 
with capitalism and for a proletariat, but also for a huge pool of state employees 
who do not make competing products. State workers, through their purchases of 
226 
: 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
petty-capitalist commodities, circulate the taxes from which they are paid to 
small-capital owners in a very large proportion of their daily spending- in 
housing, food and clothing, entertainment, local travel, and the purchase of con-
sumer durables made in small factories. Hairdressing, barbering, tailoring, house 
repair, medical care, and a multitude of other services, privately provided, sup-
port petty-capitalist households by the thousands on money earned from state-
employee spending. Although these payments come largely from taxes, petty 
capitalists themselves are especially skilled at evading taxation. 
Petty capitalists have created a circulationalloop or eddy in the island-wide 
economy which prevents the direct unilinear extraction of wealth from the pop-
ulace by tributary and capitalist modes of production. Dependence on a tribu-
tary mode alone puts petty capitalists in peril of an ever-increasing competition 
for fixed resources, as was the case in late-imperial China. But in Taiwan, the 
GMD was relatively rich, and the state sector enormous, with additional income 
from U.S. aid for decades. This configuration gave petty capitalists the opportu-
nity to proliferate even during the first twenty years of GMD rule. With the in-
trusion of foreign capital, their opportunities expanded. 
Capitalists and petty capitalists made use of each other, but they also com-
peted vigorously for the new wealth that was being created. In Taiwan, unlike in 
Pakistan or the Philippines, the working classes and their institutions were able 
to keep, circulate among themselves, and reinvest a good deal of that new wealth 
locally. In this, they resembled their Chinese ancestors who so often baffled for-
eign attempts to scoop up millions of customers. A strong, though to econo-
mists invisible, factor in Taiwan's relative prosperity and income equality was its 
small businesses, along with the wider community institutions that enabled 
them to survive in an economy apparently dominated by the GMD, the United 
States, and Japan. 
Petty capitalists have not simply held their own against incorporation into the 
formal sector. They have actively sought to participate in capitalist expansion, but 
on their own terms. Their efforts have resulted in accumulation of capital, in the 
increase in the size and number of small businesses, in higher living standards for 
themselves and related classes, and in the retention within Taiwan's economy of 
a greater proportion of the wealth its people have created. 
Reasons for the effectiveness of petty capitalism are hinted at in official attacks 
on it mounted in the 1950s and 1960s. In those years, many Chinese intellectuals 
followed Western views of their own society so closely that they mistook 
strengths for weaknesses. Before the growth of the 1960s was evident, small busi-
nesses and social institutions were repeatedly discounted as backward and harm-
ful. Industrial economies, in the view of mid-century mainstream economists, 
were to be built from the top down. One Chinese writer, citing Sun Yat-sen as au-
thority, urged the policy of using "copious foreign capital, highly trained experts, 
ultramodern techniques, so that China can be industrialized in a whole, rapid, 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
: 
227 
and highly developed way" (Hsu Yung-Shu 1954:21). Small enterprises were seen 
as wasteful and inefficient, not likely to be of use in achieving the real goals of 
capitalism. In 1954, Taiwan's 12,000 to 13,000 private (hence, at that time small) 
enterprises were written off in a long discussion of public versus private enter-
prise as "with very few exception, nothing but family industries with shabby 
equipment and backward production" (Industry of Free China 1954:1). In 1959, 
K. T. Li, Taiwan's most famous liberalizing technocrat, analyzed the effect of Tai-
wan's social environment in these terms: 
[The society is] affected by many traditional concepts and practices which 
tend to hamper economic development .... Most entrepreneurs in Taiwan 
lack an enterprising and risk taking spirit which is essential to pioneering a 
new industry .... They have little desire to improve their material life by rais-
ing productivity .... In an agricultural society, cooperation in production is 
limited to that within the family circle ... and the organization of many en-
terprises is limited to the sole-proprietorships of partnerships within the fam-
ily circle. Only a few are organized in the form of a corporation. This is a big 
stumbling-block on the road toward developing large-scale enterprises .... 
[Consumption for social prestige] includes extravagant festivals and con-
struction of pompous ancestral shrines, temples, villas, and tombs. It seri-
ously curtails the accumulation of capital for productive purposes. (K. T. Li 
1959:9-10) 
Mr. Li proved to be wrong on all points, as we now know. 
FINANCING PETTY CAPITALISM 
Much of Taiwan's economic achievement is attributable directly to the capac-
ity of petty capitalists to mobilize both to produce and to keep what they accu-
mulate from falling into the hands of either the state or the multinationals. They 
have done so through both persistent tax evasion and a complex petty-capitalist 
business practice that follows closely the list of activities K. T. Li damns in the 
quotation above. The kinship, informal financial arrangements, and folk religion 
that have contributed to Taiwan's economic success have been brought into being 
by people selecting from a repertoire of custom, shaping parts of it for new pur-
poses, and abandoning other parts to the past. These institutions contain newel-
ements as well as old, though the sense of newness quickly fades as innovation 
achieves, in turn, the status of custom. 
Tax evasion is an inherent part of normal petty-capitalist business dealings; it 
is the raison d'etre of household-scale production for market. Unlike those who 
are paid by large corporations, and unlike all but the largest corporations them-
selves, petty capitalists expect to be able to shelter most of their profits from tax-
ation. They keep no books or keep two sets of books, pay in cash, and depend on 
228 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
family and employees to be dose-mouthed with strangers. Taiwan has what may 
be the world's largest underground economy, which, the Economist says "adds 
25-30% to the official GNP figure. A foreign economist says it is more like 
30-40% ... [because] surveys suggest that 15-20% of export earnings are un-
counted because of double invoicing, and 7-8% of manufacturing output is un-
declared. Farmers, of course, never have a good harvest." Services are even bigger 
tax evaders, including the informal financial services that operate on personal 
ties. "In 1985 only a fifth of the government's revenue came from income tax; it 
collected more from customs duties. Taxes of all kinds produced only 6oo/o of rev-
enue that year (the rest came from things like profits of public-sector compa-
nies) .... last year [1987] the proportion supplied by taxes fell to so%." The 
author of the report argues the difficulty of taxing a "people who have had cen-
turies of experience at evading tax collectors." This is in large part because "most 
... industrial output comes from the family-run firms that account for 99%" of 
Taiwan's companies and "the family business [is] an organism perfectly adapted 
to tax evasion" (13 March 1989:54). 
Careful saving of all profit may supply all of a small firm's needs for money, 
but credit eases temporary difficulties and permits expansion. Foreign visitors to 
Taiwan during the early GMD period frequently commented on how effectively 
the Taiwanese were excluded from access to local bank credit through the cen-
tralized and discriminatory banking practices of the time. Ethnic stereotypes 
emerged to justify this unequal treatment: in 1974, a young American vice presi-
dent of a major U.S. bank told me -
with a straight face -
that Taiwanese in 
banking were worse at accounting, less able to see the "big picture;' more reti-
cent, and "less intelligent" than Mainlanders. Taiwanese entrepreneurs who 
might formerly have gone to Japanese banks for credit had little choice but to de-
pend on the informal means of access to capital on which the peasantry and 
smallest household businesses were accustomed to depend. 
Even in the 1980s, moneylenders, friends, and kinfolk were the main sources 
of cash for small petty capitalists (Gates 1991a) as they had been for those de-
scribed earlier by De Glopper (1972, 1979 ), Mark (1972), Silin (1972), and Tang 
(1978). In the 1970s, trusted borrowers paid about 6 percent a month. The lenders 
thus made more than banks did, but the loan was risky if the lender had poor 
judgment, for no one thought it feasible to take an absconder to court to recover 
a loss. Interest-free loans are rare: because there are many profitable ways to in-
vest even small sums, all parties are well aware that such a loan costs the lender 
money. 
The lending club (a common form in Taiwan is the biao hui), well known in 
many Chinese communities, is the characteristic way of borrowing from relatives 
and friends for whom the direct charging of interest would be an embarrassment. 
The person needing cash asks a dozen or so people to contribute equal propor-
tions of the necessary sum, which she then may use. The following month, mem-
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
: 
229 
hers again contribute similar sums and bid an interest increment for the right to 
take the total pot. Interest from the highest bidder is distributed to all partici-
pants who have not yet received the lump sum. This process is repeated monthly 
until all members have had a turn to take the pot. The last member (like the ini-
tiator) gets the use of the money free- without having to bid and pay interest. 
This system, cheap and flexible, is very popular, providing the cash for school tu-
ition or ceremonial purposes as well as the capital for small enterprises. Many 
people belong to several hui simultaneously as a courtesy to friends, a way of 
maintaining a good credit rating, and simply for profit. These loans too are quite 
unprotected by the legal system. In 1974, several Prosperity Settlement families 
were left with large losses when a Mainlander dressmaking family, which had 
achieved an unusual degree of integration in the community through its spon-
sorship of religious rituals, decamped at night, abandoning its large hui. People 
were angry, but did nothing. 
Extending credit to customers is important to many small businesses. Credit 
is granted generously to frequent and reliable customers but quickly cut off, 
even for neighbors, when they are "hard" in repaying. When rice-milling shops 
were common -
they processed and sold the essential daily staple -
they 
often gave credit widely in their neighborhoods, as small grocery stores still do. 
The shops in turn require credit of their suppliers, as do artisans and other pro-
ductive enterprises. One observer notes that xinyong (hsin-yung), a reputation 
for probity, is 
... a firm's most valuable asset. People say that to start a business one needs 
capital, but capital isn't enough. One must have hsin-yung, and to have hsin-
yung one must know people, have a good reputation with some set of people 
such as the members of one's trade. Similarly, when a business fails, as often 
happens, the failure is described as the result of a loss of hsin-yung: "If some-
one, for whatever reason, can't pay his bills when they are due, he immediately 
loses his hsin-yung. No one will advance him any more money or goods, and 
his creditors start demanding immediate repayment. That's the end- he 
goes bust." (De Glopper 1972:304) 
Pawnshops are common and crowded with articles ranging from electric gui-
tars to motorbikes, though their disadvantageous rates assure that few patronize 
them for business capital. More useful are the ubiquitous goldsmiths, who both 
buy and sell the high-carat gold for wedding and childbirth gifts, votary offerings 
to gods, and the near-obligatory flashy jewelry of the successful petty capitalist. 
Although money secured in gold does not necessarily grow in value, it is ex-
tremely liquid and, of course, easy to hide: from the tax official, one's wife, or 
one's mother-in-law. Goldsmiths for many years also served as Taiwan's black-
market foreign-exchange service, where hard currency might be obtained with-
out government interference. 
230 
: 
C H I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Petty-capitalist internal financing has grown in the prosperous 1980s into an 
informal money market that lies halfway between the sleazier end of finance cap-
italism and a crap shoot. Fortunes have been made and lost on Taibei's recently 
created stock market, treated much like a lottery, and in such semiunderground 
investment houses as Homey. 
These systems are essential to capitalizing and operating many of the family-
run enterprises that make up such a large part of Taiwan's economy. Taiwan's 
PCMP has been built up, in large part, through such widely distributed means of 
' 
access to capital and credit. To participate requires trust, however. Preexisting ties 
of long coresidence, kinship, status as fellow workers, an introduction by a 
trusted mutual friend, and/or the conspicuous display of wealth and rectitude are 
necessary preconditions for access to the large amounts of money that circulate 
through the informal sector. 
FINANCE AND FOLK RITUAL 
Folk religion, especially in its communal aspects, continues to be a major in-
stitution for the furtherance of petty-capitalist goals and for the expression of 
petty-capitalist symbolism (Skoggard 1994). Temples are intentionally costly, lav-
ish "investments" in the other world for both individuals and collectivities. Most 
community religious celebrations are given on the occasion of the "birthday" of 
a temple's patron god, but a community need not have a temple to hold a cele-
bration. In Prosperity Settlement, for example, an incense pot for a tripartite god 
known as Samgai Gong has circulated for generations among households of the 
neighborhood, its resident spirit honored by an annual community festivity, 
though they have not built him a temple (see H. Rohsenow 1973=129-30 ). 
Essential to such festivals is the custom of feasting guests by community 
households. The numbers and energies of household women are often inade-
quate for the purchasing and preparation of these enormous meals, so cooks and 
assistants are hired, along with the tables, stools, and eating equipment. Heavy 
eating, drinking, and cigarette consumption are part of the hospitality urged on 
guests; local shops and nearby markets do a land-office business on the days be-
fore the feasts. Most villages and working-class urban neighborhoods have the 
opportunity to give a feast of this sort at least once a year. The parallel pattern of 
the U.S. retail trade's doing one-quarter of the year's business during the Christ-
mas shopping season comes readily to mind. 
Households that have had a prosperous year, and that have many friends, re-
lations, and business associates, invite dozens of people to such events. Five or six 
tables of ten to twelve persons each was the norm for small-business families in 
the 1960s and 1970s. After a bad year, or if the family had other pressing needs, a 
table or two of intimates sufficed. In the 1980s, impressing and obligating a guest 
can be better done at an elegant restaurant, which now many hosts can afford. 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
: 
231 
But the ritual shape of community festivals still centers on feasts as the images of 
the circulation of wealth within the working-class community and on potentially 
profitable exchanges with both human and supernatural guests. 
Temples are enduring social, political, and economic entities that must be 
built, maintained, enlarged, and redecorated. At minimum a temple must have 
an independent building with adequate space in front of it for worshipers to 
make offerings and watch opera performances. Temples to the Earth God and 
other minor gods are often tiny, a few square feet, but they are normally free-
standing, with characteristic architecture. A temple contains an image of its pa-
tron god on an altar together with candles, an incense pot, and divining blocks. 
Beyond these essentials, the variations are endless, and the building, furniture, 
and equipment may be extensive and expensive. Dozens of images of the temple's 
primary god and numerous secondary deities in side chapels are common in 
larger temples, which may be grand architectural complexes covering a city 
block. Large busy temples have offices, clerks, incense-, amulet-, and souvenir-
selling concessions, women volunteers who keep things tidy, a resident caretaker 
family, sometimes a religious recluse or two, a library, and headquarters for the 
businesses some large temples own. 
Some towns, or parts of cities, are noted for particularly famous temples, which 
attract many daily visitors and huge crowds of pilgrims on festival days. A fringe of 
businesses -
for the famous Beigang Mazu temple, almost the whole town -
surround such temples: sellers of incense and spirit money, of fruit and cookies for 
offerings, of meals and lodging for travelers, of images and ritual goods for those 
who want a consecrated statue of the famous god made at the source. 
Folk religion, obviously, is big business. Great quantities of ritual goods and 
services are produced and consumed annually by individual households and by 
temples as corporate bodies. At least two-thirds of the population of the island 
participate in the economic transactions connected with folk religion. Arriving at 
even a rough estimate of the quantity of resources that circulate through these 
channels is difficult. Government surveys of household expenditures considered 
it worthwhile to collect data on ritual expenses (Taiwan: Provincial Government, 
Bureau of Accounting and Statistics [various years]). Their figures underestimate 
actual expenses because such expenditures are well known to be unpopular with 
the government and because the frequent small costs for incense, special foods, 
and visits to temples are easily forgotten. Temple records are very closely held (A. 
Cohen 1979) precisely because the receipts are often large. Some of these funds 
may be used for private profit by temple managers, as people commonly allege. 
But part of the record is either public or fairly easily calculated. Temples inform 
the most casual visitor of their own popularity and economic significance 
through public listings of major expenses on their walls. Ability to attract wealth 
is the best evidence of efficaciousness of the temple's deities: such displays are 
necessary advertising. 
232 
: 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Temples and their contributors may want to display evidence of their effica-
ciousness, but caution too is called for. Early in this century, John Shyrock noted 
that a temple in Anhui "came under the suspicion of the authorities for some rea-
son, so the officials simply took the list of contributors and confiscated their 
land" (1931:29). I do not know of a similar case in Taibei, but the managers of at 
least one extremely prosperous temple were told by the city government in the 
late 1960s that they must spend more of their income in visible and socially use-
ful ways. The temple built, filled, and now supports a multistory library, open to 
the public, to meet this obligation. 
Taibei City lists twenty-one temples in Guting and Wanhua districts (Taibei 
City Government 1974). These are strongly petty-capitalist areas, laid out along 
the river bank and a Japanese railway built in the 1930s from the oldest commer-
cial part of the city out to the 1968 city boundary, by then heavily built up. Sev-
eral temples date to the early 1700s; others have histories of well over one 
hundred years. One large temple was founded in 1954; many have been exten-
sively enlarged and embellished since the late 1950s. 
I surveyed seventeen temples in these two districts in the fall of 1980, noting all 
public evidence of expenditures: a donor's name on a pillar or incense burner; 
carved or pasted-up listings of donations in cash and kind. In a few, listings of tem-
ple incomes for scattered years were available. My field assistants and I interviewed 
responsible people at each of these temples.7 Some of them supplemented the writ-
ten data with helpful oral accounts of expenditures and incomes not otherwise 
commemorated. The figures are underestimates, and probably serious underesti-
mates, of temple cash flows, and they unavoidably mingle income and fixed assets. 
Of the seventeen, six temples recorded expenditures of over NT$1,ooo,ooo 
(U.S.$25,000) since the late 1950s, with most of the expenditures dating from the 
1970s.8 The total for these six was very close to NT$9,ooo,ooo (U.S.$225,000). 
This figure does not include the cost of a four-story temple built in 1954, which 
had no public records. It relies on a conservative estimate of NT$1,ooo,ooo from 
the large and wealthy Longshan Temple, for which my records are regrettably im-
perfect. Another NT$250,000 (U.S.$6,250) was spent on four relatively small 
temples, whose managers explained some of their financial arrangements to me. 
In the 1970s, three more small temples in this group spent NT$2oo,ooo 
(U.S.$5,000) on improvements such as a second story, decorated roofs over the 
entryways, stoves (jinting) for burning spirit money, stone walls, and toilets. Ex-
penses associated with annual celebrations, daily incense, wages for clerks and 
watchmen for the smaller temples would easily bring the total figure above 
NT$12,ooo,ooo (U.S.$3oo,ooo). Similar expenditures since the late 1950s for the 
7· Drs. Chang Hsun and Chang Hui-tuan, then students, did most of the arduous legwork for this 
task, for which I again thank them. 
8. The NT$ to U.S.$ figures are calculated at the 40:1 ratio that prevailed up to the later 1970s. 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
: 
233 
bigger temples (including Longshan Temple) might bring the figure near to 
NT$2o,ooo,ooo (U.S.$soo,ooo). Visits to small cities, towns, and villages 
throughout the island reveal similar activity everywhere. 
Taibei has several other ritually active districts, and a total of two hundred reg-
istered temples (Taibei City Government 1974); there may well be twice as many 
additional unregistered ritual centers, including the semipublic altars of busy 
mediums. Li Yih-yuan calculates that there were over nine thousand temples (not 
including mediums' altars) in Taiwan in 1979, roughly double the number pres-
ent seventeen years previously (1979:139). 
Where do the large sums for building and ritual come from? In the past, they 
were collected by temple committees from worshipers for the expenses of gods' 
birthdays, to pay for opera, special ritual services, firecrackers, and the like, and 
in connection with building or redecorating projects. An informant told me that 
"people like to see their names listed as a worthy believer in the god on a pillar or 
a placque, and so they give." Most temples sold incense and accepted voluntary 
contributions from visitors and, as now, temple committees took the responsi-
bility of footing the bills or of persuading wealthy families to do so. 
Since the mid 1970s, however, two ritual practices -
baidou and the setting 
up of ping' an deng- have greatly increased the efficiency of drawing revenues. 
Baidou is a ceremony associated with folk Daoism, in which families pay a tem-
ple to set out measures ( dou) of raw rice on an altar in their names. Each contains 
a cluster of symbolic implements (a mirror, a knife, a coin, a lamp), and is offered 
to the temple's god to the accompaniment of liturgical chanting by ritually pure 
specialists and (often) volunteers. After the appropriate number of days of eso-
teric ceremony, the rice is given to the family (symbolically, in a tiny red packet 
containing a few grains). It is mixed with domestic rice and eaten for the protec-
tion it may confer. A virtually identical practice, called fahui, is performed in 
temples identified as Buddhist. Although theologically distinguishable, as fund-
raising devices they are identical. There are elaborate symbolic rationales for 
baidou and fahui, but their fund-raising function is their fullest explanation. As a 
young nun told me, "People are so busy these days that they don't have time to 
come to temples so much. We couldn't manage here if we didn't paidou. It's con-
venient for them and for us; we even use computers." 
Many popular temples, most of which in the past did not perform baidou, 
now do so, some three or four times annually.9 Printed invitations are sent to for-
mer contributors, and some temples have computerized mailing lists of thou-
sands. Although one may offer any amount in return for having one's name 
9. Tracking baidou over twenty~ five years in Taibei has made me intensely alert to the lability of 
"tradition!' At temples where I have observed the yearly round of ritual events with some care over 
many years, watching them add, and then expand, baidou, I have been authoritatively told that the 
custom has always been follo';Ved since the founding of the temple. 
234 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
placed on a rice measure, the standard sum in 1980 was NT$300 (U.S.$7.50). In 
one medium-sized temple in the fall of 1980, the largest dou represented a dona-
tion (prominently labeled) of NT$10,ooo (U.S.$250). The total collected on that 
occasion was NT$169,400 (U.S.$4,235). Another less active temple of about the 
same size took in NT$75,000 (U.S.$1,875) at that time; another large and very 
popular temple received nearly NT$3oo,ooo (U.S.$7,500) for its fall baidou, tem-
ple keepers estimating that this was about average for the thrice-yearly event. 
The expense to the temple for these rituals is minimal, except for the initial 
purchases of containers (old ones are often wooden, and beautifully carved) and 
symbolic objects. (The manager of one temple that had just begun to baidou 
drew criticism for his use of plastic toy swords in some of the dou.) Much of the 
chanting is done by pious women volunteers rather than paid specialists, so that 
most of the contributions represent income. 
A second way in which temples gain income and increase contact with a body 
of supporters is through the setting up of ping' an deng -
"peace" or "stability" 
lanterns. These are conical structures, up to eight feet tall, covered with tiny 
openings, each containing a gilt image of Buddha lit with a small electric bulb. 
Below each is a space for a name. For NT$300 a year, a household or person may 
have a name inscribed; the named person will receive the benefit of a set number 
of recitations of protective and prosperity-enhancing prayers. Some ping' an deng 
revolve and emit taped prayers automatically instead of absorbing them from 
chanting specialists; this practice is considered tacky by the pious. Some temples 
have as many as four large lanterns, with thousands of names; the spillover lines 
walls near the altars. Like baidou, this is an inexpensive way to attract income for 
the temple. It also encourages identification of the worshiper with that particular 
temple, thereby regularizing and stabilizing the income. 
The urban population of working-class Taiwanese- and some Mainlanders 
-
still relies on supernaturals for help in this world, but shows decreasing inter-
est in the ritual forms of community religion that require public participation. 
Baidou and the setting up of ping' an deng have been spreading to temples that did 
not formerly offer them, and expanding in those that did. Temples to minor and 
specifically local spirits, such as the Earth God or powerful but impure ghosts, do 
not perform these rituals. Many temples, however, have seized on these virtually 
cost-free methods of retailing supernatural benefits in the interest of expanding 
temple revenues. Many believers now make their bargains with the gods without 
the trouble of carrying heavy baskets of chicken and liquor to a crowded temple 
on what may very well be a working day. 
The most interesting question, however, is what temples do with their money. 
It is a question I cannot answer in detail. The answer must be of some impor-
tance, however, as temple managers are so uniformly unwilling to discuss it. 
Leisured old gentlemen who will spend any amount of time expanding on popu-
lar ideology, iconography, and folk ritual fall silent on the subject of earnings (see 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
: 
235 
A. Cohen 1979). Occasional facts escape: local representatives of the GMD get a 
cut in return for protection from government interference; some temple man-
agers divert funds to private uses, using temples as unofficial (and unremuner-
ated) banks; temples invest funds as moneylenders, rentiers, and service 
providers. A famous example of the latter is Mujia's famous Zhi Nan Gong, 
which owns a bus franchise and a chain of daycare centers in addition to its 
profitable pilgrims' hostel. In other words, the wealth accumulated by temples is 
used as Taiwan's petty capitalists always use wealth: for investment within petty-
capitalist "informal" circuits. Temple managers are petty capitalists in another 
way: their reticence represents the never-ending struggle to make money without 
having to fork over a cut to the government. 
The capacity of Chinese folk religion to soak up and circulate capital that 
might otherwise fall into the hands of the state or the multinationals is an im-
portant element in the petty capitalists' resistance to the hegemony of these other 
modes of production. Money spent on a BMW goes to Germany and is lost to 
Taiwan; money spent on altar furniture goes to a craftsman in Lugang, who will 
lend it out again. Money banked in a publicly organized corporation is taxed, and 
perhaps ends up in an official's retirement house in Costa Rica; money funneled 
through a daughter's dowry into a dentures-making machine is off the books and 
returned to the local economy. 
Much could be said about the organizational and ideological roles of Taiwan's 
folk religion in assisting and validating petty-capitalist processes, and one can crit-
icize the more egregiously exploitive practices to which those processes tend. One 
could gloss folk religion as the principal sphere of civil society on that island. For 
present purposes, I will conclude only that folk religion, along with the patterns of 
petty-capitalist business practice and personalistic forms of organization criticized 
by K. T. Li, has not been a drag on Taiwan's economy but rather has been a brake 
on the extractive capacity of the state and multinational corporations. Both have 
created a retentive sponge for accumulated wealth, and a necessary if not sufficient 
motive force of entrepreneurial action. Without the petty-capitalist social com-
plex of which folk religion is a part, tributary economies stagnate and capitalism 
often produces only underdevelopment for local people. Through the operation 
of petty capitalism's characteristic form of social reproduction, the other two 
modes active in contemporary Taiwan do well, but so do petty capitalists. 
THE POLITICS OF PETTY CAPITALISTS 
The late 1970s and the 198os saw sharp political contradictions in Taiwan: the 
most blatant state violence to have occurred in decades was accompanied by a 
strong and now successful push for legal and electoral reforms. Ascendant petty-
capitalist politics need to be read against a background of significant political-
economic change.10 
236 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
By the mid 1970s, the capacity of state-managed production had expanded to 
the point where it had more to contribute to the economy than did the trickle-
down of tax and foreign-aid moneys. State enterprises were profitable, and state-
built infrastructure improvements were used by everyone. By the mid 1980s, the 
twenty-seven state enterprises had assets in excess of a billion dollars (China Post 
3 January 1986:4). Productivity had given the former tributary mode real social 
value. It had also increased its power, making the state increasingly independent 
of the people. In consequence, as petty-capitalist pressure for a political voice be-
came stronger, the state became less inclined to resist that pressure by the thuggish 
methods of the past. Between the mid 1970s and the mid 1980s, however, some 
thuggery occurred, shocking Taiwan and the world. Scandals at many U.S. uni-
versities erupted over GMD political surveillance of students. A Taiwan-born pro-
fessor at an American university was found dead on the campus of National 
Taiwan University after a secret-police interrogation. Those attending a Gaoxiong 
rally in support of a political magazine were badly frightened and provoked by 
surrounding riot police into street fighting; many political activists were jailed in 
the aftermath of this rally, and the wife, mother, and daughter of one of them were 
murdered at home. The author of a book critical of Jiang Jingguo was gunned 
down in his California driveway; the trials of his murderers revealed close links be-
tween Bamboo Union gangsters, Taiwan military intelligence, and the GMD. 
These were signs of a real struggle in the party. The right-wing made up of the 
Garrison Command of high military officials, the secret police, the gangs, and 
the troglodyte branch of the GMD still played by old rules that now shocked even 
their brothers-in-arms. But with U.S.$76 billion in foreign reserves by 1991 (Free 
China ]ournal25 April1991:1), the GMD state no longer needed such strongarm 
methods. It began to give way more gracefully to the powerful movement that 
had begun as "outside the party" (dangwai) and evolved into the Democratic 
Progressive party (Minjindang). By 1988, the party was a successful de-facto op-
position. Various smaller parties have also became active, many with platforms 
that differentiate them more sharply from the GMD than do Democratic Pro-
gressive party positions. Intellectuals launched a blizzard of journals and news-
papers to debate the future. Among the opposition at least, the idea of democracy 
seems to have expanded beyond the age-old limits that in China proper constrain 
it to what one scholar calls "an institutionalization of the righteous official's duty 
to petition" (Pieke 1992:301). 
The petty-capitalist majority now makes its voice heard through the newly 
free press and newly possible rallies and election campaigns. That voice is also 
heard in the conversations of ordinary people in shops and factories, during fam-
ily evenings before the television set. It is presumpt,uous to offer more than spec-
ulations about these opinions -
gathering such data is notoriously difficult and 
10. Some of this material appears in Gates 1992. 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
237 
subject to bias. Taiwan's scholars have begun to produce public-opinion data, but 
years of martial law and harsh repression have made ordinary people too cau-
tious for their public statements to mean much. I summarize here the little I 
know of Taibei petty-capitalist political opinion as that is expressed in informal 
words and in newly invented political rituals. 
Petty capitalists imagine their political future in contradictory ways. Most are 
ethnic Taiwanese or Taiwan-born Mainlanders; both agree that they want no eco-
nomic unification with China; most want no special relationship at all with it. 
"We want to be like Switzerland;' is a popular comment. "They are neutral, they 
have no worries about international politics, nobody tries to control them, and 
they just do business peacefully and successfully." In the 1980s, business people in 
Taiwan waxed rapturous about "all those customers" in China. They had in mind 
a vast hinterland of passive purchasers, not a reconstitution of a great Chinese 
state. Since the events at Tiananmen Square in the spring of 1989 and the subse-
quent squeeze on Chinese petty capitalism (Gates 1991b ), Taiwan business people 
believe the risks to investments there are greater. Some philosophically take their 
money elsewhere. The real cowboys still go for broke with a great-uncle in Fujian 
or an old schoolmate in Sichuan. 
Taiwan's independence from China having been achieved behind the leaders' 
backs some time ago, two grand political questions confront its people. One is 
the ethnic issue: can electoral democracy, which is making real progress, end 
Mainlander monopolies of key positions in the military, the government, and the 
state production sector? The unelected power of state and party apparatchiki still 
controls enormous resources on the island. Will voting enable the Taiwanese ma-
jority to get their share of what the state collects and distributes? Several genera-
tions of Taiwanese want their share, and want it very badly. Men (and a few 
women) who run successful businesses, who are pillars of local temples and vol-
untary associations, whose petty-capitalist credentials for public office are im-
peccable, have long smarted under ethnic discrimination. They want the public 
recognition, the right to move into the ruling class, and the perquisites that go 
with such a move. These are all things they might have had, they believe, had the 
Japanese stayed on, or had the Americans not supported the GMD, or had the 
GMD simply made a few more false moves. They rally to the opposition Demo-
cratic Progressive party, striving for a more liberal Taiwan. In political parades 
their desire to decapitate the GMD state is embodied by the heads of pigs -
long 
a Taiwanese logo for Mainlanders -
mounted on many floats. This is the thrust 
of political opposition to working-class people: government of Taiwanese, by Tai-
wanese, and, most definitively, for Taiwanese. 
A second strand in recent opposition politics entangles the first, for the Tai-
wanese are not the only petty capitalists, and the Democratic Progressive party is 
not an organization only of this class; it includes Mainlanders and intellectuals 
who take seriously an additional question: how much of the bloated central gov-
238 
: 
C H 
I 
N 
A ' S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
ernment and military is in fact necessary to run a Taiwan that aspires to be 
Switzerland? How much of the tributary system should be dismantled altogether, 
and what parts redirected to social uses? What resources should the GMD be 
obliged to disgorge to the public treasury? What parts of that treasury should be 
privatized, and who will get the spoils? While intellectuals of many political per-
suasions debate these issue, the lack of coherent positions points up the extreme 
ambiguities of petty-capitalist politics. 
Deploring state depredations and the more obvious malfeasances of interna-
tional capital, petty capitalists nevertheless hold private property sacred. Protec-
tion for labor helps their children who work in factories but harms themselves as 
employers. With luck, their children will get out of factory work and become em-
ployers in their turn. A more welfare-oriented economy has no charms for them. 
They trust money in their own hands more than that pooled in the hands of a 
government that has long robbed them. They say, and act as though they believe, 
that any foreseeable new government would do the same. Petty capitalism is, after 
all, a response to a tributary economy. Its political stance is resistance, not initia-
tive, except within its own well-connected circuits. 
It is a mistake, however, to assume that this resistance argues that petty capi-
talists are demanding less commanding leadership and a dismantling of the trib-
utary economy that creates such independent power. Taiwan political attitudes 
much resemble those of Western petty bourgeoisies who so easily fall for Fuhrers, 
Iron Ladies, and movie stars. A great many petty capitalists depend on export 
markets: they want a strong state to negotiate for them against China, the United 
States, and Japan. They have learned, from school and from folk religion, that 
great political figures are different from the rest of us, possessing superhuman if 
not supernatural powers equipping them to lead. 
Strong leadership requires resources. The petty capitalist already pays more 
taxes than she is willing to pay and has evolved a colossally successful system of 
tax evasion. She expects the leadership to battle IBM and Mitsubishi (as well as 
the Communists, if necessary) effectively, but not with her money. She does not 
want massive corruption and squeeze, though she assumes that bribes are occa-
sionally necessary. Better leave the government with its own production income 
not drawn directly from her pocket. Stepping down the state's political-economic 
power would cause the state to lose international clout and capacity to smash 
labor and control class disputes. The factory owner who demands obedience and 
deference from her children and apprentices must believe in hierarchy, or her 
world and livelihood would collapse. The petty capitalist wants to be absolutely 
free to run her business in her own way, but wants as well a strong leader who can 
defend her from the vagaries of the international market and can keep "society" 
harmonious without her having to trouble herself about politics. 
This very real dilemma is not well addressed in contemporary Taiwanese 
politics. It probably will not be until the ethnic question is resolved and native 
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
: 
239 
Taiwanese are enfranchised for all elections, as they soon must be. A dominant 
Democratic Progressive party is no more likely to alter radically the tribu-
tary-petty-capitalist-capitalist tripod on which the political economy rests 
than is a more thoroughly indigenized GMD. And only the party that can get 
out the petty-capitalist vote can win honest elections in Taiwan for the foresee-
able future. 
Although Democratic Progressive party victories would have the result that 
more Taiwanese would live on the tributary system as elected officials, such vic-
tories would not result in radical changes in government direction. The more lib-
eral wing of the GMD, which won the 1980s confrontation with the old guard by 
what appears to have been the slenderest of margins, is now preparing to pump 
U.S.$300 billion into state-run development projects. If these projects succeed in 
expanding state-controlled infrastructure and production capacity, the GMD 
will have countered the petty-capitalist challenge and recovered the near-inde-
pendence from popular pressure which seems always to have been its goal. Yet, 
taking the $300 billion out of its sock for productive rather than military pur-
poses could also create massive opportunities for petty capitalists -
if popular 
pressure prevents it all from flowing to large private corporations. This new op-
portunity could do much to deflate the ethnic issue that has, thus far, brought the 
Democratic Progressive party its support. As usual, capitalism proper, especially 
when the capital is foreign, will gain too; but it will not win outright. 
As genuinely electoral politics and active political participation become inte-
grated into working-class life for the first time in Taiwan's history, 11 Taiwan's peo-
ple will probably focus primarily on creating new political tools and on gaining 
expertise in their use. Although the underlying class interests of petty capitalists 
lean dangerously toward combinations of corruption and tyranny, the actual po-
litical practice of working-class people contains much that is democratic, egali-
tarian, and redistributive. 
Under martial law in GMD Taiwan, which lasted until1988, extremely tight 
control was exercised over the formation of organized groups, whether for study, 
for labor organization, for business, or for such trivia as flower shows. Only kin-
ship and religious activities were in practice exempted from the extreme and 
frightening surveillance under which urban Taiwanese lived their lives. When we 
look for evidence of how ordinary people acted when they were free to organize 
themselves for public purposes, our best examples come from folk religion. 
The scale and organizational effectiveness of these petty-capitalist rituals have 
already been stressed. With no encouragement from the government -
indeed, 
n. A historian might make an exception for the short-lived consequences in Taiwan of Japanese 
"Taisho democracy" in the 1920s and early 1930s. Farmers and workers helped to indigenize this 
movement in Taiwan, along with intellectuals. First the Pacific War and then GMD rule have nearly 
expunged it from popular memory. 
240 
: 
C H 
I 
N A 
S 
M 
0 
T 
0 
R 
with a government that tried hard, at one time, to abolish community ritual -
people ran grand festivals, built handsome buildings, organized themselves into 
networks of local leaders with contacts all over the island. They raised money, they 
circulated it among members of their class, they supported a myriad of house-
holds in independence from either state or large capital-providing institutions. 
They also embezzled a little, it is true. Leaders' tendencies to appropriate from 
the communal purse were -
and are -
kept in check, however, by many of the 
mechanisms through which ritual events are structured. Local men -
some-
times women -
of wealth and influence have a loud voice in temple affairs, but 
committees and heads of rotating celebrations are chosen by lot. A household 
head with the resources and the desire to participate can generally take a promi-
nent role a few times in a lifetime. Accounts are kept, and certain kinds of ac-
counts at least are made fully public. The atmosphere of community ritual 
planning is egalitarian: just try to stop interested old people from having their say 
on how things ought to be done. Groups who do not like what their community 
has done may secede ritually, giving their own god, ghost, or ancestor a try as a 
focus for an independent cult. Lists of donations to temples are correctly kept in 
order of size of donation; within each level, commoners and officials are listed 
without preference of rank. One observer notes that "what we see illustrated in 
the inscriptions is an organization that does not conform to the official class sys-
tem, but tends toward equality and a form of democracy- as close to it astra-
ditional China could possibly get" (Schipper 1990:414). That this is not a 
Fujian-Taiwan peculiarity is confirmed by Sichuanese researchers who describe 
village pudu ("universal salvation") ceremonies in the 1930s. Committees of vil-
lage men "handle the registration of the dead and of the living sick, for whom 
prayers are being sought. They are arranged in order: first come, first prayed for, 
is the rule" (Treudley 1971:227). Historically, networks of related cults have linked 
localities that administrative practice separated. "Interregional problems could 
thus be settled directly and on a basis of equality" (Schipper 1990:414). 
Chinese folk religion has a long history of antihierarchical, egalitarian ten-
dencies. Attributing this to the egalitarianism of some Buddhist doctrines misses 
the point. Doctrine, unsupported by sanctions or experience, is likely to have lit-
tie influence on practical matters. The Buddhist pressure toward vegetarianism 
has had very little effect on pork consumption. Ritual participation is specified as 
egalitarian because two major realities of commoner life in Chinese societies have 
been the misery entailed by tributary hierarchy and the opportunity to alleviate 
it offered by equality before the market. 
Popular ritual mirrors (and, yes, perpetuates) the way Taiwan's petty capital-
ists do business. Buyers and sellers encounter crooks and charlatans, and every-
one must look out for them. But a tremendous amount of business is done on 
trust. Business people form cliques, giving preference to those they know. Still, 
the Chinese appetite for widening the circle of acquaintances who might, some-
Petty Capitalism in Taiwan 
: 
241 
day, be useful combines graciously with generous hospitality and genuine socia-
bility. Chinese people almost never forget or ignore a debt or a kindness to some-
one in their circle; a gift or a kindness opens such circles to almost everyone. 
Under conditions of harsh competitiveness, petty capitalism can have a meaner 
face, a "limited-good" or zero-sum-game mentality. Under the expanding condi-
tions that have prevailed in Taiwan since the 1960s, however, one wnstantly 
senses a cheerful spirit of cooperation within the competition. 
These are the political as well as the economic values that Taiwan's emerging 
leadership should seek to foster. They should not foster them through moralizing 
exhortation. Petty capitalists (and everyone but naive children and GMD pen-
sioners) write off Confucian bombast for exactly what it is worth. They might, 
however, begin to build real democracy by decentralizing spending on genuinely 
local matters, delegating power to local communities to manage and maintain 
social services of their choice. They might turn the energetic interest in a whole-
some environment into a grass-roots movement well enough organized to bring 
massive pressure to bear on the state and industry. 
More radically, they might consider a broader public discussion of the family 
politics I often hear from working-class friends: that today's young people seem to 
be more filial if you don't beat them, threaten them, and govern them too strictly. 
"Haizi pa ruan, bu paying" ("Children are controlled better by kindness than by 
harshness") is often heard these days. The populace might decide to bite the bullet 
and begin to dismantle the intimate hierarchy that sets men over women, the hier-
archy on which all others are modeled and which women increasingly resent. Tai-
wan's fledgling and still narrow feminist movement is expanding through the many 
women active in environmentalism as "the nation's homemakers:' As activist moth-
ers and wives try to get industrialists to clean up after themselves, women's role in 
politics moves from tokenism (Chou, Clark, and Clark 1990) to meaningful action. 
To further their own democracy, Taiwanese people might well use more indige-
nous petty-capitalist institutions and rhetoric. Working-class people in Taiwan are 
well accustomed to raising money, organizing big projects, disciplining their mem-
bers, providing community entertainment, and encouraging local membership 
and pride. Temples are already rallying places for Taiwanese nationalism; they 
would be fine places for the recruiting of volunteer ecological pilgrims from among 
older women and men, or for the centralization of recycling tasks for children. 
They have already been informally chosen as sanctuaries for political speeches and 
debate. In them, democratically inclined leaders urge that the old machine politics 
can be met by a new politics of involvement and, where necessary, confrontation. 
With luck, and with the strong tincture of democracy that economic expansion en-
courages, Taiwan may complete its transition from a tributary system to something 
very new, absolutely autonomous, but still very Chinese. 
242 
CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
Re-creating the 
Tributary in China 
Look at me with my Red Guard schoolmates. This one was taken when 
we went to Beijing to see Chairman Mao. You can see I was the real ac-
tivist type, with my straight hair and plain clothes. We all carried Chair-
man Mao's little book . . . . We were all so certain that our ideas about 
China, about making revolution, were correct .. .. Now, society has 
changed so much .... Now everything seems reasonable, more natural. 
You can see that people are better off. But we really believed, then. 
-
Mo Moren, a Chinese intellectual, Chengdu, 1988 
Why were we still enduring all this? Why couldn't the Chinese students 
take action as the Korean students had, or as the Burmese students were 
doing right then? -
Liu Binyan, Chinese journalist, 1990 
Chinese in this century, but especially in the decades since the 
1949 revolution, have repeatedly externalized the political-economic contradic-
tions this book sketches. The energetic and then overextended socialist model in 
the 1950s gave way to the cultivation of both state and private production in the 
1960s, to the Cultural Revolution attempt to extirpate petty capitalism while 
fostering a single, collective mode of production, to the readmission of petty cap-
italism in the 1980s, to the post-Tiananmen reassertion of centralism. China-
watching has been a game of very serious Ping-Pong for over forty years. Chinese 
as well as outsider "China specialists" have been baffled by the reversals of politi-
cal-economic policy, as the quotations above suggest.1 What is most striking 
1. See Sulamith Heins Potter and Jack M. Potter's fine monograph, especially their concluding 
chapter, for an insightful and very different interpretation of "two complementary orientations to-
wards ... economic relationships" among Chinese people (1990:338). Huang Shu-min too has char-
acterized recent motion in Chinese society as "the spiral road" (1989), indicating a directional dialectic. 
243 
about these reversals is that they were accomplished -
at least until Tiananmen 
-
with a very considerable degree of voluntary compliance on the part of the 
population. 
Yes, there is a Chinese gulag; yes, the extravagances of both the Great Leap and 
the Cultural Revolution (the former far more than the latter) caused grievous 
harm to many millions. Chinese people are still much motivated by fear: fear of 
a personalistic legal system, of a network of informers, of officials dangerously re-
moved from the consequences of their actions, and, always at base, of stupid or 
cruel economic decisions leading to hard years of hunger and lifetimes of loss. To 
underestimate these is to trivialize the epochal struggle of a richly complex peo-
ple against dangers old and new. But the revolution was made, and was contin-
ued for decades, by people who seem to have supported much of what they were 
so forcefully led to do. 
Self-interest was an important source of willingness to follow the latest polit-
icalline. When China's leaders moved to rural collectivization, they offered in-
centives to those who joined, and disincentives to those who did not. Some 
communes were given special state aid to encourage others to adhere to policy. 
After 1978, when collective agricultural land was reprivatized under the responsi-
bility system, some rural authorities gave low-interest loans to households will-
ing to set up approved enterprises producing needed commodities. Political 
movements were almost always tied to economic issues, even when their rhetoric 
sounds empty of such content to Western ears. Political-economic policy always 
assumes that social relations are largely definable in political-economic terms. 
Chinese Marxism was not so aberrant as to ignore the power of the material to 
mold minds. 
Yet one hears far more than greedy maximizing in the tales Chinese tell of the 
policy reversals they have participated in and, for that matter, in the debates Tai-
wan's people have over what a good society should be, and how to build one. The 
written record, formal interviews, and private conversations all reveal that at each 
change of policy in China a great many people were willing to give the latest vi-
sion a try. In admittedly diminishing numbers, Chinese people have displayed 
considerable enthusiasm for both public/collective and household-based endeav-
ors. And, although many of these were supported by either state workers, say, or 
family farmers, a great many were supported, seriatim, by the same people. In 
moments of self-reflection, Chinese often express puzzlement about how their 
actions, their understanding, their feelings, and their politics could have changed 
so much under different policies. 
One possible explanation may be that, with two modes of production as 
deeply entrenched guides, people could relatively easily shift from one fairly com-
plete world view to the other. They did not have to be introduced to an entirely 
new ideology and moral stance when the political-economic wind changed. They 
simply needed to be reminded of the global implications of whichever model was 
244: CHINAS 
MOTOR 
more salient at the moment. Tributary and petty-capitalist modes came complete 
with distinctive moral convictions, visions of the cosmos, kinship ideals and 
practices, contrasting patterns of production and exchange, and a millennia! his-
tory of conflict and critique between them. 
China's ganbu (ruling officials) and laobaixing (commoners) continue to re-
produce modes of production which affect their encounters with socialism and 
capitalism. To argue this obliterates the line that first capitalist imperialism and 
then the Chinese revolutionary response to it drew across Chinese lives. The 
break after 1949 was real, but after forty years the fracture has knit. Even com-
mitted old revolutionaries look back with sorrow and surprise at the way their 
efforts have been "thrown away (The Guardian 17 April1990:6). The Chinese have 
allowed some of the worst aspects of their tributary heritage to contaminate the 
experiment that may yet become socialism. 
China's rulers have labored under a double delusion, confusing feudalism 
with socialism and seeing indigenous Chinese petty capitalism as identical to, 
and as dangerous as, capitalism proper. Responsibility for continuities in modes 
of production can largely be laid at the door of the ruling class, but popular col-
laboration in reproducing the past should not be ignored. Western analysts con-
tribute to the confusion as neoclassicists and Marxists alike assume that China 
has socialism because its leaders say so and that capitalism, in the short run, con-
quers all. The socialist experiment and the capitalist threat are easily conflated 
with past experience in tributary and petty-capitalist society; what is new about 
the historically more recent modes is hardly perceived through this dense and 
double ideological screen. 
The continuities from past into present are maintained in two ways. More 
obviously, they stem from the repetition of behavior based on experiences of the 
past, a tendency strengthened by the natural conservatism of aging leaders at all 
levels. This is old-fashioned "cultural lag," the sort of automatic persistence with 
which "culture" or "tradition" is often credited. That inertia counts for some-
thing cannot, of course, be denied. Yet it is imperative to locate the sources of 
present behavior in present circumstances, in the actions of people as both vic-
tims and agents, in Helen Siu's felicitous phrase (1989). The continuities be-
tween the late-imperial and the postrevolution Chinas are not the result of 
persistent values and beliefs "acting" autonomously. They are rather the result of 
the persistence of political-economic structures for which revolutionaries failed 
to create alternatives. Such failures were due to insufficient social wealth, in-
sufficient power in the new party to implement its purposes, and to insufficient 
imagination -
to the immense difficulty of envisioning, or even identifying, 
the genuinely new. 
Continuity is paradoxical in China; revolutionaries shook the world to sever 
the institutional ties that bound them to their past. The paradoxes are only ap-
parent, however. Long-established patterns of tributary political economy have 
Re-creating the Tributary in China : 
245 
been permitted to continue unopposed, and were even strengthened under the 
new system, as they have been in Taiwan under GMD control. Official support of 
kinship hierarchies and state monopoly of the best forms of employment have 
combined to pressure people into petty-capitalist responses. While Taiwan's 
rulers have pushed the majority of the population into petty capitalism, China's 
official ambivalence to household ownership alternated periods of tolerance with 
periods of sharp restriction. The Chinese segued into socialism with their prior 
commitment to tributary-style kinship nearly intact. 
STRENGTHENING HOUSEHOLD HIERARCHIES 
For a glorious moment during the land reform of 1950, means of production 
were distributed to each rural Chinese adult. At the same time, under the new 
marriage law, women found themselves able to gain freedom from unwanted 
marriages. This combined attack on the inequalities produced by TMP, PCMP, 
and gender practices was truly revolutionary. The Communist party was horri-
fied at the upsurge in divorces initiated by women who, with land of their own, 
no longer needed the doubtful economic protection of husbands. Many women 
clearly believed that they could live better on their own; this view stands as extra-
ordinarily strong evidence of the inequality of distribution within Chinese 
households, where surpluses over the barest subsistence generally went to males. 
As a number of scholars have shown (notably Stacey 1983), immediately after the 
Revolution the Communist party feared the loss of support by entrenched local 
men more than it dared to rely on the probable gain in support from economi-
cally emancipated women. Hoping to keep on track a program of land reform 
followed by collectivization that lasted through the 1950s, authorities abandoned 
women's interests, allowing household heads -
mostly male -
to maintain 
their customary control of means of production. Women and the young again 
became subaltern members of a jia made up of hierarchized persons with differ-
ential access to a cluster of economic rights and duties. 
If the goal was socialism, this shift was a horrific mistake. Household heads 
who insisted on preserving gender and kinship hierarchies could hardly have 
been expected to eradicate the old tributary hegemony. Gender and kinship in-
equalities naturalize hierarchy more effectively than any other human institution. 
The household model of deeply unequal reciprocities accustomed the young to 
their places in a wider tributary economy and legitimated the inequalities of 
power to those who benefited from them. It would be wrong to say that the rev-
olution was lost with the decision to support the patriarchal jia, for egalitarian 
treatment of women might not have been possible under the conditions of the 
time. But all the evidence shows that the party's universally male leadership be-
lieved that the revolution for women could be postponed (M. Wolf 1985); gender 
and kinship hierarchies were as necessary to the maintenance to political control 
246: CHINA'S 
MOTOR 
as they had always been. After land reform, as before it, women and younger men 
worked for the household head, with few economic options but to obey his com-
mands. One scholar observes that "the popularity of genealogy-based territorial 
rights ... remained undiminished" (Siu 1989:163). 
Rural communes brought new opportunities for women and the young after 
1957. The deemphasis on household property and new forms of work organiza-
tion gave women and the young greater daily independence of their household 
head and quantified their contributions to the family pool. Nonfarm work in 
services and factories of all sizes encouraged even greater intrahousehold equal-
ity. At the same time, however, the communes, and some noncommune work, 
maintained the direct economic power of patriarchs by paying the household 
head directly for the work of all. The decrease in private sideline work by 
women, which had formerly passed money through their hands, left them with-
out personal sources of income. Restrictions on residence enforced through the 
commodities-rationing system tied young people to their natal or marital 
households more firmly than Qing law and lineage elders ever did. With social-
ist restriction of private production, communal payments for collective work, 
and enforced residence in one's home village, a degree of household pooling 
which would have pleased the great N eo-Confucian Zhu Xi himself became the 
rural norm. 
In many communities where lineages had been powerful before the revolu-
tion, the commune system revivified lineage segments as production brigades 
and teams, further monopolizing power in the hands of clusters of male agnates 
(Diamond 1975). Commune welfare systems provided collectively only for those 
without kin, especially agnatic kin; brigades and teams as late as 1980 would gar-
nish wages or farm income of sons, tllough rarely of daughters or sons-in-law, to 
support their parents (A. Wolf 1980, fieldnotes). During very bad times, however, 
even a married-in woman might be denied a share in local resources, driven out 
of her husband's village to beg, or even sold (E. Friedman et al. 1991:241), as ag-
nates closed ranks against outsiders. In nonagricultural work units such as facto-
ries, universities, and service providers, jobs, housing, services, and commodity 
distributions were channeled through household heads to other members of 
(usually) his household. Married couples generally could not choose, for exam-
ple, to live in housing provided by the woman's work unit rather than the man's, 
if the two were different; it was assumed that husbands, not wives, supplied their 
households with housing and services. 
Over the decades, socialist politics repeatedly attacked private production and 
exploitation through wage labor. Exploitation within households, however, was 
rarely confronted. When it was, it took the form of encouraging women to join 
the work force. Participation in social labor gave, or would give, women equality 
with men. Yet women seemed to have been treated as ballast in macrostructural 
readjustments in many of the labor-policy changes that occurred after 1949 
Re-creating the Tributary in China : 247 
(Weinbaum 1976). Joining the work force failed to give young Chinese women 
equality anywhere where familial obligations remained strong (Salaff 1981, 1991; 
Kung 1983; Greenhalgh 1985a), and did not do so where their kin seniors were also 
their work supervisors. 
China's birth-limitation programs, instituted in the 196os for urban cadres, 
in the early 1970s for urban people in general, and in the late 1970s for the vast 
rural population, have sharpened Chinese officials' focus on kinship as an es-
sential institution of social control. They also reveal the strength of the gender 
bias that shapes households to forms continuous with the past. Chinese people 
unquestionably continue to prefer boy children over girls, a preference often 
taken by non-Chinese as purely ideological. Although the desire to maintain a 
patriline simply for its own sake -
to give one's ancestors descendants in return 
for the life they gave the present generation -
is still strong for some Chinese, 
people, when asked, are usually much more pragmatic, more materialist, in 
their explanation of their preference for sons over daughters: where manual 
labor must be done, males are stronger. Awareness of and action based on this 
biological given (exaggerated by the better nutrition and care boys receive while 
growing) are understandable where unmechanized tasks predominate. Gender 
prejudice is common too in regions where other kinds of work are possible. Par-
ents know that sons have better opportunities for higher education and well-
paid, stable jobs than daughters have; since the reforms of the 198os, this 
inequality has grown every year. In 1988, an experienced Women's Federation 
cadre told me: 
Men are always expected to work, so they are found jobs, but the government 
policy on women working keeps changing. Right now, we are expected to try 
to persuade women that they can contribute as much to society by staying 
home and being good wives and mothers. This is because there is too much 
unemployment. Women are not wanted as much at factories as they used to 
be. They are laid off, or not hired in the first place, or are encouraged to retire 
and try to find other work, like private business. When a person retires from a 
state job that can be inherited, it is almost always given to the family's son, not 
the daughter. If there is only a daughter, sometimes the job-inheritance right 
is ignored, because the work unit does not want to employ women. 
Sons are better than daughters as financial supports to their aging parents. Hus-
bands and fathers, not wives and mothers, will be the principal breadwinners, 
and multigenerational families will tend to be patrilineal under such conditions. 
Now, as in the past, these conditions are set by the state. 
Will the one-child policy automatically change this system? Probably not, for 
a de-facto one-child policy has been laid down for urban government workers-
a large proportion of urban populations -
for decades, with relatively little 
effect on a kinship pattern structured by hard economic realities. Discrimination 
248: CHINA's 
MOTOR 
against women is not an accidental byproduct of patrilineal, patriarchal kin sys-
tems; it is their principal consequence and purpose. Without massive affirmative 
action for women, Chinese households will continue, quite rationally, to prefer 
sons. They will continue, quite predictably, to evade one-child restrictions and 
attempt to re-create patrilineal families because the contemporary state, like that 
of late-imperial China, channels access to the means of production, as well as to 
many other essential material goods, more to and through men than to and 
through women. 
Unable to risk gender equality, unwilling to give up the household as a conve-
nient administrative unit for the control of labor and means of production, Chi-
nese officials encourage the reproduction of a tributary system at the grassroots. 
Lessons from kinship, now as in the past, are easily transferred to experience with 
the paternalistic state. 
COLLECTIVE PRODUCTION: SOCIALIST OR TRIBUTARY? 
China also retains strong tributary patterns because so much of the Chi-
nese population depends directly on state economic circuits for its livelihood 
and life chances. As officials, low-ranking public servants, state production 
workers, and members of their families, hundreds of millions of Chinese are 
maintained from tax revenues and from the surpluses created by state enter-
prises. Employment by the state has been the desire of ambitious people since 
the revolution as much as before it. State employment has multiple advantages 
in material rewards, prestige, political connections, and opportunities for mo-
bility. The rare exceptions -
unusually successful private entrepreneurs -
are the objects of very considerable resentment from state employees as a class, 
who still expect to outrank all commoners, on all scales of comparison. Those 
who work directly for the state hold ranks from party chairman to the near-
slave convicted prisoner. The majority, clustered in the middle as local offi-
cials, railway workers, factory managers, doctors, and the like, derive 
considerable power from the fact that they eat the nation's rice rather than 
food from their own farms or workshops. They make their lives and livings in 
political-economic structures that overlap extensively with those of the paral-
lel class in late-imperial China. Their descriptions of their circumstances often 
contain transparent references to tribute as a mode of exchange, as in Frank 
Pieke's telling example of a pheasant dinner with friends in Beijing. These 
birds were not for sale anywhere, but had been obtained from the host's work 
unit that in turn had received them as a "tribute payment" (shang gong) from 
a lower-ranking work unit (1992:255). 
Since Lenin, state ownership and management of means of production have 
been hallmarks of actually existing socialism, as well as the goals of many classes 
and groups attempting to establish socialism elsewhere. State agriculture, indus-
Re-creating the Tributary in China : 249 
try, and services, however, have been only intermittently capable of expanded re-
production in the socialist experiments of this century. At present writing, they 
have crumbled almost everywhere. This failure was certainly due in part, but 
probably not wholly, to the scale of defensive militarism forced on systems per-
ceived as so threatening to world capitalist hegemony. The lack of congruence be-
tween expectation and outcome in such societies suggests that we rethink the 
nature of the state production that formerly appeared to be the key to a transition 
to socialism. The success of state planning and production in other east Asian so-
cieties, such as in Japan, and in Taiwan in the 1970s and 1980s, however, precludes 
any easy dismissal of state-managed production as inherently flawed. 
In the 1950s and early 196os, China was greatly influenced by the Soviet model, 
in industry especially. The resulting large, centralized, bureaucratic production 
units have been repeatedly attacked -
by a genuine workers' rebellion during 
the early Cultural Revolution, by privatization and decentralization during the 
reformist 1980s -
but have maintained their form, and their faults, to the pres-
ent. That form and those faults represent more the persistent heritage of a preex-
isting tributary system of production than they represent socialism. 
Such a conclusion is all the more distressing and puzzling when we consider 
the very substantial movement toward socialism that the 1949 revolution made 
possible. This record contrasts markedly with that of the GMD during the same 
period, in which a plainly tributary mode was forced on Taiwan's unwilling pop-
ulation. A necessary, though not sufficient, element of China's movement toward 
socialism was an economic expansion linked to increasingly egalitarian distribu-
tion of its fruits. A World Bank study made in 1979, at the end of thirty years of 
collectivism, shows that much of the egalitarianism that must accompany any 
real socialism was not illusory. Over these years, despite a 2 percent yearly aver-
age growth in population -
comparable to that of other developing countries 
-
and despite problems with agriculture, 
rapid expansion of industrial output has caused national income per person 
to grow fairly fast. With adjustments for international comparability, per 
capita GNP appears to have grown at an annual rate of 2.0-2.5% in 1957-77 
and (because of a spurt in the last two years) 2.5-3.0% in 1957-79. Even the 
former rate is significantly above the average for other low-income developing 
countries (1.5% in 1960-78) -though even the latter is well below the aver-
age for middle-income developing countries (3.7%), and has not been high 
enough to pull China out of the low-income group. (1981:10) 
The report comments on China's very considerable internal equality, noting that 
China's most remarkable achievements during the past three decades has been 
to make low-income groups far better off in terms of basic needs than their 
counterparts in most other poor countries. They all have work; their food 
250 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
supply is guaranteed through a mixture of state rationing and collective self-
insurance; most of their children are not only at school, but being compara-
tively well-taught; and the great majority have access to basic health care and 
family planning services. Life expectancy -
whose dependence on many 
other economic and social variables makes it probably the best single indica-
tor of the extent of real poverty in a country- is (at 64 years) outstandingly 
high for a country at China's per capita income level. (n)' 
The World Bank's consultants attribute this increased life expectancy to the elim-
ination of acute malnutrition by food rationing, to the primary education of 
women resulting in better health and childrearing, to near-universal basic health 
services reducing respiratory and diarrheal diseases, and to birth control, which 
results in better maternal and child health (99). 
The World Bank sees the resources that made this improvement possible as 
derived principally from building industry and reinvesting its profits in yet more 
industry: a "distinctive feature of the Chinese budget is that enterprise profits are 
the largest single source of revenue:' with high profit margins and almost all 
profits remitted to the state. The second largest source was the three-quarters of 
all tax receipts deriving from industrial and commercial transactions; the agri-
cultural tax amounted to only 3 percent of total revenues. Half of the budget in 
the 1960s and 1970s was reinvested in economic development. Rich, industrial-
ized provinces retained much smaller shares of reinvestment than poor backward 
ones, which also received subsidies (50-51). The major flaw in this development 
program seems to have been failure to build an adequate transportation network. 
China had less mileage in roads and railroads in 1979 than India, Brazil, or the 
USSR; the World Bank described its road system as "one of the least developed in 
the world" (132-33). The twenty-eight-fold increase in navigable waterways since 
1952 (134) could not compensate for the constraints on land transport. 
The basis for much of the overall economic improvement since 1949 was the 
socialist accomplishments of the 1950s. Much of the stagnation that has occurred 
since results from the failure of state-managed undertakings to continue to ex-
pand. The socialist alternatives offered to industry after 1949, too narrowly con-
strued in practice, were engulfed by the existing and continuously reproduced 
tributary context of such work. As a member of the Chinese Academy of Social 
Sciences observed, ''After the founding of the PRC, China faced a serious outside 
menace from capitalist countries. This made some people think that anything 
different from capitalism was socialist; thus some feudalistic elements were mis-
taken to be socialist and promoted by leaders. They tried to fight capitalism with 
feudalistic weapons" (Liu Xingwu 1991:22). The result has been that, in the 1990s, 
2. Compare with Indonesia at 47 and India at 51 years of life expectancy at birth in 1979 (World 
Bank 1981:98). 
Re-creating the Tributary in China 
251 
state and other large collective production stagnates. With little to contribute to 
those employed outside state units, the beneficiaries of state disbursements are 
seen as useless or even parasitic; with insufficient income of its own to back its 
power, the ruling class continues to rely on coercion, including outbursts of vio-
lence, to ensure the extraction of value from the people. 
Andrew Walder has made an important contribution to the understanding of 
tributary forms of work through his innovative analysis of work and authority 
in Chinese state-managed industry. He looks past the Eurocentric and ill-fitting 
theory that is generally applied to this sector, concluding that something he calls 
communist neotraditionalism characterizes the complex of behaviors and be-
liefs exhibited by those who work in China's state factories. 3 He argues convinc-
ingly that communist neotraditionalism is not derived directly from the 
industrial predecessors of present forms, but he chooses the term "to highlight 
the contrast with more familiar modern forms of industrial authority that are 
notable for their relative impersonality and anonymity, the relative political and 
economic independence of workers from management, and the resulting 
prominence of group conflict, bargaining, contract, and the relatively tight bu-
reaucratic restriction of the personal discretion of immediate superiors. Out of 
common convention, the term tradition communicates these social attributes 
more concisely than any other" (1986:10). By contrast, he defines communist 
neotraditionalism by several features: first, employment is not a market rela-
tionship, labor more resembles fixed than variable capital, and employment is a 
value in itself, with many social services delivered at the state workplace; second, 
the system creates considerable dependence of workers on the enterprise itself, 
on party and management, and, in a personal way, on supervisors (n-12). Neo-
traditionalism depends on force, control, and surveillance but also on positive 
incentives: "political loyalty is rewarded systematically with career opportuni-
ties, special distributions, and other favors" from officials. Loyalty combines 
with institutionalized networks of patron-client relations maintained by the 
party, and with "a rich subculture of instrumental-personal ties independent of 
the party's control" (6-7). 
Walder's is an excellent framework for the understanding of Chinese state in-
dustry as I know it, but it works well for the other loci of state employment also 
3. Walder has constructed his analysis to apply to a generic communist political system, an ab-
stract from both China and the Soviet Union. Although I ignore this aspect in what follows, my ex-
planation for the similarity of "communist neotraditionalism» in the Soviet Union is a dilute version 
of that applied to China. Russian czarist absolutism was built on a TMP that shared many features 
with the Chinese, and was carried into the organization of the postrevolution political economy in 
historically particular ways I cannot undertake to describe here. I should note, however, that the sub-
stantially greater success China has had in supplying its population appears to depend on the persis-
tence of its PCMP, a political-economic feature that in prerevolution Russia was undeveloped. 
252 
: 
C H I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
-
for research institutes, post offices, hospitals, government bureaus, and the 
military. More important for the argument of this book, Walder's communist 
neotraditionalism looks remarkably like late-imperial tributary style. Walder 
does not address these parallels, both because he is well aware that "a cultural tra-
dition cannot explain its own continuity (or lack thereof)," but also because he 
focuses so sharply on theories of industrial development. Some patterns of in-
dustrial control which at first look traditional appeared in both the West and 
China only after World War II; Walder's Communist neotraditionalism is a mod-
ern form of industrial authority ( 10). In support of this position, he observes that 
the contracting system common in precommunist industry was common in 
many industrial traditions, including those in the capitalist West, and thus can-
not explain novelty in communist systems. He also summarizes the abrupt and 
unprecedented transition from a prerevolution industrial system based largely on 
small handicraft shops to one in which large-scale and relatively modern indus-
trial enterprises began to predominate (30-33). 
Walder is perfectly correct, I believe, about the slight influence prerevolution 
large industry had on its socialist successors; much of it was capitalist in organi-
zation and style, with some petty-capitalist compromises. I would argue, how-
ever, that the state industries he so clear-sightedly examines drew their traditions 
of organized dependence and institutional culture not from previous capitalist 
industry but from the broader tradition of state employment -
a key element in 
the tributary mode of production. In his analysis, Walder emphasizes a "princi-
pled particularism," which he describes as representing "a mixture of ideological 
commitments and impersonal loyalties demanded by the modern Leninist party 
and the role expectations of modern industrial organization with the personal 
loyalties characteristic of traditional authority and patrimonialism" (25). His 
concept of "principled particularism" also precisely epitomizes the Confucian 
ideal of combining loyalty to an impersonal and positively valued system of Con-
fucian-imperial virtues, laws, and institutions with direct, immediate, personal 
loyalty to official patrons. Loyalty to the former should guide interaction with the 
latter, while service to the latter channeled advantages deriving from the former 
to the loyal subject and grateful client. In principled particularism, the party re-
wards and promotes people according to the loyalty and service they render (25). 
These are feudal words for feudal virtues. 
Discussing the split that emerges between rank-and-file state industrial 
workers who are also party activists (and sometimes informers) and those 
who are not, he comments: "Although workers the world over show scorn for 
members who break rank in this fashion, nowhere else are such mutual antag-
onisms so permanently institutionalized in routine labor relations" (25). These 
words call up vivid images of the class-complicated anger of commoners at 
their fellow commoners who stood at the bottom of the state employment sys-
tem in imperial China -
the yamen-runners. Walder notes other stratifica-
Re-creating the Tributary in China : 
253 
tional consequences of tributary hierarchy: "China's industrial labor force, 
reflecting a pattern of stratification characteristic of society as a whole, is di-
vided into several status groups, each of which has its own publicly defined 
rights to income, job tenure, social security, labor insurance, and housing and 
residence -
each of which, in other worlds, is legally entitled to a distinctive 
style of life" ( 40). 
HISTORICAL CONTINUITIES IN STATE EMPLOYMENT 
The Chinese textile industry is a well-studied example of a technologically ad-
vanced light industry deriving directly from a much older production tradition; 
it reveals the transition from a late-imperial tributary industry to a contemporary 
"socialist" one. Although much textile production in late-nineteenth and early-
twentieth century China had important capitalist components, in this ancient 
art, tributary and petty-capitalist relations remained salient. Textile production 
made heavy demands on women's labor, which was made available cheaply by the 
operation of kinship and gender hierarchies, and on resources which were often 
controlled by the state. It is thus a particularly promising site at which to exam-
ine contemporary textile work for the influences that are likely to generate not 
socialist but feudal relations of production. 
Beginning two thousand years ago, silk was produced for home use, taxes, and 
-
by the Song -
for sale in many parts of China, but was almost everywhere a 
luxury fabric. Commoners wore hemp, ramie, and, by the Yuan, cotton. 
Of textiles made from other fibers, cotton was the most important to the state, 
which used it for military uniforms and equipment from as early as the mid-sev-
enth century. It became a commonly grown fiber only during the Song, however. 
During the Yuan, it was procured through a tax in kind for military uniforms. Its 
production spread in all directions from a center in Jiangsu along with tech-
niques of ginning, carding, and weaving brought by a woman from Hainan, 
Huan Daopo. People grew cotton to spin and weave for home use, for taxes, and 
for sale, and as a raw material to ship to areas that did not grow cotton (Chao 
1977:7, 12-13, 19, 16, 28-29). By the early Qing, in some parts of the lower Yangzi 
Valley, 90 percent of the land was under cotton; in Shandong, it was twice as 
profitable as growing grain (Elvin 1973=213). 
As cotton became both abundant and cheaper in the late Ming, it replaced 
most other fibers, including silk, for ordinary clothing. Whereas in earlier times 
government officials and employees had been paid partly in low-grade home-
woven silks produced for this purpose (L. Li 1981:42), such disbursements came 
generally to be in cottons (Chao 1977:19). Both silk and cotton production were 
encouraged by the state at various times, and state silk-making establishments 
sometimes bought their raw materials on the market. 
254 
: 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
During the early Ming, silk production was expanded from only three gov-
ernment centers to twenty-nine sites in nine provinces (Santangelo 1984:15), 
which spread the best silk-production techniques widely. Increases in quotas re-
sulted in the flight of artisans and their skills to smaller towns. Privately pro-
duced silk was apparently cheaper than that made by state factories; their 
managers thus turned to purchasing finished fabrics from the market to fulfill 
their quotas. In the resulting corruption and disruption of morale, the state sys-
tem lost its capacity to lead production. Though refurbished under new rules and 
regulations during the early Qing, government silk production was in serious de-
cline by the nineteenth century (L. Li 1981:44, 38; Santangelo 1984). Throughout 
the Qing, however, the government remained the largest single consumer of silk. 
Lillian Li observes that 
the manufacture of silk for commercial purposes greatly expanded in the late 
Ming and Ch'ing ... [but] the government played a significant role in this 
process. Perhaps one might say that the expansion of government demand 
and the growth of the commercial market were interdependent. The expan-
sion of the commercial sector had been to a large extent sparked by govern-
ment demand, but at the same time the government was increasingly 
dependent on the commercial sector for fulfilling its needs. These needs were, 
however, declining over time, and were largely expressed indirectly through 
commissioned work rather than directly through government production. 
(1981:45-46) 
The Ming expansion of textile production was only a part of a much wider 
commoditization that has been the subject of much analysis. The scholarship on 
this subject can be reduced to a pair of questions: what got it started, and why did 
it stop short of capitalism? Li suggests that the interaction of state and commerce 
(tributary and petty-capitalist production are more precise) "sparked" by strong 
state demand was essential to the Ming expansionary dynamic. I would agree, 
stressing that state production, rather than procurement on the market, was a key 
to expanded reproduction under these conditions.4 Yet private production of 
both silk and cotton remained small in scale, thus lessening the pressure for im-
provements in technology. 
Why did the Ming/Qing expansion stop, while production remained the same 
at the household level? The household basis of textile production units before 
production in the capitalist mode in the early twentieth century continues to 
puzzle analysts of this question. As we ponder the answer, it is well to remember 
4. We need not conclude that state procurement from the market operated according to market 
principles; Chinese government interventions in the market were often aimed at limiting the effects 
of market mechanisms, as, for example, in the repeated efforts over the centuries to stabilize grain 
prices through "ever-normal granaries." 
Re-creating the Tributary in China 
255 
that petty-capitalist textile production in both silk and cotton were remarkably 
efficient even in the face of this fully developed capitalist competition. Simple, 
small-scale silk production in the Pearl River delta "not only met the competition 
presented by the mechanized filatures but flourished" (Sankar 1978:70 ). In his 
sharp-eyed China tour in 1907, Lord Ronaldshay followed the movement of 
hand-woven cloth, some of it still made of home-spun yarn, from the central 
Yangzi to Sichuan and beyond, regretfully noting its competitiveness with Man-
chester goods (1908:72-75, 115). When I queried women in Sichuan, where hand 
spinning and weaving persisted into the 1950s, I heard paeans to the hard-wear-
ing, comfortable qualities of the old fabrics and their virtual costlessness for fam-
ilies with daughters. 
Silk and cotton present slightly different pictures of petty-capitalist produc-
tion. Silk may have been produced in waged workshops perhaps since the Song, 
and unambiguously in such settings since the Yuan (Chao 1977:29). A law limit-
ing private silk producers to twenty looms was repealed in the late seventeenth 
century, leaving the upper limit at one hundred looms (L. Li 1981:53). Thereafter 
"many silk-weaving factories expanded to five or six hundred looms;' according 
to Chao (1977:30). Lillian M. Li produces considerable evidence arguing that 
throughout the Ming and Qing, and even in the twentieth century, individual 
weaving households generally had only four or five looms, however. Her much 
lower figures might be nearer Chao's if we ignored the issue of whether the looms 
were under one roof. She describes twentieth-century handicraft putting-out sys-
tems in Nanjing as having "relatively large-scale operations" of one hundred to 
three hundred looms each (1981:53). This figure accords well with a number of 
characteristically petty-capitalist patterns, including especially the avoidance of 
official attention. 
Chao's insistence that cotton weaving was never done on a large scale until the 
188os (1977:30-31; also L. Li 1981:60) should also be considered in this context. 
Putting-out systems larger than the household were designed to be low-profile 
and likely to be omitted from the written record. Chao attributes the persistence 
of household-based cotton textile production to a number of factors ("[1] the na-
ture of the goods involved, [2] the rural institutions in that period, and [3] cer-
tain cultural elements in the Chinese traditional society." The most important of 
these "cultural elements" was a domestic production system by family workers 
who shared its returns in egalitarian fashion (1977:32, 35). 
The strong family loyalty and the deep-rooted desire among the Chinese to 
preserve families as the basic social units and to keep the family members to-
gether whenever possible compelled them to choose a type of production or-
ganization that would be identical to the family units. Meanwhile, the family 
as an entity felt an obligation to take care of its members, which made them 
more dependent on family support than they would be otherwise. In a sense, 
256 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
in the Chinese family labor was a truly fixed productive factor even in the long 
run. This helps explain why the Chinese domestic production system had a 
tendency to harbor surplus labor. Instead of discharging redundant labor, the 
family kept it in production even when the marginal earning fell below the 
subsistence cost. (39) 
Esther Goody, accepting Chao's argument that cotton production was house-
hold-based only, attributes that scaling to Chayanovian "self-exploitation" of 
women within households (1982:31-34). But Goody accepts as well the widely 
held assumption that "the family members must be supported somehow, and 
must eat;' no matter how much or how little they worked (19). As earlier chap-
ters in this book make clear, such an interpretation of the Chinese family 
omits entirely both the stress on unequal treatment of family members and 
the power kin seniors had over their juniors. "Redundant" females, especially 
little girls, easily found a ready market for their extremely cheap labor in other 
households in many parts of China. The history of textile production can 
hardly be written without a clear view of the commoditization of Chinese 
women as it interacted with tributary pressures to maintain certain family rec-
iprocities. 
State production, especially of silk, was advantaged by the power of officials to 
demand quotas of raw materials or finished goods at below-market prices (e.g. L. 
Li 1981:42) and by its positioning -
repeatedly stressed by Li -
for developing 
and spreading improved techniques. State production had a profound, and pos-
sibly mutually influencing relationship with that of petty-capitalist handicraft; 
Lillian Li states that "it is possible to see the strong resemblances between late 
Ch'ing and twentieth -century private practices and those of the Imperial Facto-
ries of the late Ming period" and that "public and private sectors were inter-
twined, and their institutional features were remarkably similar" (1981:52, 58). 
Li argues that these features made small-scale production highly resistant to 
capitalist penetration. That resistance was "economic and institutional" (36), tak-
ing the form of domestic production linked by numerous petty-capitalist insti-
tutions, including vigorous local markets. She comments on the strength and 
durability of the indigenous organization of silk production in those areas where 
it had long been in place (129). Differentiating this older system from capitalist 
production was a marked aversion to risk: "the wealthy preferred to invest their 
money in real estate [such as silk filatures for rent) or in short-term, high-yield 
investments, such as pawnshops, [rather) than in develop,rnent of long-term, 
high-risk modern enterprise" (187). A multiplication of purely commercial bro-
kers and agents between the household producer of raw materials and the ulti-
mate purchaser evolved, Li argues, to spread the risk: 
Pao -
"to contract;' or "to guarantee certain achievement" -
was a funda-
mental concept which pervaded ... economic relationships in China. In a 
Re-creating the Tributary in China 
: 
257 
complex process, such as the silk weaving industry, the networks of pao could 
be quite lengthy. Financial management and production remained separate. 
The ultimate purpose was the diffusion of risk and responsibility among sev-
eral different people, rather than their concentration in the hands of one en-
trepreneur. In short, it was totally contrary to the so-called spirit of 
capitalism. ( 61) 
Spreading the risk was indeed a key organizing principle of Chinese produc-
tion. Why this predominating concern with risk? Was the Chinese fear of risk so 
great that it can be suggested as a cause for the inhibition of capitalism proper, 
even in the presence of that mode, as Lillian Li argues here, and K. T. Li argued in 
the previous chapter? Because producers faced not only the marked uncertainties 
of what was, at base, an agricultural commodities market but also the irregular 
and intentionally suppressive interventions of an economically active ruling class, 
Chinese concern for risk is understandable. Both petty-capitalist and tributary 
systems operated to push the risks and costs of production as far "down" as pos-
sible- to the tax-paying household. Households, in their turn, pushed those 
risks and costs onto the shoulders of their weakest members, whose subordina-
tion the ruling class ultimately guaranteed. 
Late-imperial state textile production can only artificially, and with difficulty, 
be disentangled from petty-capitalist patterns. The reestablishment of state tex-
tile production after 1949 was, of necessity, based in part on the ongoing rem-
nants of the earlier system as well as on new socialist ideals. Silk production in the 
city of Shengze, Jiangsu, has a degree of continuity with the past which makes it 
an exceptionally clear example of how older relations of production have been 
reproduced. 
STATE SILK PRODUCTION IN SHENGZE 
According to a recent study of Shengze by Ju Futian and Wu Dash eng (1986), 
state weavers fleeing increased quotas in the early 1400s brought elaborate 
looms and the techniques for making high-quality silks to the Suzhou country-
side. Among the towns that took full advantage of this shift to greater private 
production was Shengze, which soon became one of China's four best-known 
silk centers, along with Suzhou, Hangzhou, and Huzhou. Small-scale house-
hold production soon generated petty-capitalist workshops: by the late Ming, 
several thousand weavers were employed, some by owners of dozens of looms. 
In mid-Qing, migrants from Shaoxing brought new techniques, especially in 
dyeing and printing, and Shengze became an important silk-collection and dis-
tribution center, a hub of silk commerce, and a source of weaving machinery 
and equipment. Shengze firms had branches in many cities throughout China, 
exporting silk through its port (290-98). 
258 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
Production by Chinese capitalists using electric-powered looms partially 
transformed relations of production; in 1935, Shengze had 1,360 electric looms 
employing 908 workers. Japanese organization of the silk trade in 1937, however, 
drew the best-quality raw silk out of China, closing down these modernized fac-
tories. Handicraft production of silk fabrics continued (Ju and Wu 1986:300 ), 
probably producing some of the many varieties of cheaper silks for which the re-
gion was well known. In 1924, Shengze artisans made more varieties of silk than 
did those of Hangzhou, including silk -cotton mixtures and specialty fabrics such 
as suling, used for dressing the dead (Ball1982:582-83). 
After Japan's defeat, the GMD resurrected Shengze's mills to produce cotton 
fabrics. The 1949 revolution revived some silk production. By the end of the 
1950s' movement toward the socialization of industry, four factories, producing 
mostly rayon and some silk blends, had set the pattern for local textile produc-
tion, which then persisted until1975. Only after 1975 was outdated machinery re-
placed with equipment good enough to produce international-quality silks. 
Automatic looms and many other improvements were made in 1978, resulting in 
a production boom during the 1980s (Ju and Wu 1986:300-303). 
The boom depended, Ju and Wu claim, not only on improved equipment 
bought with state funds but on labor skills: 
Most of the families in town have silk weavers among their members. Many 
families have been in the trade for generations and are well known for their 
silk weaving skills. Out of a sample from 8,490 households, 94.7 percent had 
people working in silk industry, among which ... 31 percent are entirely en-
gaged in it .... 37.69 percent have worked in the industry for one generation, 
... 56.71 percent for two generations and ... 5·6 percent for three generations. 
Many weavers come from well-known silk making families, having acquired 
the traditional weaving skills from their parents in their youth .... The ma-
jority of the 1,ooo-odd young women workers who entered the town's silk fac-
tories in the last two years are from traditional silk making families. On the 
average, they mastered the technique and started to work independently 
within three months, which is estimated to be four or five times faster than 
people from ordinary backgrounds. (1986:304-5) 
Two hundred and twenty-three smaller township and production-brigade facto-
ries were also active during the 198os, almost certainly springing from earlier 
labor-employing household workshops, but assisted as well by Shengze's five 
county-level factories. The county-level units (plus an associated printing and 
dyeing factory) paid 58.4 million yuan to the state in profit and taxes between 
1979 and 1982, eighteen times their state investments and loans for that period. 
From 1978 to 1982, they employed 3,200 new and 1,709 temporary workers, 
mostly young people. Of Shengze's 1982 work force of 17,906, 15,432 were indus-
trial workers. Silk workers in the twelve county and town silk factories numbered 
Re-creating the Tributary in China : 
259 
12,602, or just over So percent of the industrial workforce. Shengze clearly once 
again became a silk town (306-8). 
Ju and Wu are silent on the subject of raw-material procurement.5 This is a 
troubling gap in our knowledge, for the key to good-quality machine-reelable 
silk is well-grown cocoons. As all specialists insist, these are managed best 
through careful tending of relatively small numbers of worms, which are fussy 
about their environment and extremely susceptible to disease. Gearing up 
Jiangsu to produce cocoons for the expansion of the late 1970s was probably ac-
complished by means similar to those employed in Sichuan: household contracts 
with state monopsony of cocoons at state prices. The intensive and demanding 
labor of silkworm growing falls, almost necessarily, on farm women who take or-
ders from their household heads. 
An industry originally based on state demand for raw materials from house-
hold producers generated an enduring pattern of production which survived se-
vere reversals in big-scale production. The inflow of traditional skills and 
expectations continues to mold the way Shengze works; Ju and Wu worry that 
fewer than one percent of silk-factory employees have the formal technical train-
ing to keep production techniques advancing (1986:311). Stability of practice has 
kept silk-working alive in this region but may not enable the expanded repro-
duction that Shengze's factories must achieve if they are to compete in world 
markets. What happens to a countryside-full of commodity producers of co-
coons depends not only on the vagaries of a remote capitalist market for silk un-
derwear but on the narrow gate of official decision making. Should those 
decisions become too detached from the experiences of farm women, all levels of 
this broad-based structure will be catastrophically vulnerable. 
It seems reasonable to assume that productive socialized factories in 
Shengze, as in the rest of China, offer attractive work alternatives to the region's 
rural people. Despite continuing restrictions on geographical mobility, non-
registered residents increased by nearly 300 percent between 1978 and 1982, ac-
cording to Ju and Wu (1986:309). Yet they foresee a worsening labor shortage: 
"Female job-awaiting youths in other towns and cities are reluctant to leave 
their homes to become silk workers in Shengze," perhaps in part because "silk 
factories operate on a three-shift system, and the work is not nearly as light as 
it appears to be." (Tours of silk factories in Chengdu and Hangzhou have con-
vinced this researcher too that the work is far from undemanding.) "To make 
up for this shortage, quite a few young female peasants have been recruited in 
recent years. However, they often move away, some going back to their home 
villages" (312). 
5· The entire volume by Fei Xiao Tung and others (1986) ignores the raw-materials problem in the 
heart of China's silk region. One is strongly tempted to assume that the procurement process might 
not appear in a positive light. 
260 
: 
C H 
I N 
A ' S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
We see something of why they have done so in Ju and Wu's descriptions of 
Shengze's unsavory living conditions. Narrow streets and crushing foot traffic 
lead to unpleasant and dangerous commuting. The town's sewers, built in the 
Ming dynasty, regularly back up all over town. The housing shortage leaves at 
least 710 households with no houses, and 230 with "housing difficulties." The 
houseless and those with housing difficulties amount, then, to nearly one-sixth 
of the town's residents. With a population of over thirty thousand, Shengze has 
one "very small and poorly equipped hospital" -
and no clinics even at big fac-
tories. Women's and children's health care suffers especially. By 1983, the year of 
the study, only 109 commercial establishments were permitted, a limitation lead-
ing to difficulties in purchasing everything from amusements to staple vegeta-
bles. "The town's residents are frequently heard to complain about this" (312-14). 
While Ju and Wu offer no information on the subject, I assume, from my field 
interviews in Chengdu, Sichuan, and Xiamen, Fujian, that leaving a job in one of 
Shengze's silk factories would be no simple matter. State employment is not eas-
ily laid aside, even for workers who are able to find other means of support. Per-
mission to quit is not always granted, although those who have been refused 
permission make, by their own accounts, extraordinarily bad workers. 
In Chengdu in 1988, a state worker who wished to quit an industrial job filed 
an application, which might take a year to process, to tuiji, or "withdraw;' from 
state employment. Withdrawing is different from retirement (tuixiu), which car-
ries postemployment benefits, such as a pension, supplied by the factory. A 
worker who has been permitted to tuiji ceases to work but remains an unpaid 
member of her work unit for about two years, during which time she may change 
her mind and return to state employment. In the expansionary climate of 
Chengdu during the 1980s, this waiting period made people anxious lest the fac-
tory's needs alter and their permissions be rescinded. My interview subjects were 
small petty capitalists sinking their profits into business expansion, and thus 
eager for independence from their former jobs. In Shengze, with its apparent re-
striction on petty capitalism, we see a more classic choice: work for the state or go 
back to the farm. 
One could hardly ask for a clearer example of a "socialism" that appears to 
have re-created some aspects of a tributary system. Chinese officials are once 
again supervising the production of silks for a remote purchaser, calling on 
home-taught skills and home-bred docility in local labor power, drawing value 
away from its region of production, and keeping a special dass of state employ-
ees bound to unrewarding jobs. The absence, even in big factories, of medical 
care, housing, and other services that socialist production by definition provides, 
results in worker flight and, almost certainly, to bad work in the factories them-
selves. 
China has a long tradition of hereditary production workers who made 
goods directly for court or government use (see Hucker 1961:31-33). Their con-
Re-creating the Tributary in China : 
261 
tribution to the economy as a whole cannot have been large or important ex-
cept in one way: among the goods they made were China's finest products, the 
things China was most likely to export in trade and to present as countergifts 
for tribute brought from abroad. That there should have been significant tech-
nical and organizational continuities in such products is unsurprising. That ex-
pectations deriving from tributary-state production should have carried over 
into the organization of socialist factories was more than likely. For silks, for 
many other textiles, for lacquerware, for porcelain, for metalwork associated 
with arms production, for salt making and horse raising and a multitude of 
other imperial products, models existed in which whole regions of the country 
were geared to supplying state demands for materials and labor. Social scien-
tists should hasten to explore the continuities that may exist with present re-
gional cultures. 
NONPRODUCTION STATE EMPLOYMENT 
Although in past and present Chinas, some people worked directly for the 
state in production, the extraction of tribute from the population as a whole de-
pended on an entirely different set of state employees. These were the officials 
themselves and the underlings who make officials efficacious. The late-imperial 
government has been admired for conducting its business with a relatively mod-
est number of officials -
only one local magistrate per 1oo,ooo people in 1749, 
up to 250,000 in 1819 (Hsiao Kung-chuang 1960:5). Subordinates were another 
matter: they swarmed, with doubtless dozens for each official in a strict sense. In 
Qing-dynasty Hankou, two submagistrates (xunjian) had yamen staffs of armed 
guards and over a hundred civil functionaries, for example, while there may 
have been thousands of subbureaucratic functionaries- yamen-runners" et al. 
-in Hankou government offices (Rowe 1984:33, 36). In 1612, Fujian's Xinghua 
prefecture had eight civilian and nine military officials (plus four county civil-
ian officials) -but 565 low-ranking employees such as policemen and horse-
men (Vermeer et al. 1990b:156). The pattern persists- in 1979, the number of 
state workers and staff not including industrial workers accounted for 17 percent 
of the labor force, although they had been only one percent in 1952 (World Bank 
1983:395). 
The imperial network of inns for official travelers described in Chapter 2 has 
been replicated and expanded by the present government. Its operation offers 
many insights into the advantages of state employment. During fieldwork in 
Sichuan and Fujian provinces in the late 1980s and early 1990s, I have stayed in 
many county- and township-level government guesthouses. Drivers' road atlases 
indicate them all, for in many parts of the country they are the only form of pub-
lic accommodation. They exist for the convenience of those who travel on official 
business; Chinese government could hardly continue without them. They have a 
262 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
centripetal energy, absorbing more and more residents, including substantial 
colonies of staff and their families, and attracting clusters of service providers for 
those who visit these latter-day yam ens. Often grandly overbuilt, they contain fa-
cilities their users could not afford on private means. They are used as recre-
ational perks by anyone who can scrape acquaintance with officialdom. Food is 
often excellent and abundant (as well as extremely cheap) in the dining rooms of 
such hostelries. To live in one for a week or two reveals that the number of meals 
served greatly outnumbers the number of staff and registered guests: the extra 
eaters are relatives and cronies. The guesthouse for Nanjing County, Fujian, has 
six hundred beds, only fifty to sixty of which are ever in use, according to the 
cleaners. In such places, a visiting foreigner may well find herself displacing from 
one of the better rooms a middle-aged cadre on holiday with a young woman 
who is clearly not his daughter. 
Such centers of local government, including schools, party work units, and 
other public-service organizations (postal, transportation, sanitation, engineer-
ing, etc.), employ huge numbers of people. For an American accustomed to the 
cash nexus in which we live our lives, they are a daily education in the quality and 
nature of tributary life. A worker is housed, furnished, fed, transported, supplied 
with work materials, and given treats (theater tickets, a share in the work unit's 
windfall truckload of apples), according to status in the hierarchy. One is also 
paid, though not much. Money is part of the distribution of useful items sup-
plied by the work unit -
but the money, however carefully managed, cannot be 
freely used to alter the housing, food, and so on. which are one's lot. Wages go for 
clothing, some foods eaten at home, savings, and a wide range of miscellaneous 
expenses. To choose to spend money on a benefit that is normally supplied -
such as housing -
is nearly impossible. This is not only because living space is 
hard (not impossible) to build, buy, or rent. To move out of legitimately appor-
tioned work-unit housing, however, is a bit like moving out of the parental 
home. There is a room, one is supposed to live in it, it costs money to do other-
wise. If you move out, what are you up to? The housing allotment is part of your 
earnings. Are you going to throw that away? Why separate yourself from your 
economic, political, and social base? Don't you like your fellow workers? Are you 
hiding something? The combination of unnecessary wastefulness and deliber-
ately sought isolation would draw invidious attention. Take the housing appro-
priate to your status: money matters less than position. 
In state employment, one accepts what is given and makes one's attachment to 
the unit conspicuous. People with nothing to do there report to their units every 
workday, whiling away the hours in sleep, newspaper reading, gossip, or silent tea 
drinking. Perhaps there is no electricity, so they are unable to run their machines. Or 
the raw materials have not arrived, or there are already warehouses full of whatever 
product the factory manufactures, or they are massively overstaffed, or the task for 
which the unit was originally organized has been rendered obsolete. Perhaps a po-
Re-creating the Tributary in China 
: 
263 
litical campaign, here or elsewhere, means that work is disrupted. Except under ex-
treme conditions, go to work anyway, drink tea, and try to find out what is going on. 
People who hold such positions must appear regularly at their units, but they 
need not do much else. They are attendants on their superiors, waiting to re-
spond to direct orders from above, rather than self-motivated pursuers of clearly 
defined goals. The incredible lethargy of "workers" in Chinese state work units 
(department stores, post offices, government bureaus, and state factories) is diffi-
cult to exaggerate and extremely annoying to foreigners and Chinese alike. The 
near-failure of state production enterprises is, quite rightly, often attributed to 
the appalling irresponsibility and unresponsiveness of their employees, and these 
facts are used to deny that socialism can possibly work. 
Why are Chinese state workers so lazy when, working in household businesses, 
Chinese will labor unremittingly? The obvious answer is that in a large, complex 
organization where they are guaranteed wages, whether they work or not makes 
no difference to the rewards they receive; working for themselves, they keep all 
they earn. Household labor is less alienated than that performed in huge corpora-
tions. There is a great deal of truth in this answer. It is certainly the answer gener-
ally given by Chinese people themselves. But there is more to the problem. The 
student of Chinese languages learns quickly that Chinese do not, as English speak-
ers do, terminologically merge administrative activity in the office, study, cleaning 
the house, and laying brick under a single verb translatable as "work." Various 
form of manual work are gong, as in kugong, heavy labor such as cart pulling. The 
university teacher, administrator, clerical worker, or post-office employee shang-
ban- "ascends [to the place of] management"; the bookworker du shu-
"memorizes books" or yanjiu -
"researches." Children, engaged in the drudgery 
of memorizing thousands of characters, come closer to sounding like workers -
they zuo gongke -
"do work lessons," though this appears to be a locution that 
emerged with public education. It is graceless to ask an office worker or teacher 
where she "performs labor"; one asks in what unit the person "serves" (fuwu)-
or, simply, to what work unit she is attached. In Chinese language, as in Chinese 
life, types of employment are necessarily separated between into the manual, gong, 
categories and the mental, office-ascending, book-studying sorts. These latter jobs 
were done almost exclusively in late-imperial China and in economically undevel-
oped Taiwan- and are done in the present-day People's Republic of China- by 
those who are either employed by the state or in training to be so. 
These are more than verbal niceties; the lack of appropriate language in En-
glish goes to the heart of the absence in Western life of comparable relations ex-
cept in military life. Those who serve the state hold positions that many others 
envy, for obvious reasons. People save, study, and struggle to pass the narrow 
gates of admittance to such service. There have always been Chinese who, recog-
nizing the risks of office, have declined them, but to do so was never easy. Chinese 
(and Taiwanese) are sometimes extremely anxious when they sense an impend-
264 
: 
C H 
I N A ' S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
ing job transfer they will be unable to refuse. Tributary servants "tremble and 
obey"; there are no alternative employers for state functionaries, and their loyalty 
is more fundamental than their ability. 
Through the 1980s, as private production became more common, millions of 
Chinese sought employment outside the state sector. In my experience, people 
generally made this leap only when their state job became extremely ill rewarded 
and/or likely to be terminated. Good jobs in the state sector are still prizes, ideal 
combinations of high security and low work demand. Many Euro-Americans feel 
distaste, even outrage, at the work habits of east Asian petty capitalists, who are 
willing to live behind their businesses, stay open sixteen hours a day, and have 
their children look after customers in between math problems. We would not 
work in this way; a proper job would not make such inhuman demands. Gov-
ernment workers in the People's Republic of China (and in Taiwan), often hold 
similar sentiments toward fast-paced workplaces. One serves in government 
rather than work hard all day. The state is not a producer but an extractor from 
producers, and a distributor to its loyal servants. As long as the reality resembles 
this simple model, sentiment and work-related expectations will do likewise. 
Extracting value from producers is the shining goal of a newly appointed 
rural official in a satiric short story by Freeman J. Wong. The cadre has drunk so 
much at his own promotion party that he speaks his mind, describing a rela-
tionship with the people he now governs: 'Tm very happy today. This is the first 
time I really realize the importance of you, the common people. You are all my 
property. You belong to me. Without you, my power is not real power and I my-
self am not like myself" (1990:12). Chinese commoners use this terminology as 
well: they "belong to" particular administrative levels and thus to the men who 
head them. The quality and quantity of their roads, their schools, their indus-
trial products, their foodstuffs are determined, in large part, by their commu-
nity's situation in the hierarchy, and by the nature of the men to whom they 
"belong." The fictional cadre is happy in this moment of becoming an official, 
whose power depends on his control over others. Like officials I have encoun-
tered, however, he may find that maintaining control of other human beings is 
more difficult than it appears. He will remember, too, on the morning after, that 
he also "belongs" to someone. When I translated the old saw "I am His Majesty's 
dog at Kew; pray tell me, sir, whose dog are you?" for a funny and sensible 
county head, he saw the point at once. 
CLASS POLITICS IN THE 1980s 
The class politics of the 1980s were acted out in Tiananmen during the spring 
of 1989, when multitudes of intellectuals, some workers, and a good proportion 
of the Beijing citizenry first demonstrated for freedom and democracy and were 
then violently repressed by the military arm of officialdom.6 
Re-creating the Tributary in China 
265 
China's leaders turned to these control measures principally, I believe, to main-
tain the political-economic domination over petty capitalism which has been a 
major preoccupation of Chinese ruling classes since the Song. The inherent ten-
dency of capitalist-like relations of production to generate "social disorder" or 
"freedom" (depending on where you stand) is well known to Chinese statecraft. 
Late-imperial rulers and some post 1949leaders have emphasized the negative, so-
cial disorder aspect -
luan, chaos -
rather than the positive "freedom" aspect 
stressed by liberal traditions. But the phenomenon is the same. Through the 
screen of Western journalism, people outside China saw the 1989 spring protests 
throughout China as motivated primarily by liberal values deriving from Euro-
American experiences with capitalism and resistance to it. In part, assuredly, the 
protests were "liberal." This does not mean, however, that the protesters them-
selves were demanding freedom for petty capitalists as a class of actually existing 
people; petty capitalism commoditizes and delegitimizes the "legitimate" person-
alism of the tributary system. Protesters spoke against corruption, called for the 
restoration or creation of a clear distinction between state/public resources and 
household/private resources. They objected to the gobbling up by well-placed 
leaders' households of the best bits of the collective economy, demanding the rec-
tification or elimination of transfers between the socialist mode -
which thus 
loses its socialist character -
and the petty-capitalist mode -
in which the 
familism of even large enterprises links officials' children and street hawkers in a 
common universe of (im)morality and (mal)practice. Capitalism proper, as prac-
ticed in China by international corporate capitalists, was not a serious issue, either 
pro or con. Feudalism was. 
For the students who initiated the protests, and for the Beijing people who 
overwhelmingly depended on the state payroll, much of the energy for collective 
action came from their anxiety about their own economic futures. How would a 
student from Beijing University, China's finest, have a job of the sort she thought 
she deserved if the leadership kept giving all the best companies to their "sons 
and younger brothers;' as well as to their sisters and their cousins and their aunts? 
The "freedom" to criticize leaders was woven into the need to preserve a socialist 
mode from corrupt transfers at the top. Student and other participants acted 
heroically, but we should be clear about their goals and the political economic 
conditions that inspired them to risk their lives. 
What brought out the rest of the millions who demonstrated in those weeks? 
In Beijing, students were supported first by other government workers -
those 
from communications agencies, medical people, teachers, police, state factory 
hands, and by those whom inept socialism has failed: the unemployed. Many of 
these, hustling scanty and sometimes illegal livelihoods, were the "hooligans" 
who took most of the punishment for protest. Such people marched in such 
6. Some of this material is included in Gates 1991b. 
266: CHINA's 
MOTOR 
cities as Chengdu as well, filling its broad main avenues with what must have 
been hundreds of thousands of people. 
An enormous proportion of people work for the state in such capitals as Bei-
jing, Chengdu, and Xian, where major demonstrations parallelled those of Bei-
jing. Inevitably, protest aimed at economic and political justice for this class will 
involve such people. In the highly commercialized city of Xiamen/ by contrast, 
the students marched, but they marched alone. Fuzhou, the provincial capital of 
Fujian, has many state workers. Their wider interests, however, lie with the com-
merce that dominates the provincial economy. Student protests there peaked on 
16 May, receiving virtually no support outside the narrow circle of intellectuals 
(Erbaugh and Kraus 1989:5, 13). Business people in Chengdu whom I interviewed 
in the fall of 1989 saw the whole event as quite irrelevant to their class interests. 
In Beijing, eleven members of the "Flying Tiger Brigade;' a group of motorcy-
clists composed mainly of private businessmen who had served as couriers for 
the student protesters, were arrested as a subversive "motorcycle gang" on 30 May 
(Amnesty International1989:86). It has been suggested that the economic crack-
down of fall1989 "was designed primarily to punish the owners of restaurants 
and other small private enterprises in the capital that had offered material assis-
tance to demonstrators" (Yale-in-China Association 1989:6). But this assistance 
seems unusual rather than characteristic of petty-capitalist response. Beijingers 
from many class positions helped the Tiananmen protesters with food, water, 
shelter, and in other ways as the protest in that city engulfed nearly the entire 
population by late May. Some of them at least did so very much as Beijingers, ac-
cording to one foreigner with extensive Beijing contacts.8 Observers' lists of par-
ticipating class-identifiable groups often show broad class support, even 
including members of the military and security organs, but never include "shop-
keepers" or "petty traders" or any such designation (e.g., Delfs 1989; do Rosario 
1989). A rare reference to the participation of peddlers simply points out the 
poverty of some student protesters, keeping themselves in school at Fudan Uni-
versity in Shanghai by selling used books, old clothing, and cheap jewelry on 
campus (S. R. Chen 1989:8). 
Petty-capitalist participation in the uprising appears to have been insignificant 
in Chengdu, where I was best able to take the pulse of popular response. Petty-cap-
italist households kept their heads low, partly because they were not effectively or-
ganized, but primarily because the attacks on corruption smelled faintly like an 
attack on them. At the same time, the "People's Market" that was burned was a state 
7- I conducted interviews on another topic in Xiamen for three weeks in November-December 
1989 and was thus able to explore some of the effects of the May-June events on local people. 
8. JohnS. Rohsenow, in Beijing during the protests, emphasizes the sense of outrage that Beijing's 
sophisticated laobaixing felt that outsiders -
such as the army -
should attempt to play a role in 
their city (personal communication, 31 July 1989 ). 
Re-creating the Tributary in China 
267 
department store; the many private shops nearby were left untouched. The few 
petty capitalists who would discuss the class aspect with me resented most the tax 
and other transfers made from their private pockets to -
or at least in the name of 
-
the public purse. Students and state workers, by contrast, criticized state func-
tionaries mostly for transferring public resources illicitly to private hands. They saw 
a great many private entrepreneurs, large and small, as the beneficiaries of such 
transfers. "Honest" business people were acceptable by society, but those receiving 
illegitimate assistance from the state sector should take warning. 
In the dramatic but characteristic events of Tiananmen, we see a Chinese pop-
ular politics in which petty capitalists played the extremely marginal role they 
still have in political life. Capitalism is a side issue. The debates are about the state 
mode: socialist or feudal? 
TAIWAN VERSUS THE PEOPLE's REPUBLIC OF CHINA 
Taiwan, by any standards, has a more successful economy than has China. Part 
of this success is due to the heritage of construction and legality left by the Japa-
nese in Taiwan, and of destruction and social chaos left in China by the U.S.-
aided GMD on the mainland. In any comparison between the two Chinese 
systems, it is only fair to recognize that by 1945 Taiwan, with all its war damage, 
was far in advance of continental China as a whole. Their trajectories since 1949 
have amplified Taiwan's advantage. The popular and often the academic conclu-
sions drawn from this fact are that capitalism has made Taiwan wealthy, while so-
cialism has impoverished China. Many assume that the two economies operate 
very differently, on entirely separate principles. 
As this and the previous chapters perhaps have made clear, I disagree. Both 
Chinese ruling classes operate large state-production sectors that give them sub-
stantial economic autonomy from their tax base, especially from their agricul-
tural tax base. The quality of rural life does not, therefore, have much direct effect 
on the operation of government. Taiwan's government, after its initial and, I 
think, highly self-interested land reform, has done little to improve life for rural 
Taiwanese; the government of the People's Republic of China has done a great 
deal, relative to resources, when it did not have to. But at the end of the day, agri-
culture and the rural folk who practice it are not central to either system, despite 
pieties about the peasant as foundation of the nation. 
In any industrializing region that hopes to remain free of the domination of 
multinational capital, state production must take an active role. In China, these 
industries have been saddled from their inception by feudal holdovers; the same 
was true in Taiwan until the mid 1960s. Thereafter in Taiwan they have had the 
advantages and disadvantages of uneasy alliance with world capitalism, a risky 
undertaking that China began only in the 1980s. In Taiwan, the insertion of a 
substantial role for foreign private capitalism has not resulted in dependency or 
268 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
in an extraordinary degree of exploitation of local workers -
although many 
work too much for too little in bad conditions. The real dependency of unequal 
exchange has been averted; Taiwan runs a positive trade balance with the United 
States. It has been averted because Taiwan's rulers, with their class industrial fiefs 
up and running, remain independent of both capitalists and their own people. It 
has been averted too because capitalists must compete in Taiwan with shoals of 
fast-moving, opportunistic, hard-working petty capitalists who absorb profits 
that in Colombia or Bangladesh would go to the multinationals. 
In China, rulers have been slow to risk loosing capitalists and petty capitalists 
to compete, even while setting the terms of their encounters. Does their reluc-
tance stem from their commitment to socialism, or does it signify the choice of a 
Confucian grandfather who prefers his money safe behind a loose brick in the 
wall? Do Chinese rulers think (as I do) that their hold on local activities is so 
weak that petty capitalism would overwhelm them if the door were opened a 
crack? It certainly felt weak in the reform decade of the 1980s, when tributary 
anxieties reached the boiling point at Tiananmen. The reassertion of central con-
trols which has emerged in the mid 1990s suggests a defensive return to tributary 
policies. 
The political economies of Taiwan and China do not differ greatly in their 
economic logics. Those logics grow out of encounters between tributary and 
petty-capitalist choices, each of which implies the possibilities of the other and 
thus reproduces not only itself, but the idea of its opposite, whenever someone 
acts. Westerners are apt to see capitalism as either the Good or Bad Fairy of the 
piece -but always coherent and tremendously powerful. From the Chinese per-
spective, capitalism is a set of random opportunities to be seized by tributary or 
petty-capitalist players for their own ends. The Chinese may be wrong about this; 
the capitalist mode of production may be an epochal juggernaut that mows down 
feudal and petty-bourgeois alternatives. But it has not done so in the east Asian 
world yet. 
Re-creating the Tributary in China 
269 
Conclusions 
When I was young my nursemaid spoke ... : 
The nursemaids over there have it very easy 
after a big feast, there are never any messy dishes to clean up 
At daybreak, they need but lightly wave a piece 
Of magic black-colored cloth 
And everything will return to its original place 
Nursemaid! May I go see if this is true? 
-
Chang Shiang-hua, "The Drunkard;' 1986 
The Chinese social formation, "Chinese culture" in the broadest 
reading of that term, takes its primary structure and dynamics from the interplay 
of the tributary and petty-capitalist modes of production, as outlined in these 
pages. I have offered interpretations oflate-imperial political economy, regional-
ization, kinship and gender, and folk ideologies as well as brief analyses of the 
ways in which this past informs present Chinese societies. 
The relationship between China's two modes of production shows important 
continuity of structure maintained through historical-materialist process. Some-
times as members of fairly self-conscious classes, and sometimes simply as per-
sons choosing among household alternatives, people acted in accordance with 
two different and cohesive sets of material and ideological possibilities. Some-
times TMP-compatible behavior has nearly swamped behavior of the PCMP, and 
vice versa. In this book, I do not attempt to explain why these shifts occurred, al-
though that may be the most important question that can be asked of Chinese 
history. Almost certainly there is no single answer; we must examine the histori-
cal particulars without abandoning the search for structural regularities. Shifts in 
relative weighting of petty-capitalist versus tributary choices are partially ex-
plained, however, by the lack of fit between the two modes, by the contradictory 
impulses to action engendered by people who had come to see two distinct vi-
270 
sions of the good life. Here, I content myself with outlining what I think was 
going on and, to a lesser extent, how it occurred. 
Essential to the argument is the idea of competition between the two modes of 
production -
a competition not of reified abstractions that, of course, cannot 
act, but of competition between officials and owner-operators, women and men; 
within minds, among actions. Since the Song, this competition -
this struggle 
-
has motivated a great deal of Chinese culture, giving it the shape in which it 
encountered the capitalist mode of production. This struggle is culturally recog-
nized, I think, by the Chinese preoccupation with the suppression of unorthodox 
thought, political dissent, and family dissension. In the settlement of conflict, 
harmony, that great cultural shibboleth, is rarely achieved -
repression or self-
sacrifice are more familiar outcomes. This vision of unresolvable struggle is re-
constructed at each generation not because Chinese behavior is an acting out of 
ideas in conflict, but because people are constantly obliged to distribute limited 
resources to often incompatible but legitimate ends: tribute versus investment, 
honorific maintenance of the old or the dead versus the nurture of the young, 
dowry versus brideprice, and so forth. 
The secular trend of Chinese life since the early Song has seen both modes 
grow in sophistication and complexity, developing ever-more-elaborate insti-
tutional mechanisms for their mutual encounters, expanding the range of 
skills a Chinese person needs to survive. We may see this in certain aspects of 
the Chinese state and of Chinese business practice, and in the highly mystified 
institutions that link the two modes into a single social formation, and hence 
are quintessentially Chinese. Kinship and gender are key among them, as is 
folk religion. 
Especially since the Song, rulers developed a wide repertory of ideology and 
action to maintain a tributary economy and to limit competing petty-capitalist 
thought and deed. That repertory included: the magnificent stroke of coopting 
moneyed talent through the examination system, using what are fundamentally 
market mechanisms; a wide range of effective administrative and military tech-
niques; detection of dissent by secret police and informers; the penetration of do-
mestic life through making agnates partners in indissoluble patricorporations 
and making men responsible for female kin; and the appropriation and recon-
textualizing of folk deities and celebrations. Contemporary historical opinion 
does not judge the Chinese state as much by its late-Qing collapse as by its over-
all tendency from the Song on to gain strength and sophistication. The capacity 
of an imperial court and a class of scholar-officials to discipline and extract rev-
enue from their huge territories, to move toward longer periods of dynastic sta-
bility, to penetrate popular life with the vision of tributary personal relationships 
and with the imagery of a hierarchical, bureaucratic cosmos: these stand as com-
pelling evidence for the strength of the tributary mode. The persistence into late-
twentieth-century industrial times of Chinese states in which tributary circuits 
Conclusions : 
271 
still dominate and regulate those of commerce in the interests of bureaucratic 
ruling classes is evidence of a more immediate kind. 
Petty capitalism too developed its repertory, showing increasing sophistica-
tion and power over time. We see a long shift toward capitalist-like relations of 
production combined with the familistic ones its encompassment within the 
TMP required. Men made use of the inescapable patrilineal core of official kin-
ship to forge lineage organizations that functioned as accumulating and invest-
ing corporations. At the same time, people following petty-capitalist logic 
ignored or reinterpreted kin obligations in social matters in which tributary in-
terests were weak, such as the treatment of female kin. The array of business 
practices developed by petty capitalists is second to none in achieving the goal 
of expansion of wealth combined with protection against a predatory ruling 
class. 
The issue of the secular trend in the struggle between these emerging forces 
can be focused most clearly by a consideration of who held hegemony. The his-
torical trend seems relatively clear. The Song was an era in which powerful fami-
lies with commercial interests allied themselves with a strong military to build a 
government that encouraged social mobility and fostered private production and 
free labor. These tendencies were not seriously curbed by the Mongol invasion; 
the Yuan, it seems, did not fully absorb the complexity of the TMP or object to 
the counterhegemonic commercialism that flourished during their relatively 
brief rule. But forces were building to reassert the TMP pattern in which wealth 
would flow to rulers rather than to their subjects. The Ming reorganization of 
taxation, their refinement of the bureaucracy, and their increased attention to 
achieving ideological hegemony led directly to the Qing state. According to Susan 
Naquin and Evelyn Rawski, "The long-term trend in Chinese history toward cen-
tralization of state power was continued and advanced under strong interven-
tionist early Qing rulers" (1987:10). 
Much action by the ruling class, often most marked at the beginning of dy-
nasties, was aimed at regaining control over the economy and at channeling re-
sources into military, hydraulic, administrative, and ideological mechanisms to 
ensure their success in doing so. Such action had two consequences: initially, less 
wealth remained in private hands to evolve into capital. This was, I think, both a 
desired and an intended consequence. Chinese rulers, even those favorable to 
commerce, did not want the country run by rich merchants, whose power would 
have unseated them and been ideologically outrageous to boot. But the second 
consequence, as Naquin and Rawski have wisely noted, is that ruling-class con-
struction in favor of creating productive agriculture and smooth mechanisms for 
extracting tribute from it also favored the development of commodity produc-
tion (1987:21-27). This is true both because merchants also needed roads and 
canals and -
perhaps more important -
because strong demands for tribute, 
and the power to enforce those demands, triggered intensification of production, 
272 
: 
C H 
I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
population growth, seasonal labor surpluses, income-earning sideline produc-
tion, and folk ideologies that glorified privatization as popular resistance. 
A successful reestablishment of a powerful TMP may lead to more economic 
success than the TMP is quite prepared to cope with. Powerful tributary extrac-
tion constantly reproduces the social conditions under which people will pro-
duce for market out of desperation; commoners invent material and ideological 
means to resist the flow of all surplus to their rulers. Clever petty capitalists find 
ways to keep and expand wealth, and occasional episodes of tributary weakness 
lead to new power centers. Serious problems for petty-capitalist production 
emerge because of the economic irrationality of the market in its uses of collec-
tive resources (water, soils, forest reserves, etc.). Many people become discour-
aged by the overextension of the political-economic free-for-all that petty 
capitalism engenders. A political clique with a new control gimmick (including 
the persuasive use of ideology), or with a military base outside of China proper, 
may thus find it possible to rearticulate the organizational mechanisms and 
moral core of tributary society in such a way as to find willing listeners. A refur-
bished TMP once again begins to build the infrastructure for more prosperity 
than it will know what to do with. When prosperous times come, the petty-capi-
talist moral imperative not merely to maintain but to aggrandize the household 
will also find willing listeners. 
The organizational structures of each mode have grown stronger with each turn 
of the screw. Petty-capitalist action not only forces stronger control mechanisms 
from the TMP for maintenance, it forces accommodation within the tributary state 
to market mechanisms: competition in the recruitment of scholar-officials, the 
ever-increasing use of money rather than labor and simple commodities as pay-
ment of taxes, shifts away from hereditary work in state production centers, the use 
of state-licensed merchants for the production and distribution of such profitable 
commodities as salt. Petty capitalists shelter under the tributary umbrella of kin-
ship and evade official control with the border-jumping mechanisms used by cap-
italist multinational corporations. The most successful merchants move part of 
their operations out of the country entirely, as the Fujianese did, avoiding taxes and 
government interference generally. Failing that, they use the advantages of long-
distance trade and other forms of sojourning in places remote from their home 
base. And, like the ordinary, local petty-capitalist farmer or textile maker, they 
make the family their fortress. 
Petty capitalism was an expanding irritant to, a cause of focused response in, 
the ruling class: it was the motor of China's modern history. But I do not think it 
can be argued that petty capitalism has ever gained hegemony in China. Its ac-
tions are evasive; it is pinned securely to a model of kinship compatible with trib-
utary goals. Perhaps most important, it has developed only the sketchiest vision 
of a political alternative. The secular trend of late-imperial China has been one of 
struggle extraordinarily productive for its powerful rulers and horrendously 
Conclusions : 
273 
wasteful for its common people. Its persistence since the 1949 revolution still 
shapes choices today in China and Taiwan. While carefully controlled alliance 
with world capitalism has made petty capitalism the key to development in Tai-
wan, China shows greater continuities with its past. Now as then, the byproducts 
of the struggle between its modes of production have been technological stasis, 
population growth, and dramatically involuted social relations. This is a very 
long way from what Marx appears, on the surface, to have meant by the Asiatic 
mode of production. But perhaps it is not such a long way after all. 
Does my specialized use of the term "petty capitalism" further our under-
standing of Chinese societies? When we take a mode of production to be a system 
of economic and social reproduction which shapes both material and cultural 
life, I think it does. A "petty-capitalist mode of production" recognizes and orga-
nizes an essential aspect of Chinese political economy and cultural experience 
and relates it to more obvious, more ideologically emphatic, aspects of Chinese-
ness, summarized as a tributary mode. The concept of petty capitalism as a co-
herent and oppositional set of behaviors and mentalities clarifies many of the 
daily choices ordinary Chinese people make. Condensing and describing what is 
most important about Chinese culture is made simpler with such an analytical 
tool. 
The concept helps too to advance our theoretical understanding of society in 
general. The debate about the nature of east Asian political economies focuses on 
two questions: Did these peoples develop a kind of capitalism? If so, what was and 
is its nature? It is reasonable to argue (as do most who engage in this argument) 
that big private industry in Taiwan, for example, is simply a capitalism with Chi-
nese characteristics. It is also possible to argue, as I have here, that Taiwan's big, in-
digenous, private firms are a part of a private-producer mode which is still 
dominated by tributary hegemony. Their owner/managers are thus the upper 
petty-capitalist class in a class system in which petty capitalism defines only the 
non tributary side of the economy. I subsume these tycoons under the label "petty 
capitalist" not to dispute their size or significance but to avoid a conceptual error. 
It is clear that Taiwan's (and Singapore's, and Hong Kong's, and Korea's, per-
haps Japan's) and certainly some of China's large firms meet definitions of capi-
talism based on relations of production and ownership of the more obvious 
means of production. This "capitalism" converges with that of the West and is in-
timately engaged with the Western capitalist mode of production in its daily op-
erations. It is also true that Western capitalism has passed through phases in 
which owner-managers developed large but still recognizably "family" firms, in 
which the claims of kinship placed some limitations on the movement of capital. 
Between east Asian and Western capitalisms there are large areas of overlap; for 
many analysts, those overlaps authenticate large, contemporary, private, Chinese 
enterprises as capitalist. From those who take this position, I ask a fuller explica-
tion of the role of the state as owner and employer, and of the kinship/ gender and 
274 
: 
C H I N A 
S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
class relations of that most characteristic petty-capitalist class, owner-operator 
household firms. 
My guess is that the convergence some analysts see between Chinese and capi-
talist political economies is temporary. The large and important internal Chinese 
markets have significantly different political contexts in which state and kinship 
are especially salient. In consequence, they are likely to travel in the future, as they 
have in the past, different trajectories. This is not because "culture" in some ideal-
ist or elitist sense steers their motion with dead hands. It is rather because the 
inner motion of each differs. The "laws of motion" of the capitalist mode of pro-
duction as they were specified by Marx assumed European-like state, kinship, and 
cultural environments. The economic aspects of those environments were left out 
of his equations. The motion of the PCMP depends on other environments, 
which east Asians continue to reproduce. In Chinese societies especially, large, 
powerful state sectors exist; the talented and the opportunist are drawn to find 
niches in them, and to perpetuate them; by doing so, human beings gain the 
power to continue to restrain and direct the motion of petty capitalists. They, in 
their turn, by being productive, evading taxes, staying small, fearing officials, and 
eschewing political action, perpetuate the gulf between themselves and power 
which helps reproduce both themselves and their tributary opposites. 
My interpretation has the advantage of Occam's razor. Although it is sensitive 
to the particularities of both China's past and present, it is constructed of ele-
ments drawn from and compatible with twentieth-century historical material-
ism. It aims both at elucidating Chinese culture, thus making it more readily 
comparable with other cultures, and at expanding through concrete example the 
reach of the idea of a mode of production to encompass, as Marx and Engels 
clearly intended it should, relations of kinship, of gender, of popular ideology. 
This book remains a sketch, suggesting a number of lines of inquiry which 
may link Chinese culture with others of the same kind and may define more 
clearly the outlines of capitalism proper. Although capitalism has not yet overrun 
all world cultures, it has had profound effects on ecology, population dynamics, 
economy, politics, gender and kinship, and the way people envision their world 
for an astonishing proportion of the globe's population. Experiments in social-
ism deriving from the former Soviet Union have failed to find the genuinely new 
forms that might have fended off capitalist pressures by creating egalitarian 
abundance. Since the astonishing political events of 1989, capitalism has had no 
real rival on this earth. For all that a century and a half of socialist thought has 
taught about the tremendous human costs of running the world on capitalist 
principles, we have as yet invented no way of escaping its limitations and creating 
a more humane political economy. It is immensely important that we continue to 
be conscious of the patterns and processes of capitalism lest we begin to take 
them for granted as natural, inevitable, and permanent. Marx's demystification 
of those patterns and processes remains Marxism's most valuable legacy. 
Conclusions : 
275 
Throughout the period of capitalist expansion, China has proved extremely 
resistant to takeover of its political economy by capitalist relations of production 
and the liberal politics that have historically accompanied them in the West. The 
east Asian polities of Japan, Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore, and Hong Kong all 
have powerful state modes of production which have used considerable force to 
engineer capitalist cooperation with and subordination to their national goals. In 
all these, with few and relatively short-term exceptions, indigenous petty-capital-
ist firms (some admittedly large) have come to outcompete foreign corporate 
capitalists in production and in the extraction of surplus value from their own 
working classes. Capitalism proper simply does not play the same role in these 
societies as it does elsewhere; it has less power. 
It may be argued that this is a phase in the development of worldwide capital-
ism, that east Asians will outgrow their state-heavy, petty-capitalist-supported 
economies and look more "normal" as capital's accumulative force gains strength. 
Until the 1970s, such an argument would have been as good a guess at the future 
as any, and better than most. Since the emergence of east Asian economies as the 
main moving force in the world economy, we must think again. East Asia is be-
coming Number One not because its social formations are becoming more capi-
talist but because the dynamic of a tributary mode that has captured a 
petty-capitalist one is geared up yet further by the capture of capitalism. East 
Asian leaders clearly intend that the state, with its essential tributary resource base, 
shall retain hegemony. The violent confrontation at Tiananmen in 1989 between 
students critical of illegitimate operation of the state mode and China's leaders 
benefiting from that operation is only the latest example of the privileged status of 
the hegemonic mode in east Asia. 
Perhaps those east Asians whose interests are served by capitalism can over-
throw their absolutist states and establish something more than the superficial 
democracy of Japan, Taiwan, Singapore, and South Korea. But to do so, they 
must confront not only the state apparatus but petty capitalists as a class. East 
Asian petty capitalists owe much of their existence to kinship forms that enable 
very considerable exploitation of juniors by seniors and females by males. In an 
energetic labor market, patriarchal power erodes easily unless backed by the state. 
In China's Song-and-later social contract, however, heads of legitimately consti-
tuted households accept limitations on accumulation in return for hegemonic 
help in keeping their domestic labor supply in line; scholar-officials allowed the 
masses to truck, barter, and exchange for profit, in return for popular absorption 
of patrilineal kinship and feudal philosophy. The alliance is very strong, as Chi-
nese women found after the revolution and as Chinese young people find when-
ever they question the TMP hierarchy too publicly. 
I predict that, in the foreseeable future, difficulties in establishing free-wheel-
ing corporate capitalism in China will persist; Japan, as it consolidates a more 
complex position in the world economy, will not become more like the West ex-
276 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
cept in fashionable superficialities; east Asian states will always be on the verge of 
journalistically invented "breakthroughs to democracy" in their political form 
but will act with all necessary force to suppress real challenges to TMP centrality. 
Every once in a while, citizens will be run over by tanks to emphasize that point. 
Petty capitalists will muddle through, machining the bolts that go in the frame 
that fits on the car that drives to the house that Zhang built. If I am right, Marx-
ist scholars will need to revise their interpretations of what capitalism has been 
and of what it is likely to become. This book has been an attempt to begin this 
task without abandoning a powerful tool that does not happen to be a crystal 
ball. 
This interpretation of Chinese culture suggests other, more academic, prob-
lems and points toward their solution. As I hinted briefly in Chapter 2, the PCMP 
may be a lens through which to view three other of the enduring ancient class 
civilizations: those of the Indian subcontinent, of Islamic Afro-Asia, and of the 
non-Islamic Mediterranean. Prior to the expansion of capitalism as a world sys-
tem, Sub-Saharan Mrica, large parts of North and South America, and Oceania 
seem to have had the wisdom and good fortune to save themselves from com-
modity economies and extremes of inequality; the complex indigenous civiliza-
tions of Mexico and Peru have been too thoroughly disrupted by colonialism for 
one to analyze, though I judge that they too followed a different path and did not 
develop petty capitalism as I have defined it here. 
In India, in the core Islamic world, and in the European Mediterranean, how-
ever, we find civilizations where market economies too constrained to be called 
capitalist coexisted with other modes of production. In them, money capital, 
consumer goods, and persons were commoditized, though the key factors of pro-
duction, land and labor power, typically were not. In these worlds, we find tradi-
tions of strong states supported in gender and kinship relations, and in attitudes 
toward the market, by religious institutions. And we find (along with China) the 
world's extremes in the repression of women. Purdah and suttee, the veil, and 
virgin motherhood compare well with footbinding and Confucian death-before-
dishonor values in their extraordinary violence against women. 
This tripod -
extreme sexism, strong states, and extensive but not hege-
monic capitalist markets -
supports behaviors often strikingly similar to those 
of Chinese petty capitalism. The pattern cohered, persisted, and gave rise to more 
distinctive present-day consequences in east Asia, I believe, because it was in 
China that rulers most carefully aligned their interests with those of commoner 
men by inventing the forms of Chinese kinship. They then persistently adhered 
to a simple, administratively useful set of definitions and laws in regard to people 
and their property with the results I have described for gender, class, and state. A 
connection between the bonds of biology and the most critical of all cultural re-
lationships -
the ownership of means of production -
is a human common-
place, but in many societies people have some freedom to rewrite their kinship 
Conclusions : 277 
rules. In China, the state enforced their patrilineal core. In consequence, China 
has persisted more autonomously into the twentieth century in culture, in polity, 
and in political economy than any of the ancient states. Such a view of several of 
the world's major civilizations makes possible consistent and still holistic com-
parisons among them for a variety of intellectual purposes. 
Another direction from which to proceed in the implementation of the idea of 
a petty-capitalist mode of production is to apply it to the debates about petty 
commodity production past and present. As Ellen R. Judd so effectively outlines 
(1994:114-18), the term "petty commodity production" is generally used to dis-
tinguish production-for-exchange by household labor from petty capitalism, in 
which wage labor is employed. Because of the commoditization of women, this 
distinction is difficult to preserve in the Chinese case. There are three currents in 
the petty-production debate. One focuses on the proliferation of petty commod-
ity production in many present -day societies, the other on the role of this pattern 
in the origin of capitalism, and a third on the connections between household 
production and relations of kinship and gender. 
First, to what degree is petty commodity production a separate entity of some 
kind, and to what degree is it merely a disguised form of proletarianization? The 
Chinese case, I think it is now clear, suggests that east Asian and perhaps other 
forms of PCMP can be independent of capitalism (although necessarily depen-
dent on some other mode of production). The patterns of petty production inca-
pable of expanded reproduction so often described for the slums and markets of 
the capitalist-dominated third world bear only superficial resemblance to the 
Chinese PCMP and are probably best seen as proletarianization. 
The second debate inquires whether petty commodity production is a neces-
sary historical precursor to capitalism; whether it diverts economic actors away 
from "moving on" to capitalism; or whether the two are in fact independent, 
merely coincident. I would argue for the latter. Some private commodity pro-
duction existed in almost all precapitalist class societies; if petty commodity pro-
duction had tended to evolve into the capitalist mode regardless of context, 
surely it would have done so in China. But petty capitalism (capitalism too) ex-
ists only in historical context. What is distinctive about Europe is not petty pro-
duction but the absence of states powerful enough to bind property-holding 
unbreakably to kin groups. 
Third, those interested in petty commodity production increasingly explore 
the relations of production which are culturally presented as those of kinship. 
Much of the sinologicalliterature takes kinship as a given and assumes egalitar-
ian bonds of affect among kinfolk. This is clearly a weak assumption. While as 
humans we are doubtless biologically biased to form such bonds, the attach-
ments between parents and children, brothers and sisters, husbands and wives, 
are often disrupted or overridden by cultural practice. Kinship is not a given, but 
must be constructed. The Chinese kinship system is better seen as an ideological 
278 
: 
C H I N A ' S 
M 0 
T 0 
R 
precipitate of the interaction of a limited set of biological givens, of state attempts 
at administrative efficiency, and of the open-ended possibilities of the commod-
ity form. Markets sell the idea of commoditized social relations along with sur-
plus eggs and handicrafts, and where women and children are weakly positioned 
(by the state) to defend themselves against such commoditization, intimate ties 
are easily manipulated. Only where the power of the state and its tributary system 
over private capital are weak -
perhaps because they pay insufficient attention 
to the intimate life of the household -
will kinship cease to be the primary 
nexus for commodity production. 
In the study of petty production, the so-called domestic mode of production 
has received considerable attention. This tradition, which depends on the work 
of A. V Chayanov, has been influential and useful. It has sharp limitations, how-
ever, in that it encourages analysts to examine domestic production without 
questioning the consequences for households of their encapsulation in tributary 
systems or of the sharp inequalities inherent in their kinship- and gender-based 
relations of production. 
This book argues for careful examination of multiple modes of production in 
a given social formation. The progress made in anthropology since the 1950s is 
largely the result of our growing understanding of the significance for the peoples 
we have traditionally studied of an expansionary capitalism since the 1400s. 
Much work remains to be done on specifying and tracing out the dialectical in-
fluences of subordinate modes, of counterhegemonic economic logics, in virtu-
ally all of these societies -
including those of advanced capitalism and of the 
mid-century socialisms. Eric Hobsbawm, speaking of Britain, which in this cen-
tury has experimented with various combinations of state-managed and laissez-
faire economies, reminds us that "the main socialist discovery of the postwar era 
has been precisely that the social management of the economy can take other 
forms than total centralized planning under total public ownership. The socialist 
problem lies in finding the right combination [of public and private forces] to get 
economic and technical dynamism while maintaining equality and social justice" 
(1989:13). 
Most Chinese would agree. Born from the marriage between tributary and 
petty-capitalist modes of production, they are not likely soon to abandon their 
political-economic ancestors. Misled by deep and unexamined TMP assump-
tions, and thus deflected from the socialist road, the Chinese Communist party 
built institutions that emphasized some of the least productive and least progres-
sive elements of popular culture, instead of the inhering productivity, democracy, 
flexibility, and taste for autonomy which imbue ordinary Chinese with their cul-
tural character. Petty-capitalist politics is strong on resistance and weak on posi-
tive programs. How can this situation be strengthened? The only resources 
available, indigenously, in Chinese culture, are the organizational structures of 
petty-capitalist production. These include not only the household farm or fac-
Conclusions : 
279 
tory but the community temple and the popular ideology and morality of 
money. Antibureaucratic populism, protofeminism, and market egalitarianism 
have much to offer Chinese men and women today. 
The power of states to harm has been much underestimated by intellectuals in 
this century, a view that led to the appalling Leninist mistake that the state would 
be a people's best ally against capitalism. Tragically, we have wasted a century of 
socialist experiment on strengthening states instead of human-scale, popular, 
democratic entities, to control capitalism. We -
all of us -
have fruitlessly 
looked "over there" for magic solutions to our social messes. The Chinese PCMP 
does not generate all the organizations and ideology necessary to extricate the 
Chinese from their persisting problems. But it contains some of them and is, in 
any case, the cultural raw material from which their future must, inevitably, be 
forged. The effort to achieve social justice and a human social formation there 
will not succeed unless and until the Chinese take seriously their own popular 
traditions and the people who have struggled to create them. 
280 
C H 
I 
N 
A 
S 
M 
0 
T 0 
R 
Appendix: Dowry to Wedding-Cost Ratios 
]. Lossing Buck (1937) organized his data into categories based on 
the primary products, mostly foodgrains, characteristic of seven ecological areas. 
In my tables I have decomposed and reaggregated a part of his data, first choos-
ing six substantial geographical areas in which I anticipated that the strong and 
weak influences of TMP and PCMP would be clearly visible, drawing boundaries 
around these areas on Buck's Map 3 ("Localities in which studies of all kinds were 
made" [1937:3]) and including all cases witllin the boundaries in my calculations.' 
Buck gives no wedding and dowry data for some of the sites; the actual number 
of cases on which calculations are based is given as N in my Table A1. The num-
ber of Fujian cases is unfortunately small; those for Guangdong do not in fact 
represent the Pearl River delta well. 
Buck divided the farms in each area by size into eight categories. In my tables 
I have reduced the number of categories to four, by collapsing his "very small" 
and "small" as S, "medium" as M, "medium large" as ML, and "large", "very 
large", "very, very large," and "very, very, very large" as L; except in the North 
China Plain and Yangzi Valley, where a much higher proportion of the largest 
sizes of farm are found, "large" is given as L, and the various "very's" collapsed 
into a single VL category. 
Buck's Table 17, "Special expenditures for farms having the expenditure" 
(412-16), contains current Chinese-yuan figure entries for five kinds of ceremo-
nial expenditures, including "weddings" and "dowries:' "Weddings" refers to the 
cost of marrying a son; "dowries" to the cost of supplying the daughter with 
dowry. "Wedding" costs include a variety of expenditures. This money might 
have been spent solely on ceremonies (feasts for the groom's relatives, for exam-
ple); on ceremonies plus indirect dowry and/or brideprice kept by the bride's 
1. I label the areas: North China Plain (NCP; actually the eastern end of the plain): Buck's site 
numbers 70, 71,79-91, 95, 96, 98, 100, 101, 104, 106, 107, 108-11, 113, 114, u6, 117, 119; Yangzi Valley (YV; 
the lower valley, especially south of the river): Buck's site numbers 120, 122, 126, 131-37, 151-53, 158-62, 
164, 166, 167-69, 171-76, 178-95, 219, 220, 224, 225, 226; Fujian (F; coastal and trading Fujian): Buck's 
site numbers 197-99, 259-61; Sichuan (SC; the Chengdu Plain): Buck's site numbers 230, 234-38, 
240-55; Guangdong (GD; the Pearl River delta): Buck's site numbers 268,269,275-77,282, 283; north-
west China (NWC; Gansu and the nearby Qinghai trade corridor): Buck's site numbers 1-6, 16-19. 
Appendix : 
281 
parents; or on purchase alone. Because of this merging, it is not possible to de-
termine the relative proportions of dowry-heavy versus brideprice-heavy mar-
riages in any category as for the Wolf data. The bottom line here must remain a 
simple ratio of wedding costs to dowry costs. 
Buck's wedding and dowry figures are puzzling in a way that suggests that they 
substantially overrepresent the amount of dowry paid in Chinese marriage ex-
changes. As my Table 1 above (Chapter 7) based on Wolf's figures shows, mar-
riages transacted with no expense to the bride's family were fairly common; many 
girls received little or no dowry from their parents (though they may have receive 
indirect dowry from their parents-in-law). Buck's "dowries" column contains no 
zeroes, only a blank indicating that the household had no such expenditure. Do 
these blanks represent households that did not pay for a dowry because they 
married no daughters, or because they gave the daughters they married no 
dowries? We cannot tell. We can only be certain -
from other sources -
that 
some girls went to marriage with no dowry from their parents. The figures 
offered in Table A1, then, overstate the amount of dowry that brides, on the aver-
age, received. 
Marriages transacted with no expense to the groom's family were relatively 
rare. Buck's column for "wedding" expenses has fewer ambiguous blanks; the av-
erage costs of weddings must have been slightly less than my calculations indi-
cate, but not as much less as those for dowries. With this warning, then, let us 
turn to Table A1, for which I recalculated summaries of three areas that should 
most clearly reveal the differential influences of weak and strong versions of the 
two modes. 
Although there are many reasons to view these findings cautiously, the data 
are reassuringly predictable in the changing quantities of wedding and dowry ex-
penses in regions and over differently sized farms, and in the resulting averages of 
dowry-to-wedding ratios. These last were high- 1.13- in the North China 
Plain, middling -
.74 -
in the Yangzi Valley, and low- .53 -
among the Fu-
jianese. 
It is not surprising that ritual costs regularly rose with the prosperity implied 
by larger farm size; it is surprising that they rose as little as they did in many 
cases. Only on the North China Plain did dowries almost quadruple from small-
est farms to largest; wedding costs were generally more restrained in their varia-
tion. 
Nor is it surprising that data for the North China Plain and Fujian represent 
two ends of a spectrum of magnitudes of expenditures, with the Yangzi Valley 
neatly in the middle. A north-to-south continuum in all kinds of phenomena is 
a cliche of Chinese studies. This gradient represents both different regional costs 
and regional differences in spending patterns: the poor north and the richer 
south, as well as the subsistence economy of the north and the more commodi-
tized south. It is useful, then, to turn to some other regions in which north-
282 
: Appendix 
T A B L E 
A 1. 
Dowry: wedding expenses by political-economic region 
(North China Plain-NCP; Yangzi Valley-YV; Fujian-F) and size of farm 
Site/Size 
Weddings 
Dowries 
D:W 
Total 
Number 
Average 
Total 
Number 
Average 
Expense of Weddings Expense 
Expense of Weddings Expense 
NCP/S 
¥1258 
22 
¥57 
¥1222 
24 
¥51 
.89 
NCP/M 
¥1776 
21 
¥85 
¥1461 
21 
¥70 
.95 
NCP/ML 
¥1632 
19 
¥86 
¥1724 
18 
¥96 
1.12 
NCP/L 
¥3737 
21 
¥89 
¥2212 
22 
¥101 
1.35 
NCP/VL 
¥2911 
21 
¥139 
¥3713 
20 
¥186 
1.34 
Average = 1.13 
YV/S 
¥4345 
29 
¥150 
¥2001 
19 
¥105 
.70 
YV/M 
¥4496 
25 
¥180 
¥2672 
23 
¥116 
.64 
YV/ML 
¥4464 
25 
¥179 
¥3164 
21 
¥151 
.84 
YV/L 
¥4509 
24 
¥188 
¥2658 
22 
¥121 
.64 
YV/VL 
¥4646 
14 
¥332 
¥2468 
10 
¥247 
.74 
Average= .71 
F/S 
¥976 
2 
¥488 
¥640 
2 
¥320 
.66 
F/M 
¥1937 
4 
¥484 
¥472 
3 
¥157 
.32 
F/ML 
¥2315 
5 
¥463 
¥711 
3 
¥237 
.51 
F/L 
¥2299 
6 
¥383 
¥1203 
5 
¥241 
.63 
Average= .53 
Source: Buck 1937. 
southness- interpreted as climate/ecology, as mixes of migrants and indigenes 
or, with Jack Goody, as exposure to Confucian letters (1990:109-10)- can 
hardly be argued to have had much relevance. 
Let us look first at a region in which TMP was high and PCMP low, but which 
is not generally typed as northern- Sichuan. (See Table A2.) Migration into 
Sichuan following a series of seventeenth-century disasters was largely from 
neighboring south-central provinces, but Sichuan's dowry/wedding-cost pattern 
is closest to that of the North China Plain. An average D:W ratio of 1.55 was the 
highest of the six regions, higher even than for the North China Plain; again, as 
in Wolf's and my findings, the Sichuanese were dowry extremists. 
A second region, the Gansu/Qinghai trade-route corridor, is located in the 
north. Its D:W ratio, however, resembles not that of the North China Plain but 
rather Fujian's (see Table A3). No imaginable migratory or diffusionary link ex-
plains this similarity. This region, like Fujian, was the entrepot for a wide-rang-
Appendix : 
283 
TAB L E 
A 2. 
D:W expenses in the Sichuan Plain (SC), by size of farm 
Total 
Number 
Average 
Total 
Number 
Average 
Expense 
of Weddings 
Expense 
Expense 
of Weddings 
Expense 
D:W 
SC/S 
¥173 
4 
43 
¥126 
2 
42 
.98 
SC/M 
¥214 
4 
53 
¥402 
5 
81 
1.55 
SC/ML 
¥276 
5 
55 
¥442 
4 
111 
2.01 
SC/L 
¥954 
10 
95 
¥1435 
9 
159 
1.67 
Average= 1.55 
Source: Buck 1937. 
ing trade dependent on a vast hinterland over which the state exercised ineffec-
tive control. Commercial transactions may be expected to have dominated those 
of tribute; petty-capitalist views may well have affected marriage exchanges, re-
sulting in a low dowry average. 
A third case in the extreme south, the Pearl River delta, should be tested for 
D:W ratios in a regional culture that many (e.g. Freedman, Naquin and Rawski 
and Skinner) lump with Fujian as southeast coast. My logic, by contrast, argues 
that it should resemble the Yangzi Valley, with its balance of TMP and PCMP 
forces. Guangzhou's overseas trade, unlike that of Fujian and the Gansu/Qinghai 
corridor, was brought under fairly strict control by the institutions developed to 
control commerce with Europeans, and Guangzhou was for centuries a key south-
ern city with canal links to the capital. Buck's data are unusually inadequate for the 
testing of this possibility: only one site (Chungshan) for which figures are pro-
vided is located within the Pearl River delta proper. Calculating on the basis of a 
TABLE A3. 
D:W expenses in the Gansu/Qinghai corridor (NW), 
by size of farm 
Total 
Number 
Average 
Total 
Number 
Average 
Expense 
of Weddings 
Expense 
Expense 
of Weddings 
Expense 
D:W 
NW/S 
¥411 
6 
¥69 
¥183 
6 
¥31 
.45 
NW/M 
¥344 
5 
¥69 
¥155 
5 
¥31 
.45 
NW/ML 
¥391 
5 
¥78 
¥114 
4 
¥29 
.37 
NW/L 
¥742 
9 
¥82 
¥357 
6 
¥60 
.73 
Average = .50 
Source: Buck 1937. 
284 
: Appendix 
TABLE A4. 
D:W expenses in Guangdong (GD), by size of farm 
Total 
Number 
Average 
Total 
Number 
Average 
Expense 
of Weddings 
Expense 
Expense 
of Weddings 
Expense 
D:W 
GD!S 
¥1757 
7 
¥251 
¥827 
6 
¥138 
.55 
GD/M 
¥1478 
7 
¥211 
¥757 
7 
¥108 
.51 
GD/ML 
¥1759 
7 
¥251 
¥482 
4 
¥121 
.48 
GD/L 
¥3330 
11 
¥303 
¥1180 
6 
¥197 
.65 
Average = .55 
Source: Buck 1937. 
much larger region, in which tributary effects would not be much felt, produces 
the following rather uninteresting result. With more complete information, I 
would expect an average D:W ratio for Guangzhou of approximately .65. Alas, on 
the basis of these data, Guangdong resembles Fujian after all. (See Table A4.) 
Appendix 
285 
Sources 
Ahern, Emily Martin. 1973. The Cult of the Dead in a Chinese Village. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press. 
--. 1975. "The Power and Pollution of Chinese Women." In Margery Wolf and Roxane 
Witke, eds., Women in Chinese Society, pp. 193-214. Stanford: Stanford University 
Press. 
--. 1981. Chinese Ritual and Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Ahern, Emily Martin, and Hill Gates, eds. The Anthropology of Taiwanese Society. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. [See also Emily Martin.] 
Alexeiev, Basil M. 1928. The Chinese Gods of Wealth. [London]: University of London. 
Amin, Samir. 1972. Modes of Production, Social Formations, Interconnections of the 
Various Levels of a Formation, Classes and Social Groups, Nation, and Ethnic 
Groups: Introduction to the Concepts. Dakar: United Nations African Institute 
for Economic Development and Planning. 
Amnesty International. 1989. Death in Beijing. London: Amnesty International, British 
section. 
Amsden, Alice. 1979. "Taiwan's Economic History: A Case of Etatism and a Challenge to 
Dependency Theory:' Modern China 5, 3=341-79. 
--. 1991. "Big Business and Urban Congestion in Taiwan: The Origins of Small 
Enterprise and Regionally Decentralized Industry (respectively)."World 
Development, 19, 9:1121-35. 
Anderson, Eugene N. 1975. "Songs of the Hong Kong Boat People." Chinoperl News 
5=13-14. 
Arrigo, Linda Gale. 1986. "Landownership Concentration in China: The Buck Survey 
Revisited." Modern China 12, 3:259-360. 
Ayscough, Florence. 1924. "Cult of the Ch' eng Huang Lao Yeh." Journal of the North 
China Bulletin of the Royal Asiatic Society, North China Branch 55=131-55. 
--. 1925. A Chinese Mirror. London: Jonathan Cape. 
--. 1938. Chinese Women Yesterday & Today. London: Jonathan Cape. 
Bai Shouyi, ed. 1982. An Outline of Chinese History. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press. 
Baity, Philip Chesley. 1975. Religion in a Chinese Town. Taibei: Orient Cultural Service. 
Baker, Hugh D. R. 1968. A Chinese Lineage Village: Sheung Shui. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press. 
Sources 
287 
Ball, J.Dyer. 1982 [1892, fifth ed. 1925]. Things Chinese. Hong Kong: Oxford University 
Press. 
Banaji, J. 1979. "Mode of Production in a Materialist Conception of History:' Capital and 
Class 7=1-44. 
Barclay, George W., Ansley J. Coale, Michael A. Stoto, and T. James Trussell. 1976. "A 
Reassessment of the Demography of Traditional Rural China." Population Index 
42:606-35· 
Barrett, Richard, with Martin King Whyte. 1982. "Dependency Theory and Taiwan: A 
Deviant Case Analysis." American Journal of Sociology 87:1064-89. 
Barth, Frederick. 1969. Ethnic Groups and Boundaries. Boston: Little, Brown. 
Basu, Ellen Oxfeld. 1991a. "Profit, Loss, and Fate: The Entrepreneurial Ethic and the 
Practice of Gambling in an Overseas Chinese Community." Modern China 17, 
2:227-59· 
--. 1991b. "The Sexual Division of Labor and the Organization of Family and Firm in 
an Overseas Chinese Community." American Ethnologist 18, 4:700-18. [See also 
Ellen Oxfeld.] 
Beattie, Hilary J. 1979. Land and Lineage in China: A Study of T'ung-ch' eng County, 
Anhwei, in the Ming and Ch'ing Dynasties. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Bell, John. 1965. A Journey from St. Petersburg to Pekin, 1719-22. Ed. J. L. Stevenson. 
Edinburgh: The University Press. 
Berthier, Brigitte. 1988. La Dame-du-Bord-de-L'Eau. Nanterre: Societe d'ethnologie. 
Binford, Leigh, and Scott Cook. 1991. "Petty Production in Third World Capitalism." In 
Littlefield and Gates, eds., Marxist Approaches in Economic Anthropology, pp. 
65-90. 
Bird, Isabella. 1983 [1883]. The Golden Chersonese and the Way Thither. London: 
Century. 
Black, Alison H. 1986. "Gender and Cosmology in Chinese Correlative Thinking." In 
Bynum et al., eds. Gender and Religion: On the Complexity of Symbols, pp. 
166-95· 
Blake, C. Fred. 1978. "Death and Abuse in Chinese Marriage Laments: The Curse of 
Chinese Brides." Asian Folklore Studies 37, 1:3-33. 
Bloch, Maurice. 1977. "The Past and the Present in the Present." Man 12:278-92. 
--. 1983. Marxism and Anthropology: The History of a Relationship. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Bodde, Derk, and Clarence Morris. 1967. Law in Imperial China. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press. 
Bosco, Joseph. 1989. Rural Industrialization in a Taiwanese Township: Social and 
Economic Organization and Change. Ph.D. diss., Department of Anthropology, 
Columbia University. 
Boserup, Ester. 1970. Women's Role in Economic Development. New York: St. Martin's 
Press. 
288 
Sources 
Bottomore, Tom, ed. 1983. A Dictionary of Marxist Terminology. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press. 
Boxer, C. R., ed. 1953. South China in the Sixteenth Century: Being the Narratives of 
Geleote Pereira, Fr. Gaspar da Cruz, O.P, Fr. Martin de Rada, O.E.S.A. London: 
The Hakluyt Society. 
Bray, Francesca. 1986. The Rice Economies: Technology and Development in Asian 
Societies. London: Basil Blackwell. 
Bredon, Juliet, and Igor Mitrophanow. 1972 (1927]. The Moon Year. Taibei: Ch'eng-wen. 
Brook, Timothy. 1989. The Asiatic Mode of Production in China. Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. 
Sharpe. 
Brown, Donald E. 1991. Human Universals. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Buck, David D. 1984. "Themes in the Socio-Economic History of China, 1840-1949: A 
Review Article." Journal of Asian Studies 42, 3: 459-73-
Buck, J. Lossing. 1937. Land Utilization in China [Atlas and Statistics]. Shanghai: 
Commercial Press. 
Burgess, John Stewart. 1966 (1928]. The Guilds of Peking. Taibei: Ch'eng-wen. 
Burkhardt, V. R. 1982 (1953]. Chinese Creeds and Customs, 3 vols. Taibei: Xingjia Tushu 
Youxian Gongsi. 
Bynum, Caroline, Stevan Harrell, and Paula Richman, eds. 1986. Gender and Religion: 
On the Complexity of Symbols. Boston: Beacon Press. 
Cahill, Suzanne. 1984. "Beside the Turquoise Pond: The Shrine of the Queen Mother of 
the West in Medieval Chinese Poetry and Religious Practice." Journal of Chinese 
Religions 12:18-32. 
--. 1986. "Reflections of a Metal Mother: Tu Kuang-t'ing's Biography of Hsi Wang 
Mu." Journal of Chinese Religions 13 and 14:127-42. 
--. 1988. "A White Clouds Appointment with the Queen Mother of the West." Journal 
of Chinese Religions 16:43-53. 
Cardoso, Fernando H., and Enzo Faletto. 1979. Dependency and Development in Latin 
America. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Chang Chen-kuei. 1963 (1958]. "A Will: No Peace for Veterans." Formosan Quarterly 1, 
4:127-28. 
Chang Chung-li. 1955. The Chinese Gentry. Seattle: University of Washington Press. 
Chang Kwang-chih. 1980. Shang Civilization. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Chang Kuang-chih, Kuang-chou Li, Arthur P. Wolf, and Alexander Chien-chung Yin, 
eds. 1989. Anthropological Studies of the Taiwan Area: Accomplishments and 
Prospects. Taibei: Department of Antllropology, National Taiwan University. 
Chang Pin-tsun. 1990. "Maritime Trade and Local Economy in Late Ming Fukien." In 
Vermeer, ed., The Development and Decline of Fukien Province, pp. 63-82. 
Chang Shiang-hua. 1986. Sleepless Green Green Grass and Sixty-eight Other Poems. 
Trans. Stephen L. Smith. Hong Kong: Joint Publishing Co. 
Chao Kang. 1977. The Development of Cotton Textile Production in China. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Sources 
289 
--. 1987. Man and Land in Chinese History. An Economic Analysis. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press. 
Chao Kang and Chen Zhengyi. 1986. Zhongguo jingji zhidu shilun [Discourses on 
Chinese economic history]. Taibei: Lianjing chuban shiye gongsi. 
Chavannes, Edouard. 1910. Le Tai Chan. Paris: Pion. 
Chaves, Jonathan. 1986. "Moral Action in the Poetry of Wu Chia-chi (1618-84)." Harvard 
Journal of Asiatic Studies 46, 2:387-469. 
Chayanov, A. V. 1986 [1925]. The Theory of Peasant Economy. Madison: University of 
Wisconsin Press. 
Chen, K. C. 1986. "Culture, Morality, and Sexuality in Late Nineteenth Century China:' 
Bulletin of the Institute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica 62:205-33. 
Chen, Sarah Ren. 1989. "Fire in Their Bellies." Far Eastern Economic Review, 11 
May:12-13. 
Chen Cheng. 1953. "The Present Economic Situation in Taiwan" (report by Premier Chen 
Cheng to the Legislative Yuan, April28, 1953). Far Eastern Economic Review 
14:806-9). 
--. 1961. Land Reform in Taiwan. Taibei: China Publishing. 
Chen Chi-yu. 1963 [1960 ]. "I Do Not Want To Die -
17 Months after Retirement:' 
Formosan Quarterly 1, 4:125-27 [Kung Lun Pao, 23 October 1960 ]. 
Chen Chung-min. 1977. Upper Camp. A Study of a Chinese Mixed Cropping Village in 
Taiwan. Taibei: Institute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica. 
--. 1985. "Dowry and Inheritance." In Hsieh Jih-chang and Chuang Ying-chang, eds., 
The Chinese Family and Its Ritual Behavior, pp. 117-27. 
Ch'i Ch'ao-ting. 1936. Key Economic Areas in Chinese History. London: Allen and 
Unwin. 
China News. 1992. "Scholars Pray for Good Results." 26 June:8. 
China Post. 1986. "State Firms' Assets Pass Record NT$3,oooB. Mark." 3 January:4. 
--. 1988. "Income Gap Expands." 6 June:I. 
--. 1992. "Couple Sentenced for Selling Daughter." 24 February:12. 
Ching, Frank. 1988. Ancestors: Nine Hundred Years in the Life of a Chinese Family. 
London: Harrap. 
Chou, Eric. 1971. The Dragon and the Phoenix. London: Michael Joseph. 
Chou Bih-er, Cal Clark, and Janet Clark. 1990. Women in Taiwan Politics. Overcoming 
Barriers to Women's Participation in a Modernizing Society. Boulder and London: 
Lynne Rienner. 
Chu, Cordia Ming-yeuk. 1977. Menstrual Beliefs of Chinese Women. Berkeley 
[mimeo]. 
Chu Hsi and Lu Tsu-ch'ien, comps. 1967. Reflections on Things at Hand. The 
Neoconfucian Anthology. Trans. Wing-tsit Chan. New York: Columbia University 
Press. 
Ch'u T'ung-tsu. 1961. Law and Society in Traditional China. Paris: Mouton. 
290 
Sources 
Chuang Ying-chang. 1987. "Ch'ing Dynasty Chinese Immigrants to Taiwan: An 
Anthropological Perspective." Bulletin of the Institute of the Institute of 
Ethnology, Academia Sinica 64: 179-203. 
--. 1989. "Lineage Organization on the Taiwan Frontier." In Chang Kwang-chih et al., 
eds., Anthropological Studies of the Taiwan Area, pp. 207-32. 
--.1991. "Chinese T'ung-yang-hsi Marriage: The Ch'en Family ofT'ou-fen, Taiwan." 
Proceedings of the National Science Council, Republic of China 1, 2:174-85. 
Chuang Ying-chang and Hsu Shu-ui. 1994. "Shen, gui, yu zuxian de zaienkau yi Xinzhu 
Liujia Zhuluo Baigong de congbai weili [A reconsideration of the gods, ghosts, 
and ancestors in the Baigong of Liujia Village, Xinzhu]." Min-Tai Socio-Cultural 
Comparison Project Workshop, Institute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica. Ms. 
Clark, Cal. 1989. Taiwan's Development: Implications for Contending Political Economic 
Paradigms. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press. 
Clark, Hugh R. 1990. "Settlement, Trade, and Economy in Fukien to the Thirteenth 
Century." In Vermeer, ed., The Development and Decline of Fukien Province, pp. 
35-62. 
Coale, Ansley J. 1985. "Fertility in Rural China: A Reconfirmation of the Barclay 
Reassessment:' In Susan B. Hanley and Arthur P. Wolf, eds., Family and 
Population in East Asian History, pp. 186-95. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Coble, Parks M. 1979. "The Kuomintang Regime and the Shanghai Capitalists, 1927-29." 
China Quarterly 77=1-24. 
Cohen, Alvin P. 1979. "Fiscal Remarks on Some Folk Religion Temples in Taiwan." In 
Sarah Allen and Alvin P. Cohen, eds., Legend, Lore, and Religion in China: Essays 
in Honor of Wolfram Eberhard on His Seventieth Birthday, pp. 85-158. San 
Francisco: Chinese Materials Center. 
Cohen, Paul. 1984. Discovering History in China. American Historical Writing on the 
Recent Chinese Past. New York: Columbia University Press. 
Collins, JaneL. 1991. "Housework and Craftwork within Capitalism: Marxist Analyses of 
Unwaged Labor." In Littlefield and Gates, eds., Marxist Approaches in Economic 
Anthropology, pp. 91-99. 
Coltman, Robert, Jr. 1891. The Chinese: Their Present and Future, Medical, Political, and 
Social. Philadelphia: Davis. 
Commeaux, Charles. 1970. La vie quotidienne en Chine so us les Mandchous. [Paris]: 
Hachette. 
Cook, Scott. 1982. Zapotec Stoneworkers: The Dynamics of Rural Simple Commodity 
Production in Modern Mexican Capitalism. Washington D.C.: University Press of 
America. 
--. 1985. Peasant Capitalist Industry. Lanham, Md.: University Press of America. 
Cooper, Eugene. 1980. The Wood-carvers of Hong Kong: Craft Production in the World 
Capitalist Periphery. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Couling, Samuel. 1917. The Encyclopedia Sinica. London: Oxford University Press. 
Sources 
291 
Crissman, Lawrence W. 1973. Town and Country. Ph.D. diss., Department of 
Anthropology, Cornell University. 
Crook, Isabel, and David Crook. 1959· Revolution in a Chinese Village. Ten Mile Inn. 
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Currie, Kate. 1982. "The Development of Petty Commodity Production in Mughal 
India." Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars 14, 1: 16-24. 
Cutler, Antony, Barry Hindess, Paul Hirst, and Athar Hussain. 1977. Marx's "Capital" and 
Capitalism Today. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Darley, Mary. 1917. Cameos of a Chinese City. London: Church of England Zenana 
Mission Society. 
Davidson, James W. 1967 [1903]. The Island of Formosa. Taibei: Ch'eng-wen. 
Davis, John Francis. 1972 [1836]. The Chinese: A General Description of the Empire 
China and Its Inhabitants. 2 vols. Wilmington, Del.: Scholarly Resources. 
Davis, Richard L. 1986. "Political Success and the Growth of Descent Groups: The Shih 
of Ming-chou during the Sung." In Ebrey and Watson, eds., Kinship Organization 
in Late Imperial China, 1000-1940, pp. 62-94. 
Day, Clarence Burton. 1927. "Paper Gods for Sale." China Journal7, 6:277-84. 
--. 1928. "Shanghai Invites the God of Wealth." China JournalS, 6:289-94. 
--. 1969 [1940 ]. Chinese Peasant Cults: Being a Study of Chinese Paper Gods. Taibei: 
Ch'engWen. 
deBary, Wm. Theodore, Wing-tsit Chan, and Burton Watson, comps. 1960. Sources of 
Chinese Tradition. New York: Columbia University Press. 
De Glopper, Donald. 1972. "Doing Business in Lukang." In W. E. Willmott, ed., Economic 
Organization in Chinese Societies, pp. 297-326. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
--. 1979. "Artisan Work and Life in Taiwan." Modern Chinas, 3:283-316. 
de Groot, J. J. M. 1969 [1892-1910 ]. The Religious System of China. 6 vols. Taibei: 
Ch'eng-wen. 
Delfs, Robert. 1989. "The People's Republic." Far Eastern Economic Review, 1 June:12-15. 
Dermigny, Louis. 1964. Les memoires de Charles de Constant sur le commerce a la 
Chine. Paris: Ecole pratique des hautes etudes. 
Diamond, Norma J. 1975. "Collectivization, Kinship, and the Status of Women in Rural 
China." Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars 7, 1:25-32. 
--. 1979. "Women and Industry in Taiwan." Modern China 5, 3:317-40. 
--. 1988. "The Miao and Poison: Interactions on China's Southwest Frontier." 
Ethnology 27, 1:1-23. 
Dickemann, M. 1979. "Female Infanticide, Reproductive Strategies, and Social 
Stratification: A Preliminary Model:' In N. Chagnon and W. Irons, eds., 
Evolutionary Biology and Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological 
Perspective, pp. 321-67. North Scituate, Mass.: Duxbury Press. 
--. 1984. "Concepts and Classification in the Study of Human Infanticide." In Glenn 
Haufstater and Sarah Hrdy, eds., Infanticide, Comparative and Evolutionary 
Perspectives, pp. 427-37. New York: Aldin e. 
292 
Sources 
Dirlik, Arif. 1982. "Chinese Historians and the Marxist Concept of Capitalism. A Critical 
Examination." Modern China 8, 1:105-32. 
Dobb, Maurice. 1946. Studies in the Development of Capitalism. New York: 
International Publishers. 
Dodgen, Randall A. 1991. "Hydraulic Evolution and Dynastic Decline: The Yellow River 
Conservancy, 1796-1855." Late Imperial China 12, 2:36-63. 
Doolittle, Justus. 1966 [ 1865]. Social Life of the Chinese. 2 vols. New York: Harper. 
Dore, Le P. H., S.J. 1970 [1926]. Manuel des supersititions chinoises. Paris: Universite de 
Paris. 
do Rosario, Louise. 1989. "Safety in Numbers." Far Eastern Economic Review, 25 May 
1989:15. 
Douglas, Robert K. 1887. China. London: Society for the Promotion of Christian 
Knowledge. 
Dukes, Edwin Joshua. n.d. [1878?] Everyday Life in China; or, Scenes along River and 
Road in Fuh-kien: [London]: London Missionary Society. 
Eagleton, Terry. 1991. Ideology. London: Verso. 
Eberhard, Wolfram. 1965a. Folktales of China. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
--. 1965b. "Chinese Regional Stereotypes." Asian Survey 5, 12:596-608. 
--. 1967. Guilt and Sin in Traditional China. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
--. 1968. "On Some Chinese Terms of Abuse." Asian Folklore Studies 1:25-40. 
Ebrey, Patricia Buckley. 1984. Family and Property in Sung China. Yuan Ts'ai's Precepts 
for Social Life. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
--. 1986. "Early Stages in the Development of Descent Group Organization." In Ebrey 
and Watson, eds., Kinship Organization in Late Imperial China, 1000-1940. 
--. 1993. The Inner Quarters: Marriage and the Lives of Chinese Women in the Sung 
Period. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Ebrey, Patricia Buckley, ed. 1981. "Exhortations on Ceremony and Deference." In Ebrey, 
Chinese Civilization and Society: A Sourcebook, pp. 204-7. New York: The Free 
Press. 
Ebrey, Patricia Buckley, and James L. Watson, eds. 1986. Kinship Organization in Late 
Imperial China, 1000-1940. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
The Economist. 1988. "Underground Economy:' 13 March: 54. 
Edkins, Joseph. 1878 [1859]. Religion in China. Boston: J. R. Osgood. 
Elvin, Mark. 1973. The Pattern of the Chinese Past. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Erbaugh, Mary. 1990. "Chinese Women Face Increased Discrimination." Off Our Backs 
20, 3=9· 33· 
Erbaugh, Mary, and Richard Kraus. 1989. "The 1989 Democracy Movement in Fujian 
and Its Aftermath." Ms. 
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1940. The Nuer. Oxford: Clarendon. 
The Far East. 1871. "Taiwan's Trade." 7:1-3. 
Far Eastern Economic Review. 1953. "Taiwan." 14:80, 365-69. 
--. 1953. "The Pineapple Industry of Taiwan." 15:86. 
Sources 
293 
--. 1953. " 'Rice and Sugar Parity' Subsidy of Taiwan." 15:372. 
--. 1954. "Industries of Taiwan." 16:209-10. 
--.1954. "Taiwan Electric Power Industry:'17:529-30. 
--. 1955. "Farm Income in Taiwan." 18:729-30. 
--. 1961. "Wanted -
Cash." 34, 1:3. 
Faure, David. 1984. "The Tangs of Kam Tin -
A Hypothesis on the Rise of a Gentry 
Family." In David Faure, James Hayes, and Alan Birch, eds., From Village to City: 
Studies in the Traditional Roots of Hong Kong Society, pp. 24-42. Hong Kong: 
Center for Asian Studies, University of Hong Kong. 
--. 1986. The Structure of Chinese Rural Society: Lineage and Village in the Eastern 
New Territories, Hong Kong. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press. 
--. 1989. "The Lineage as Cultural Invention: The Case of the Pearl River Delta:' 
Modern China 15:4-36. 
Fei, John C. H., Gustav Ranis, and Shirley W. Y. Kuo. 1979. Growth with Equity: The 
Taiwan Case. London: Oxford University Press. 
Fei Xiao Tung. 1953. China's Gentry. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
--. 1984 [1946]. "An Interpretation of Chinese Social Structure and Its Changes." In Fei 
Xiao Tung, Chinese Village Close-up, pp. 124-57. Beijing: New World Press. 
--. 1986a. "Small Towns, Great Significance -
A Study of Small Towns in Wujiang 
County." In Fei Xiao Tung et a!., Small Towns in China, pp. 9-61. 
--. 1986b. "Probing Deeper into Small Towns -
A Study of Small Towns in the Four 
Municipalities of Southern Jiangsu." In Fei Xiao Tung et a!., Small Towns in 
China, pp. 62-87. 
--. 1986c. "Small Towns in Northern Jiangsu." In Fei Xiao Tung et al., Small Towns in 
China, pp. 88-132. 
--. 1986d. "Small Towns in Central Jiangsu." In Fei Xiao Tung eta!., Small Towns in 
China, pp. 133-70. 
Fei Xiao Tung eta!. 1986. Small Towns in China -
Functions, Problems and Prospects. 
Beijing: New World Press. 
Feil, Daryl K. 1987. The Evolution of Highland Papua New Guinea Societies. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Fernandez-Kelly, Maria Patricia. 1981. "Development and the Sexual Division of Labor: 
An Introduction." Signs 7, 2:268-78. 
Feuchtwang, Stephan. 1974. City Temples in Taipei under Three Regimes. In Mark Elvin 
and G. William Skinner, eds., The Chinese City between Two Worlds, pp. 263-302. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Feuerwerker, Albert. 1984. "The State and the Economy in Later Imperial China." Theory 
and Society 13, 3:297-326. 
Fewsmith, Joseph. 1983. "From Guild to Interest Group: The Transformation of Public 
and Private in Late Qing China:' Comparative Studies in Society and History 25: 
617-40. 
Fielde, Adele M. 1887. Pagoda Shadows. London: T. Ogilvie Smith. 
294 
: Sources 
--. 1894. A Corner of Cathay. Studies from Life among the Chinese. New York: 
Macmillan. 
Formosan Quarterly. 1963. [Special Issue.] "Chinese Refugees in Formosa." 1, 4· 
Foster, Mrs. Arnold. 1899. In the Valley of the Yangtse. London: London Missionary 
Society. 
Foster, George M. 1967. Tzintzuntzan: Mexican Peasants in a Changing World. Boston: 
Little, Brown. 
Foster-Carter, A. 1978. "The Modes of Production Controversy." New Left Review 
107=47-77· 
Franke, Herbert. 1976. Sung Biographies. Weisbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag GMBH. 
Free China Journal. 1991. 25 Aprib. 
Freedman, Maurice. 1950. "Colonial Law and Chinese Society." Journal of the Royal 
Anthropological Society 80:97-126. 
--. 1957. Chinese Family and Marriage in Singapore. Colonial Research Study 20. 
London: HMSO. 
--. 1958. Lineage Organization in Southeastern China. London: Athlone. 
--. 1963. "A Chinese Phase in Social Anthropology." British Journal of Sociology 14, 
1:1-19. 
--. 1966. Chinese Lineage and Society. London: Athlone. 
--. 1967. "Ancestor Worship: Two Facets of the Chinese Case." In Maurice Freedman, 
ed., Social Organization: Essays Presented to Raymond Firth, pp. 85-103. London: 
FrankCass. 
--. 1974a. "On the Sociological Study of Chinese Religion:' In Arthur P. Wolf, ed., 
Religion and Ritual in Chinese Society, pp. 19-41. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
--. 1974b. "The Politics of an Old State: A View from the Chinese Lineage:' In John 
H. R. Davis., ed., Choice and Change: Essays in Honour of Lucy Mair, pp. 68-88. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
--. 1979. "Rites and Duties, or Chinese Marriage:' In G. William Skinner, ed., The 
Study of Chinese Society: Essays by Maurice Freedman, pp. 255-95. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 
Fried, Morton H. 1953. The Fabric of Chinese Society. A Study of the Social Life of a 
Chinese County Seat. New York: Octagon. 
--. 1967. The Evolution of Political Society. New York: Random House. 
Friedman, Edward, Paul G. Pickowicz, and Mark Selden. 1991. Chinese Village, Socialist 
State. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Friedman, Harriet. 1986. "Patriarchal Commodity Production:' Social Analysis 20:47-55. 
Fu Yiling. 1980. "Capitalism in Chinese Agriculture: On the Laws Governing Its 
Development." Modern China 6, 3:311-16. 
--.1986 [1955]. Ming-qing shidai shangren yu shangye ziben [Merchants and 
merchant capital in the Ming/Qing period]. Taibei: Gufong Chubanshe. 
Fu Zhufu. 1981. "The Economic History of China: Some Special Problems." Modern 
China 7, 1:3-30. 
Sources 
295 
Gailey, Christine Ward. 1980. "Putting Down Sisters and Wives: Tongan Women and 
Colonization." In Eleanor Leacock and Mona Etienne, eds., Women and 
Colonization, pp. 294-322. New York: Monthly Review Press. 
--. 1987. From Kinship to Kingship. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Galenson, Walter, ed. 1979. Economic Growth and Structural Change in Taiwan: The 
Postwar Experience of the Republic of China. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Gallin, Bernard. 1966. Hsin Hsing: A Chinese Village in Change. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
Gallin, Rita S., and Bernard Gallin. 1987. "Dowry and Family in Changing Rural Taiwan." 
Paper, Association for Asian Studies, Boston. 
Gamble, Sidney D.1968 [1954]. Ting Hsien: A North China Rural Community. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 
Garaudy, Roger. 1967. Le probleme chinois, avec des textes essentiels de Mao Tse-Toung. 
Paris: Seghers. 
Gardella, Robert P. 1990. "The Min-pei Tea Trade during the Late Ch'ien-lung and Chia-
ch'ing Eras: Foreign Commerce and the Mid-Ch'ing Fukien Highlands." In 
Vermeer, ed., The Development and Decline of Fukien Province, pp. 317-48. 
Gates, Hill. 1979. "Dependency and the Part-time Proletariat. Modern China 5, 3:381-407. 
--. 1981. "Social Class and Ethnicity." In Ahern and Gates, eds., The Anthropology of 
Taiwanese Society, pp. 241-81. 
--. 1985. "The Petty Capitalist Mode of Production." Chicago: Circle for Taiwan 
Studies, University of Chicago, July. 
--. 1987a. "Money for the Gods." Modern China 13, 3:259-77. 
--. 1987b. Chinese Working-Class Lives: Getting By in Taiwan. Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press. 
--. 1989. "The Commoditization of Chinese Women:' Signs 14, 4:799-832. 
--. 1991a. "Narrow Hearts and Petty Capitalism." In Littlefield and Gates, eds., Marxist 
Approaches in Economic Anthropology, pp. 13-36. 
--. 1991b. "Eating for Revenge: Corruption and Consumption under Economic 
De-reform." Dialectical Anthropology 16:233-49. 
--. 1992. "Small Fortunes: Class and Society in Taiwan:' In Denis Simon and Michael 
Y. M. Kau, eds., Taiwan: Beyond the Economic Miracle, pp. 169-85. Armonk, N.Y.: 
Westview Press. 
--.1993. "Cultural Support for Birth Limitation in Post-Mao China." In Deborah 
Davis and Stevan Harrell, eds., Chinese Families in the Post-Mao Era, pp. 251-74. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
--.1995. "When People Are Sold: Buying Brides in China- Again." Ms. [See also Hill 
Gates Rohsenow.] 
Gates, Hill, and Robert P. Weller, eds. 1987. "Hegemony and Chinese Folk Ideologies." 
Modern China 13, 1:3-16. 
Geertz, Clifford. 1980. Negara: The Theatre State in Nineteenth Century Bali. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
296 
: Sources 
Gereffi, Gary and Donald Wyman, eds. 1990. Manufacturing Miracles: Paths of 
Industrialization in Latin America and East Asia. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 
Gernet, Jacques. 1962. Daily Life in China on the Eve of the Mongol Invasion, 1250-1276. 
New York: Macmillan. 
Gledhill, John. 1984. "The Transformations of Asiatic Formations: The Case of Late 
Prehispanic Mesoamerica." In Matthew Spriggs, ed., Marxist Perspectives in 
Archaeology, pp. 135-48. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Gold, Thomas B. 1986. State and Society in the Taiwan Miracle. Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. 
Sharpe. 
Goldfrank, Walter L. 1979. The World System of Capitalism, Past and Present. Beverly 
Hills, Calif.: Sage. 
Goldstein, Sidney. 1987. "Forms of Mobility and Their Policy Implications: Thailand and 
China Compared:' Social Forces 65, 4:915-42. 
Goodale, Jane C. 1971. Tiwi Wives. A Study of the Women of Melville Island, North 
Australia. Seattle: University of Washington Press. 
Goodrich, Anne Swann. 1981. Chinese Hells: The Peking Temple of Eighteen Hells and 
Chinese Conceptions of Hell. Taibei: Monumenta Serica. 
Goody, Esther N. 1982. "Introduction:' In Esther N. Goody, ed., From Craft to Industry: 
The Ethnography of Proto-industrial Cloth Production, pp. 1-37. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Goody, Jack. 1973. "Bridewealth and Dowry in Africa and Eurasia." In Goody and 
Tambiah, Bridewealth and Dowry, pp. 1-58. 
--. 1983. The Development of the Family and Marriage in Europe. Cami:lridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
--. 1990. The Oriental, the Ancient and the Primitive: Systems of Marriage and the 
Family in the Pre-industrial Societies of Eurasia. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Goody, Jack, and S. J. Tambiah. Bridewealth and Dowry. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Graham, David Crockett. 1961. Folk Religion in Southwest China. Washington, D.C.: 
Smithsonian Institution. 
Gray, John Henry. 1875. Walks in the City of Canton. Victoria, Hong Kong: De 
Souza. 
--. 1878. China. A History of the Laws, Manners, and Customs of the People. 2 vols. 
London: Macmillan. 
Greenhalgh, Susan. 1984. "Networks and Their Nodes: Urban Society on Taiwan." China 
Quarterly 99:529-52. 
--. 1985a. "Sexual Stratification in East Asia:' Population and Development Review 11, 
2:265-314. 
--. 1985b. "Is Inequality Demographically Induced? The Family Cycle and the 
Distribution of Income on Taiwan." American Anthropologist 87, 3:571-94. 
Sources : 297 
--. 1988. "Families and Networks in Taiwan's Economic Development:' In Winckler 
and Greenhalgh, eds., Contending Approaches to the Political Economy of 
Taiwan, pp. 224-45. 
--. 1994. "De-orientalizing the Chinese Family Firm." American Ethnologist 21, 
4=746-75· 
Gregory, C. A. 1982. Gifts and Commodities. New York: Academic Press. 
Gronewold, Sue. 1985. Beautiful Merchandise: Prostitution in China, 1860-1936. New 
York: Harrington Park Press. 
Grove, Linda, and Joseph W. Eshrick. 1980. "From Feudalism to Capitalism: Japanese 
Scholarship on the Transformation of Chinese Rural Society." Modern China 6, 
4=397-438. 
The Guardian. 1990. "Change Worries Old Communists." 17 April:6. 
Haeger, John Winthrop. 1975. "Introduction: Crisis and Prosperity in Sung China." In 
Haeger, ed., Crisis and Prosperity in Sung China, pp. 1-12. Albuquerque: 
University of Arizona Press. 
Hajnal, John. 1981. "European Marriage Patterns in Perspective:' In D. V. Glass and 
D. E. C. Eversley, eds., Population in History, pp. 101-43. London: Edward Arnold. 
--. 1982. "Two Kinds of Preindustrial Household Formation System:' Population and 
Development Review 8, 3:449-94. 
Haldon, John. 1993. The State and the Tributary Mode of Production. London: Verso. 
Hamilton, Gary. 1984. "Patriarchalism in Imperial China and Western Europe: A 
Revision of Weber's Sociology of Dominance," Theory and Society 13, 3:393-425. 
--. 1985. "Why No Capitalism in China? Negative Questions in Historical, 
Comparative Research." Journal of Developing Societies 1, 1:65-89. 
Handlin, Joanna F. 1975. "Lu K'un's New Audience: The Influence of Women's Literacy 
on Sixteenth-Century Thought." In Margery Wolf and Roxane Witke, eds., 
Women in Chinese Society, pp. 13-38. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Hane Mikiso. 1982. Peasants, Rebels, and Outcastes: The Underside of Modern Japan. 
New York: Pantheon. 
Hanley, Susan, and Arthur P. Wolf. 1985. "Introduction:' In Hanley and Wolf, eds., 
History and Population in East Asia, pp. 1-30. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Harrell, Stevan. 1974. "When a Ghost Becomes a God." In Arthur P. Wolf, ed., Religion 
and Ritual in Chinese Society, pp. 193-206. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
--. 1982. Ploughshare Village: Culture and Context in Taiwan. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press. 
--. 1986. "Women, Men, and Ghosts." In Bynum, Harrell, and Richman, eds., Gender 
and Religion, pp. 97-116. 
--. 1987. "The Concept of Fate in Chinese Folk Ideology." Modern China 13, 1:90-109. 
Harrell, Stevan, and Sara A. Dickey. 1985. "Dowry Systems in Complex Societies:' 
Ethnology 24, 2:105-20. 
Harris, Marvin. 1971. Culture, Man, and Nature. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell. 
298 
Sources 
--. 1974. Cows, Pigs, Wars, and Witches: The Riddles of Culture. New York: Random 
House. 
Harris, Marvin, and Eric B. Ross. 1987. Death, Sex, and Fertility: Population Regulation 
in Preindustrial and Developing Societies. New York: Columbia University Press. 
Hart, Keith. 1986. "On Commoditization." In Goody, ed., From Craft to Industry: The 
Ethnography of Proto-industrial Cloth Production, pp. 38-49. 
--. 1992. "Market and State after the Cold War: The Informal Economy Reconsidered." 
In Roy Dilley, ed., Contesting Markets: Analyses of Ideology, Discourse, and 
Practice, pp. 214-230. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh Press. 
Hartwell, Robert M. 1967. "A Cycle of Economic Change in Imperial China: Coal and 
Iron in Northeast China, 750-1350." Journal of the Economic and Social History of 
the Orient 10:102-59· 
--. 1982. "Demographic, Political, and Social Transformations of China, 750-1550:' 
Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 42:365-442. 
Harvey, David. 1989. The Condition of Postmodernity. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Hase, Patrick. 1990. "New Territories Poetry and Song:' In Hong Kong Museum of 
History, Collected Essays on Various Materials for Hong Kong Studies. Hong 
Kong: Urban Council. 
Hazelton, K. 1986. "Patrilines and the Development of Localized Lineages: The Wu of 
Hsiu-ning City, Hui-chou, to 1525." In Ebrey and Watson, eds., Kinship 
Organization in Late Imperial China, 1000-1940. pp. 137-69. 
He Liyi. 1993. Mr. China's Son: A Villager's Life. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. 
Heider, Karl. 1979. Grand Valley Dani: Peaceful Warriors. 2d ed. Fort Worth, Tex.: Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston. 
Hill, Ann Maxwell. 1989. "Chinese Dominance of the Xishuangbanna Tea Trade: An 
Interregional Perspective." Modern China 15, 3:321-45. 
Hilton, Rodney, ed. 1976. The Transition from Feudalism to Capitalism. London: Verso. 
Himmelweit, Susan. 1983. "Mode of Production." In Bottomore, ed., A Dictionary of 
Marxist Thought. 
Hinton, William. 1966. Fanshen: A Documentary of Revolution in a Chinese Village. 
New York: Random House. 
Ho, Samuel P. S. 1978. Economic Development of Taiwan, 1860-1970. New Haven: Yale 
University Press. 
Ho P'ing-ti. 1954. "The Salt Merchants of Yang-chou: A Study of Commercial Capitalism 
in Eighteenth Century China." Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 17:130-68. 
--. 1959. Studies on the Population of China 1368-1953. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press. 
--. 1962. The Ladder of Success in Imperial China. New York: Columbia University 
Press. 
Hoang, Pierre. 1898. Le mariage chinois au point de vue legal. Chang-hai [Shanghai]: 
Imprimerie de Ia Mission Catholique. 
Sources 
299 
Hobsbawm, Eric J. 1965 "Introduction." In Hobsbawm, ed., Precapitalist Economic 
Formations, New York: International Publishers. 
--. 1989. "Out of the Wilderness." In Hobsbawm, Politics for a Rational Left, pp. 
203-13. London: Verso. 
Hobsbawm, Eric J., and Terence Ranger, eds. 1987. The Invention of Tradition. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hong Kong. Governor's Committee. 1953. Chinese Law and Custom in Hong Kong: 
Governor's Committee Report. Hong Kong: The Government Printer. 
Honig, Emily. 1986. Sisters and Strangers: The Cotton Textile Workers of Shanghai. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Honig, Emily, and Gail Hershatter. 1988. Personal Voices: Chinese Women in the 198o's. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Hou Ching-lang. 1975. Monnaies d'offrande. Paris: Presses universitaires de France. 
Howell, Nancy. 1979. Demography of the Dobe !Kung. New York: Academic Press. 
Hsiao, Michael Hsin-huang. 1981. Government Agricultural Strategies in Taiwan and 
South Korea. Nankang, Taiwan: Academia Sinica. 
Hsiao Jen-chian.1963 [1959]. "We Know the Difference between Army and Family:' Formosan 
Quarterly 1, 4:118. [Ziyou Zhongguo (Free China Fortnightly), 16 December.] 
Hsiao Kung-chuang. 1960. Rural China: Imperial Control in the Nineteenth Century. 
Seattle: University of Washington Press. 
Hsieh Jih-chang. 1981. "Chung-kuo chia-tsu ti ting-i: ts'ung ike T'aiwan ti hsiang-
ts'un t'an-ch'i" [The definition of the Chinese family: from the perspective of 
a rural village]. In Li Yih-yuan and Chiao Chien, eds., Chung-kuo ti min-tsu, 
she-hui yu wen-hua [China's people, society, and culture], pp. 119-29. Taibei: 
Shi-huo. 
Hsieh Jih-chang and Chuang Ying-chang, eds. 1985. The Chinese Family and Its Ritual 
Behavior. [Taibei]: Institute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica. 
Hsiung Ping -chen. 1992. "Mothers and Sons in the Ming and Ch'ing Household." Mimeo. 
Hsiung Ping-Chun. 1996. Living Rooms as Factories: Class, Gender, and the Satellite 
Factory System in Taiwan. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
Hsu Chang-ming.1984. "Peasants, Women, and the Revolution- CCP Marriage 
Reform in the Shaan-Gan-Ning Border Area." Republican China 10, 1A:1-24. 
Hsu Cho-yun. 1980. Han Agriculture: The Formation of Early Chinese Agrarian 
Economy (206 B.C.-A.D. 220 ). [Seattle]: University of Washington Press. 
Hsu Hong. 1991. "Internal Migrations during the Yung-lo Period (1402-1424)." In 
Proceedings of the National Science Council, Republic of China 1, 2: 196-218. 
Hsu Yung-shu. 1954. "An Essay on Dr. Sun Yat-Sen's Policy of Total Utilization of Foreign 
Capital:' Industry of Free China 2:21-22. 
Hu Hsien Chin. 1948. The Common Descent Group in China and Its Functions. New 
York: Viking Fund. 
Hu Tai-li. 1984. My Mother-in-law's Village: Rural Industrialization and Change in 
Taiwan. Taibei: Institute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica. 
300 
: Sources 
--. 1986. "Gods, Ghosts and Gamblers" [Shen, gui, yu duzhe]. Presented at the Second 
International Conference on Sinology, Academia Sinica [Taibei, Taiwan]. 
Huang, Philip C. C. 1985. The Peasant Economy and Social Change in North China. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
--. 1990. The Peasant Family and Rural Development in the Yangzi Delta 1350-1988. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Huang, Ray. 1969. "Fiscal Administration during the Ming Dynasty." In Charles 0. 
Hucker, ed., Chinese Government in Ming Times, pp. 73-128. New York: 
Columbia University Press. 
--. 1974. Taxation and Governmental Finance in Sixteenth-Century Ming China. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Huang Pei. 1974. Autocracy at Work. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Huang Shu-min.1989. The Spiral Road: Change in a Chinese Village through the Eyes of 
a Communist Party Leader. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. 
Hue, M. 1970 [1855]. The Chinese Empire. 2 vols .. Port Washington N.Y.: Kennikat Press. 
Hucker, Charles 0. 1961. The Traditional Chinese State in Ming Times (1368-1644). 
Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
Hughes, Robert. 1987. The Fatal Shore. New York: Knopf. 
Independent Formosa [formerly Formosan Quarterly], Editorial Board. 1964. "What Is 
Going On Inside Formosa." 2, 4:10-11. 
Industry of Free China. 1954. "Taiwan Public Enterprises vs. Private Enterprises." 1, 
4:1-19. 
Jacoby, Neil H. 1967. U.S. Aid to Taiwan. New York: Praeger. 
Jaschok, Maria H. A. 1988. Concubines and Bondservants: The Social History of a 
Chinese Custom. London: Zed Books. 
--. 1984. "On the Lives of Women Unwed by Choice in Pre-Communist China: 
Research in Progress:' Republican China 10, 1A:42-55. 
Johnson, David G. 1977. The Medieval Chinese Oligarchy. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. 
Johnson, David, Andrew J. Nathan, and Evelyn S. Rawski, eds. 1985. Popular Culture in 
Late Imperial China. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Johnson, Elizabeth L. 1984. "Great-aunt Yeung: A Hakka Wage-Laborer." In Mary 
Sheridan and Janet Salaff, eds., Lives: Chinese Working Women, pp. 76-91. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
--. 1988. "Grieving for the Dead, Grieving for the Living: Funeral Laments of Hakka 
Women." In Watson and Rawski, eds., Death Ritual in Late Imperial and Modern 
China, pp. 135-63. 
Johnston, R. F. 1910. Lion and Dragon in Northern China. London: John Murray. 
Jones, P. H. M. 1959. "Taiwan after Ten Years: Agriculture -
Remarkable Increase in 
Yields." Far Eastern Economic Review 27, 26:585-86. 
Jones, Susan Mann. 1972. "Finance in Ningpo: The 'Ch'ien Chuang; 1750-1880." In W. E. 
Willmott, ed., Economic Organization in Chinese Society, pp. 47-77. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. [See also Susan Mann.] 
Sources 
301 
Jordan, David K. 1972. Gods, Ghosts, and Ancestors. The Folk Religion of a Taiwanese 
Village. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Ju Futian and Wu Dasheng. 1986. "The Formation and Development of the Silk Town 
Shengze." In Fei Xiao Tong et al., Small Towns in China, pp. 290-315. 
Judd, Ellen R. 1994. Gender and Power in Rural North China. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press. 
Ka Chih-ming. 1987. Land Tenure, Development, and Dependency in Colonial Taiwan 
(1895-1945). Ph.D. diss., Department of Sociology, State University of New York at 
Binghamton. 
--. [1993]. Taiwan dushi xiao xingzhi zaoye de zhuangye, jingying yu shengchang 
zuzhi [Market, social networks, and the production organization of small-scale 
industry in Taiwan]. Taibei: Institute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica. 
Ka Chih-ming and Mark Selden. 1986. "Original Accumulation, Equity, and Late 
Industrialization: The Cases of Socialist China and Capitalist Taiwan." World 
Development 14, 10-11:1293-1310. 
Kahn, Joel S. 1978. "Marxist Anthropology and Peasant Economies: A Study of the Social 
Structure of Underdevelopment:' In John Clam mer, ed., The New Economic 
Anthropology, pp. uo-37· New York: St. Martin's Press. 
--. 1982. "From Peasants to Petty Commodity Production in Southeast Asia." Bulletin 
of Concerned Asian Scholars 14, 1:3-15. 
Kahn, Joel S., and J. Llobera, eds. 1981. The Anthropology of Pre-Capitalist Societies. 
London: Macmillan. 
Kamachi Noriko. 1990. "Feudalism or Absolute Monarchism? Japanese Discourse on the 
Nature of State and Society in Late Imperial China:' Modern China 16, 3:330-70. 
Kann, E. 1955. "The Great Inflation in China (1946-1949 ). Part One [of four]." Far 
Eastern Economic Review 18, 19:592-95). 
Kao, H. K. 1954. "Taiwan." Far Eastern Economic Review 17, 10:45. 
Ke Changji. 1987 [1959]. "An Inquiry into the Initial Steps of Song Dynasty Employment 
Relations" [Song dai guyong guanxi di chubu tanso ]. In Zhongguo ziben juyi 
mengya wenti taolun ji. Taibei: Gufong Chubanshe. 
Kerr, George. 1947a. "Formosa's Return to China." Far Eastern Survey 14:284-7. 
--. 1947b. "Formosa: The March Massacres." Far Eastern Survey 14:153-59. 
--. 1965. Formosa Betrayed. New York: Houghton Mifflin. 
"Kingjing." 1965. "The Economy-controlling System of Nationalist Government." 
Independent Formosa 4, 2:5-18. 
Kishimoto-Nakayama Mio. 1984. "The Kangxi Depression and Early Qing Local 
Markets." Modern China 10, 2:227-56. 
Kiyonari Tadao. 1983 [ 1979]. "The Unsung Mainstays (1) Small Businesses." In 
[Murakami Hyoe and Johannes Hirsch meier, eds.], Politics and Economics in 
Contemporary Japan, pp. 157-183. Tokyo: Kodansha. 
Koo, Hagen (with Doo-Seung Hong). 1981. "Class and Income Inequality in Korea." 
American Sociological Review 45:610-25. 
302 
Sources 
Kottak, Conrad. 1974. Anthropology. New York: Random House. 
Kriedte, Peter, Hans Medick, and Jurgen Shlumbohm. 1982. Industrialization before 
Industrialization: Rural Industry in the Genesis of Capitalism. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
--. 1993. "Proto-industrialization Revisited: Demography, Social Structure, and 
Modern Domestic Industry." Continuity and Change 8, 2:217-52. 
Krug, Barbara. 1989. "Economic Reforms:' In China in Crisis, Royal Institute of 
International Affairs Discussion Paper 20, pp. 22-35. London. 
Kuhn, Dieter. 1988. Textile Technology: Spinning and Reeling. In Sir Joseph Needham, 
gen. ed., Chemistry and Chemical Technology, pt. 9. Science and Civilization in 
China, vol. 5. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kuhn, Philip A. 1990. Soulstealers: The Chinese Sorcery Scare of 1768. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press. 
Kulp, Daniel Harrison. 1923. Country Life in South China. New York: Teacher's College, 
Columbia University. 
Kung, Lydia. 1983. Factory Women in Taiwan. Ann Arbor, Mich.: UMI Research Press. 
Labby, David. 1976. The Demystification of Yap: Dialectics of Culture on a Micronesian 
Island. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Lai Jeh-hang, Ramon H. Myer, and Wou Wei. 1991. A Tragic Beginning: The February 28, 
1947 Uprising in Taiwan. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Leach, Edmund. 1965 [ 1954]. Political Systems of Highland Burma. Boston: Beacon Press. 
Leacock, Eleanor. 1971. North American Indians in Historical Perspective. New York: 
Random House. 
--. 1977. "The Changing Family -
Levi-Strauss; or, Whatever Happened to Fathers?" 
Social Research 44:235-59. 
Lee, James. 1990. State and Economy in Southwest China. Stanford: Stanford University 
Press. 
Lee Bing. 1952. "Report from Formosa." Far Eastern Economic Review 13:16-17. 
Legros, Dominique, Donald Hunderfund, and judith Shapiro. 1979. "Economic Base, 
Mode of Production, and Social Formation: A Discussion of Marx's 
Terminology:' Dialectical Anthropology 4, 3:243-49. 
Lehner, Urban C. 1991. "Growth Costs Taiwan in Social Dislocations as the Big Time 
Looms:' Wall Street Journal, 5 August:AL 
Lem, Winnie. 1991. "Gender, Ideology, and Petty Commodity Production: Social 
Reproduction in Languedoc, France:' In Littlefield and Gates, eds., Marxist 
Approaches in Economic Anthropology, 103-18. 
Levy, Howard J. 1966. Chinese Foot binding. The History of a Curious Erotic Custom. 
New York: W. Rawls. 
Li, K. T. 1959. ''A Review of the Economic Situation in Taiwan in 1958." Industry of Free 
China 11,3:3-21. 
--. 1959. "The Growth of Private Industry in Free China." Industry of Free China 12, 
6:3-19. 
Sources 
303 
--. 1976. The Experience of Dynamic Growth on Taiwan. Taibei: Mei-Ya. 
Li, Lillian M. 1981. China's Silk Trade: Traditional Industry in the Modern World, 
1842-1937. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
--. 1982. "Introduction: Food, Famine, and the Chinese State." Journal of Asian 
Studies, 41, 4:687-707. 
Li Yih-yuan. 1976. "Chinese Geomancy and Ancestor Worship: A Further Discussion." In 
William H. Newell, ed., Ancestors, pp. 329-38. The Hague: Mouton. 
--. 1979. "Zongjiao yu mixin wenti" [Problems of religion and superstition]. In Yang 
Guoshu and Ye Chijeng, eds., Dangjian Taiwan shehui wenti [Contemporary 
Taiwan social problems]. Taibei: Juliu tushu gongsi. 
Li Yu-ning.1984. "Hsu Tsung-han: Tradition and Revolution." Republican China 10, 
1A:13-28. 
Liau, Kianliong. 1963. ''An Analysis on the Formosan Economy." Formosan Quarterly 2, 
1:1-6. 
Lim Simtai. 1964. "The Forest of Formosa and the Assassination of Mr. Khu Khimtong." 
Independent Formosa [formerly Formosa Quarterly]3, 1:8-12. 
Lin, Jan. 1989. "Beyond Neoclassical Shibboleths: A Political-Economic Analysis of 
Taiwanese Economic Development:' Dialectical Anthropology 14, 4:283-300. 
Lin Man-houng. 1991. "Two Social Theories Revealed: Statecraft Controversies over 
China's Monetary Crisis, 1805-1854." Late Imperial China 12, 2:1-35. 
Lin Renchuan. 1990. "Fukien's Private Sea Trade in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth 
Centuries." In Vermeer, ed., The Development and Decline of Fukien Province, 
pp. 16}-216. 
Lin Yu-tang. 1936. ''A Nun of Taishan" (a novelette) and Other Translations. Shanghai: 
Commercial Press. 
Little, Mrs. Archibald. [1898]. Intimate China. London: Hutchinson. 
Little, Daniel. 1989. Understanding Peasant China: Case Studies in the Philosophy of 
Social Science. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Littlefield, Alice. 1978. "Exploitation and the Expansion of Capital: The Case of the 
Hammock Industry of Yucatan." American Ethnologist 5, 3:495-508. 
Littlefield, Alice, and Hill Gates, eds. 1991. Marxist Approaches in Economic 
Anthropology. Lanham, Md.: University Press of America. 
Littlefield, Alice, and Larry T. Reynolds. 1990. "The Putting-Out System: Transitional 
Form or Recurrent Feature of Capitalist Production?" Social Science Journal27, 
4=359-72. 
Liu, Alan P. L. 1987. Phoenix and the Lame Lion. Stanford: Hoover Institution Press. 
Liu Pin-yen [Binyan]. 1990. A Higher Kind of Loyalty: A Memoir by One of China's 
Foremost Journalists. New York: Pantheon. 
Liu Xingwu. 1991. "Tradition and Modernization: The Chinese Case." Practicing 
Anthropology 13, 1:22-27. 
McCreery, John L. 1976. "Women's Property Rights and Dowry in China and South 
Asia." Ethnology 15:163-74. 
304 
Sources 
--. n.d. "Why Don't We See Some Real Money Here?" Ms. 
Macfarlane, Alan. 1987. The Culture of Capitalism. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
McGough, James P. 1984. "The Domestic Mode of Production and Peasant Social 
Organization: The Chinese Case." In E. Paul Durrenberger, ed., Chayanov, 
Peasants, and Economic Anthropology, pp. 183-201. New York: Academic Press. 
Macgowan, J. 1909. Lights and Shadows of Chinese Life. Shanghai: North China Daily 
News and Herald. 
McKnight, Brian E. 1971. Village and Bureaucracy in Southern Sung China. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Mamdani, Mahmood. 1972. The Myth of Population Control. New York: Monthly 
Review Press. 
Mann, Susan. 1987a. Local Merchants and the Chinese Bureaucracy, 1750-1950. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 
--. 1987b. "Widows in the Kinship, Class, and Community Structures of Qing China." 
Journal of Asian Studies 46:37-56. 
--. 1992. "Household Handicrafts and State Policies in Qing Times." In Jane Leonard, 
ed., To Achieve Wealth and Security, pp. 75-96. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
[see also Susan Mann Jones.] 
Mao Zedong. 1972. Poems of Mao Tse-tung. Trans. and with an intro. and notes by 
Hwa-ling Nie Engle and Paul Engle. New York: Simon and Schuster. 
--. 1990. Report from Xunwu. Trans. and with an intro. and notes by Roger R. 
Thompson. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Mark, Lindy Li. 1972. Taiwanese Lineage Enterprises: A Study of Familial 
Entrepreneurship. Ph.D. diss., Department of Anthropology, University of 
California, Berkeley. 
Marks, Robert M. 1984. Rural Revolution in South China: Peasants and the Making of 
History in Haifeng County, 1570-1930. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. 
Martin, Emily. 1988. "Gender and Ideological Differences in Representations of Life and 
Death." In Watson and Rawski, eds., Death Ritual in Late Imperial and Modern 
China, pp. 164-79. [See also Emily Martin Ahern.] 
Marx, Karl. 1965. Precapitalist Economic Formations. Ed. and with an intro. by E. J. 
Hobsbawm. New York: International Publishers. 
--. 1968. Karl Marx on Colonialism and Modernization; His Despatches and Other 
Writings on China, India, Mexico, the Middle East, and North Africa. Ed. and 
with an intro. by Shlomo Avineri. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday. 
--. 1973. Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy. Trans. and 
with a foreword by Martin Nicolaus. New York: Vintage. 
--. 1977. Capital, vol. 1. Intro. by Ernst Mandel. Trans. Ben Fowkes. New York: 
Vintage. 
--. 1981. Capital, vol. 3. Intro. by Ernst Mandel. Trans. David Fernbach. New York: 
Vintage. 
Marx, Karl, and Frederick Engels. 1962. Selected Works, vol. 1:92. 
Sources 
305 
Mason, EdwardS., and Mahn Je Kim. 1979-1981. Studies in the Modernization of the 
Republic of Korea. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Meillassoux, Claude. 1978. " 'The Economy' in Agricultural Self-Sustaining Societies: A 
Preliminary Analysis." In David Seddon, ed., Relations of Production: Marxist 
Approaches to Economic Anthropology. London: Cass. 
Mendels, Franklin. 1970. Industrialization and Population Pressure in Eighteenth-
Century Flanders. Ph.D. diss., Department of History, University of Wisconsin. 
--. 1972. "Proto-industrialization: The First Stage of the Industrialization Process." 
Journal of Economic History 32: 241-61. 
--. 1981. Industrialization and Population Pressure in Eighteenth-century Flanders. 
New York: Columbia University Press. 
Menpes, Mortimer. 1909. China. London: A. & C. Black. 
Metzger, Thomas A. 1973. The Internal Organization of Ch'ing Bureaucracy. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Miles, Robert. 1987. Capitalism and Unfree Labour. Anomaly or Necessity? London: 
Tavistock. 
Mintz, Sidney W. 1971. "Men, Women, and Trade." Comparative Studies in Society and 
History 13, 3:247-69. 
--. 1981. "Afterword." In Ahern and Gates, eds., The Anthropology of Taiwanese 
Society, pp. 427-42. 
--. 1985. Sweetness and Power: The Place of Sugar in Modern History. New York: 
Viking. 
Mitamura Taisuke. 1970. Chinese Eunuchs. The Structure of Intimate Politics. Rutland, 
Vt., and Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle. 
Miyakawa Hisayuki. 1955. "An Outline of the Naito Hypothesis and Its Effects on 
Japanese Studies of China." Far Eastern Quarterly 14:533-52. 
--. 1969. "The Naito Hypothesis." In James T. C. Liu and Peter J. Golas, eds., Change 
in Sung China: Innovation or Renovation? Lexington, Mass.: D. C. Heath and 
Company. 
Morgan Guaranty Survey, June 1961. 1962. "Economic Development in Taiwan." In After 
Seeing Free China, pp. 43-50. [Taibei]:n.p. 
Morishima Michio. 1982. Why Has Japan Succeeded? Western Technology and Japanese 
Ethos. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Morrison, Hedda, and Wolfram Eberhard. 1973. Hua Shan, the Taoist Sacred Mountain 
in West China: Its Scenery, Monasteries and Monks. Hong Kong: Vetch and Lee. 
Morse, Hosea Ballou. 1966 [1909]. The Gilds of China. Taibei: Ch'eng-wen. 
Moulder, Frances. 1977. Japan, China, and the Modern World Economy: Toward a 
Reinterpretation of East Asian Development, ca. 16oo to ca. 1918. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Murphey, Rhoads. 1970. The Treaty Ports and China's Modernization: What Went 
Wrong? Michigan Papers in Chinese Studies 7. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Center for Chinese Studies. 
306 
Sources 
Murray, Stephen 0., and Hong Keelong. 1994. Taiwanese Culture, Taiwanese Society: A 
Critical Review of Social Science Research Done on Taiwan. Lanham, Md.: 
University Press of America. 
Myers, Ramon. 1970. The Chinese Peasant Economy: Agricultural Development in 
Hopei and Shantung, 1890-1949. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
--. 1976. "The 'Sprouts of Capitalism' in Agricultural Development during the Mid-
Qing Period." Ch'ing-shih wen-t'i 6:1-24. 
--. 1980. The Chinese Economy: Past and Present. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth. 
[n.a.]1987 [1959]. Zhongguo zibenzhuyi mengya wenti taolun ji [Collected discussions 
of the problem of China's sprouts of capitalism] Taibei: Gufong chubanshe. 
Naquin, Susan. 1986. "Two Descent Groups of North China: The Wangs ofYung-p'ing 
Prefecture, 1500-18oo:' In Ebrey and Watson, eds., Kinship Organization in Late 
Imperial China, 1000-1940, pp. 210-44. 
--. 1988. "Funerals in North China: Uniformity and Variation." In Watson and Rawski, 
eds., Death Ritual in Late Imperial and Modern China, pp. 37-70. 
Naquin, Susan, and Evelyn S. Rawski. 1987. Chinese Society in the Eighteenth Century. 
New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Needham, Joseph. 1965. Science and Civilization in China, vol. 4, pt. 2. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Nevard, Jacques. 1960. "End of Aid by '65 is Taiwan's Goal." New York Times, 3 April, sec. 
19=3· 
New York Times. 1958. "U.S. Seeks to Limit Chiang's Army's Size:' 5 September, sec. p. 
--. 1960. "Taiwan's Economy Stagnates." 3 April, sec. 19:3. 
--. 1960. "ROC Military Budgets Expand." 5 September, sec. 4:1. 
--. 1961. "U.S. Aide Berates Taiwan on Funds, Asserts Nationalist Regime Overspends 
Itself." 23 January, sec. 4:7. 
Ng Chin-keong. 1983. Trade and Society: The Amoy Network on the China Coast, 
1683-1735. Singapore: Singapore University Press. 
--. 1990. "The South Fukienese Junk Trade at Amoy from the Seventeenth to the Early 
Nineteenth Centuries:' In Vermeer, ed., The Development and Decline of Fukien 
Province, pp. 297-316. 
Niehoff, Justin. 1987. "The Villager as Industrialist: Ideologies of Household 
Manufacturing." Modern China 13, 3:278-309. 
Nonini, Donald M. 1979. "The Mysteries of Capital Accumulation: Honoring the Gods 
and Gambling among Chinese in a Malaysian Market Town." In Proceedings of 
the First International Symposium on Asian Studies, 1979, pp. 701-10. Hong Kong: 
Asian Research Service. 
--. 1983a. The Chinese Community of a West Malaysian Market Town: A Study in 
Political Economy. Ph.D. diss., Department of Anthropology, Stanford University. 
--. 1983b. "The Chinese Truck Transport 'Industry' of a Peninsular Malaysian Market 
Town." In Linda Y. C. Lim and L. A. Peter Gosling, eds., The Chinese in Southeast 
Asia, vol. 1, pp. 171-206. Singapore: Maruzen Asia. 
Sources 
307 
Nugent, David. 1991. "Control of Space, Stability of Time: The Peruvian State as Arbiter 
of Surplus Flows:' In Littlefield and Gates, eds., Marxist Approaches in Economic 
Anthropology, pp. 161-86. 
Numazaki lchiro. 1986. "Networks of Taiwanese Big Businesses." Modern China 12, 
4=487-534· 
--. 1991. Networks and Partnerships: The Social Organization of The Chinese 
Business Elite in Taiwan. Ph.D. diss., Department of Anthropology, Michigan 
State University. 
--. 1993. "The Tainanbang: The Rise and Growth of a Banana-Bunch-shaped Business 
Group in Taiwan." Developing Economies 31, 4:485-510. 
Olsen, Stephen M. 1972. "The Inculcation of Economic Values in Taipei Business 
Families." In W. E. Willmott, ed., Economic Organization in Chinese Society, pp. 
261-96. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Omohundro, John T. 1981. Chinese Merchant Families in Iloilo: Commerce and Kin in a 
Central Philippine City. Athens: Ohio University Press. 
Overmyer, DanielL. 1984. ''Attitudes toward the Ruler and State in Chinese Popular 
Religious Literature: Sixteenth and Seventeenth Century Pao-Chuan." Harvard 
Journal of Asiatic Studies, 44, 2:347-80. 
Oxfeld, Ellen. 1992. "Individualism, Holism, and the Market Mentality: Notes on the 
Recollections of a Chinese Entrepreneur." Cultural Anthropology 7, 2:267-300. 
--. 1993. Blood, Sweat, and Mahjong: Family and Enterprise in an Overseas Chinese 
Community. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. [See also Ellen Oxfeld Basu.] 
Palmer, Bryan D. 1990. Descent into Discourse. The Reification of Language and the 
Writing of Social History. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
Pan Yang-shan. 1954. "Formosa's Textile Industry:' Far Eastern Economic Review 17:859. 
Pan Yinghai. 1988. Taiwan Pingpu zu yanjiu shu mu hui pien [Researches on the Taiwan 
plains Aborigines]. Taibei: Institute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica. 
Parish, William L., and Martin King Whyte. 1978. Village and Family in Contemporary 
China. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Parry,]., and M. Bloch, eds. 1989. Money and the Morality of Exchange. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Pasternak, Burton. 1969. "The Role of the Frontier in Chinese Lineage Development." 
Journal of Asian Studies 28, 3:555-61. 
--. 1972. Kinship and Community in Two Chinese Villages. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press. 
--. 1983. Guests in the Dragon. New York. Columbia University Press. 
--. 1985a. "The Disquieting Chinese Lineage and Its Anthropological Relevance." In 
Hsieh Jih-chang and Chuang Ying-chang, eds., The Chinese Family and Its Ritual 
Behavior, pp. 165-91. [Taibei]: Institute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica. 
--. 1985b. "On the Causes and Demographic Consequences of Uxorilocal Marriage in 
China:' In Susan B. Hanley and Arthur P. Wolf, eds., Family and Population in 
East Asian History, pp. 309-36. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
308 
Sources 
Peng Ming-min. 1972. A Taste of Freedom: Memoirs of a Formosan Independence 
Leader. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
Peng Zheyi. 1987 [ 1959]. "Can the Historical Text 'The Weaver' Illuminate the Question 
of Sprouts of Capitalism in China's Handicraft Industry?" In [n.a.], Collected 
discussions of the problem of China's sprouts of capitalism, pp. 488-519. Taibei: 
Gufong chubanshe. 
Perdue, Peter C. 1987. Exhausting the Earth: State and Peasant in Hunan, 1500-1850. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Perkins, Dwight H. 1969. Agricultural Development in China, 1368-1968. Chicago: 
Aldin e. 
--. 1981. "Research on the Economy of the People's Republic of China: A Survey of the 
Field." Journal of Asian Studies 42, 2:345-72. 
Perry, Elizabeth J, 1980. Rebels and Revolutionaries in North China, 1845-1945. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 
Pickering, W. A. 1898. Pioneering in Formosa. London: Hurst and Blackett. 
Pieke, Frank. 1992. The Ordinary and the Extraordinary: An Anthropological Study of 
Chinese Reform and Protest in Beijing, 1989. Ph.D. diss., Department of 
Anthropology, University of California, Berkeley. 
Plopper, Clifford H. 1969 [1935). Chinese Religion as Seen through the Proverb. New 
York: Paragon. 
Polanyi, Karl. 1965 [1944]. The Great Transformation. Boston: Beacon Press. 
Potter, Jack M. 1968. Capitalism and the Chinese Peasant. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
Potter, Sulamith Heins, and jack M. Potter. 1990. China's Peasants: The Anthropology of 
a Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Pruitt, Ida. 1967 [1945]. A Daughter of Han. Boston: Beacon Press. 
Pyle, Jean Larson. 1990. The State and Women in the Economy. Lessons from Sex 
Discrimination in the Republic of Ireland. Albany: State University of New York 
Press. 
Rawski, Evelyn Sakakida. 1972. Agricultural Change and the Peasant Economy of South 
China. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
--. 1985. "Economic and Social Foundations of Late Imperial Culture:' In Johnson, 
Nathan, and Rawski, eds., Popular Culture in Late Imperial China, pp. 3-33. 
Rebel, Hermann. 1989. "Cultural Hegemony and Class Experience: A Critical Reading of 
Recent Ethnological-Historical Approaches, Part 1." American Ethnologist 16, 
1:117-36. 
Redding, S. Gordon. 1990. The Spirit of Chinese Capitalism. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. 
Republic of China. DGBAS [Directorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics]. 
[Various years.] Statistical Abstract of the Republic of China. Taibei: DGBAS, 
ROC. 
Rexroth, Kenneth, and Ling Chung, eds. and trans. 1973. The Orchid Boat: Women Poets 
of China. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Sources 
309 
Riggs, Fred W. 1952. Formosa under Chinese Nationalist Rule. New York: Macmillan. 
--. n.d. [ 1959]. The Consulting Firm, the U.S. Aid Agency, and the Chinese Veterans' 
Program. Syracuse, N.Y.: The Inter-University Case Program [mimeo]. 
Roel, Vergilio. 1981. "El Modo de Produccion Inca." In Waldemar Espinoza Soriano, ed., 
Los modos de produccion en el imperio de los Incas, pp. 201-12. Lima: Amaru 
Editores. 
Rohsenow, Hill Gates. 1973. Prosperity Settlement: The Politics of Pai-pai in Taipei, 
Taiwan. Ph.D. diss., Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan. [See 
also Hill Gates.] 
Rohsenow, John S. 1991. A Chinese-English Dictionary of Enigmatic Folk Similes 
(Xiehouyu). Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
Ronaldshay [Lawrence John Lumley Dundas, Earl of Ronaldshay]. 1908. A Wandering 
Student in the Far East. 2 vols. Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood. 
Ropp, Paul S. 1976. "The Seeds of Change: Reflections on the Condition of Women in the 
Early and Mid-Ch'ing." Signs 2, 1:5-23. 
Rowe, William T. 1984. Hankow: Commerce and Society in a Chinese City, 1796-1889. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Rudra, A. 1988. "Pre-Capitalist Modes of Production in Non-European Societies:' 
Journal of Peasant Studies 15:373-94. 
Sa, Sophie. 1985. "Marriage among the Taiwanese of pre-1945 Taipei." In Susan Hanley 
and Arthur Wolf, eds., History and Population in East Asia, pp. 277-308. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 
Sacks, Karen. 1979. Sisters and Wives: The Past and Future of Sexual Equality. Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press. 
Sahlins, Marshall. 1972. Stone Age Economics. Chicago: Aldine. 
--. 1981. Historical Metaphors and Mythic Realities: Structure in the Early History of 
the Sandwich Islands Kingdom. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
--. 1988. "Cosmologies of Capitalism: The Trans-Pacific Sector of 'The World 
System.'" Proceedings of the British Academy, 74=1-51. 
Salaff, Janet W. 1981. Working Daughters of Hong Kong: Filial Piety or Power in the 
Family? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
--. 1988. State and Family in Singapore. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
--. 1991. "The Chinese Connection: Management Control Structures and the Search 
for Labor in Taiwan, Part I: Small Firms." In E. K. Y. Chen eta!., eds., Taiwan: 
Economy, Society, and History, pp. 175-205. Hong Kong: University of Hong 
Kong. 
Sangren, P. Steven. 1983. "Female Gender in Chinese Religious Symbols: Kuan Yin, Ma 
Tsu, and the 'Eternal Mother.' "Signs 9:4-25. 
--. 1984. "Great Tradition and Little Tradition Reconsidered: The Question of 
Cultural Integration in China." Journal of Chinese Studies 1:1-24. 
--. 1987. History and Magical Power in a Chinese Community. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press. 
310 
Sources 
Sankar, Andrea. 1978. The Evolution of the Sisterhood in Traditional Chinese Society: 
From Village Girls' Houses to Chai T'angs in Hong Kong. Ph.D. diss., Department 
of Anthropology, University of Michigan. 
--. 1984. "Spinster Sisterhoods." In Mary Sheridan and Janet W. Salaff, eds., Lives: 
Chinese Working Women, pp. 51-70. Bloomington: University of Indiana Press. 
Santangelo, Paolo. 1984. Le manifatture tessili imperiali durante le dinastie Minge Qing 
con particolare attenzione a quelle di Suzhou. Napoli: Istituto universitario 
orientale. 
Saso, Michael. 1982. "Taiwan: Old Gods and Modern Society." In Carlos Calderola, ed., 
Religions and Societies: Asia and the Middle East, pp. 579-606. Amsterdam: 
Mouton. 
Schafer, Edward H. 1963. The Golden Peaches of Samarkand. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
--. 1973. The Divine Woman: Dragon Ladies and Rain Maidens in T'ang Literature. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Scheper-Hughes, Nancy. 1992. Death without Weeping: The Violence of Everyday Life in 
Brazil. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Schipper, Kristofer. 1990. "The Cult of Pao-sheng Ta-ti and Its Spreading to Taiwan: A 
Case Study of Fen-hsiang." In Vermeer, ed., The Development and Decline of 
Fukien Province, 397-416. 
Schneider, Jane, and Peter Schneider. 1976. Culture and Political Economy in Western 
Sicily. New York: Academic Press. 
Schoppa, R. Keith. 1989. Xiang Lake -
Nine Centuries of Chinese Life. New Haven: Yale 
University Press. 
Scott, James C. 1985. Weapons of the Weak. Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance. New 
Haven: Yale University Press. 
Seaman, Gary. 1981. "The Sexual Politics of Karmic Retribution:' In Ahern and Gates, 
eds., The Anthropology of Taiwanese Society, pp. 381-96. 
--. 1982. "Spirit Money: An Interpretation:' Journal of Chinese Religions 10:80-91. 
Selya, Roger Mark. 1974. The Industrialization of Taiwan. Some Geographic 
Considerations. Jerusalem: Jerusalem Academic Press. 
Shadick, Harold. 1952. "Translator's Introduction." In Liu T'ieh-yun (Liu E), The Travels 
of Lao Ts'an. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Shaw, Robert. 1994. Servant-Girls and Servant-Wives of Amoy, 1905-1988. Honors 
Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Stanford University. 
Shen Ts'ung-wen [Shen Congwen].1982 [1947]. "The Frontier City." In Shen, The 
Chinese Earth. New York: Columbia University Press. 
Shepherd, John. 1988. "Rethinking Tenancy: Explaining Spatial and Temporal Variation 
in Late Imperial and Republican China." Comparative Studies in Society and 
History 30, 3:403-31. 
--. 1993. Statecraft and Political Economy on the Taiwan Frontier, 16oo-18oo. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Sources 
311 
Shi Ming. 1979. Taiwan ren sibai nian shi [Four hundred years of Taiwan people's 
history]. San Jose, Calif.: Paradise Cultural Association. 
Shiba Yoshinobu. 1970. Commerce and Society in Sung China. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Center for Chinese Studies. 
--. 1975. "Urbanization and the Development of Markets in the Lower Yangtze Valley:' 
In John Winthrop Haeger, ed., Crisis and Prosperity in Sung China, pp. 13-48. 
Albuquerque: University of Arizona Press. 
--. 1977. "Ningpo and Its Hinterland." In Skinner, ed., The City in Late Traditional 
China, pp. 391-440. 
Shieh Gwo-shyong. 1992. "Boss" Island. New York: P. Lang. 
Shiga Shuzo. 1978. "Family Property and the Law of Inheritance in Traditional China:' In 
David C. Buxbaum, ed., Chinese Family Law and Social Change. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press. 
Shih Min-hsiung, 1976. The Silk Industry in Ch'ing China. Trans. E-tu Zen Sun. Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Center for Chinese Studies. 
Shinohara Miyohei. 1962. Growth and Cycles in the Japanese Economy. Tokyo: 
Kinokuniya. 
Shryock, John. 1931. The Temples of Anking and Their Cults. Paris: Librairie Geuthner. 
Silin, Robert H. 1972. "Marketing and Credit in a Hong Kong Wholesale Market." In 
W. E. Willmott, ed., Economic Organization in Chinese Society, pp. 327-52. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
--. 1976. Leadership and Values. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Simon, Denis Fred and Michael Y. M. Kau, eds. 1992. Taiwan: Beyond the Economic 
Miracle. Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe. 
Siu, Helen F. 1989. Agents and Victims in South China. New Haven: Yale University 
Press. 
Skinner, G. William. 1961. Leadership and Power in the Chinese Community of 
Thailand. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
--. 1964. "Marketing and Social Structure in Rural China, Part I." Journal of Asian 
Studies 24, 1:1-43. 
--. 1965a. "Marketing and Social Structure in Rural China, Part II:' journal of Asian 
Studies 24, 2:195-228. 
--. 1965b. "Marketing and Social Structure in Rural China, Part III." Journal of Asian 
Studies 24, 3=363-99. 
--. 1971. "Chinese Peasants and the Closed Community: An Open and Shut Case:' 
Comparative Studies in Society and History 13, 3:270-281. 
--. 1977a. "Cities and the Hierarchy of Local Systems:' In Skinner, ed., The City in Late 
Imperial China, pp. 275-351. 
--. 1977b. "Regional Urbanization in Nineteenth-Century China." In Skinner, ed., The 
City in Late Imperial China, pp. 211-49. 
--. 1977c. "Urban and Rural in Chinese Society." In Skinner, ed., The City in Late 
Imperial China, pp. 253-273. 
312 
Sources 
--. 1977d. "Urban Development in Imperial China." In Skinner, ed., The City in Late 
Imperial China, pp. 3-31. 
--. 1977e. "Urban Social Structure in Ch'ing China:' In Skinner, ed., The City in Late 
Imperial China, pp. 521-53. 
--. 1985. "The Structure of Chinese History." Journal of Asian Studies 64, 2:271-92. 
Skinner, G. William, ed. 1977. The City in Late Imperial China. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press. 
Skocpol, Theda. 1979. States and Social Revolutions: A Comparative Analysis of France, 
Russia, and China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Skoggard, Ian. 1993. Dependency and Rural Industrialization in Taiwan: The History and 
Organization of Taiwan's Shoe Industry. Ph.D. diss., Department of 
Anthropology, City University of New York. 
--. 1994. "The Structure and Spirit of Development in Rural China." Ms. 
Smart, Josephine. 1983. "Dong-Kings, Triads and Hawkers: Spatial Monopoly among the 
Street Hawkers in Hong Kong." Canadian Journal of Development Studies 4, 
1:158-63. 
--. 1986. "The Hawker Permitted Place: A Discussion of the Impact of State Policy on 
Street Hawking in Hong Kong." The Asian Journal of Public Administration 8, 
2:260-79-
Smart, Josephine, and Alan Smart. 1991. "Personal Relations and Divergent Economies: 
A Case Study of Hong Kong Investment in South China." International Journal of 
Urban and Regional Research 15, 2:216-33. 
--. 1992. "Capitalist Production in a Socialist Society: The Transfer of Manufacturing 
from Hong Kong to China." In F. A. Rothstein and M. L. Blim, eds., Anthropology 
and the Global Factory: Studies of the New Industrialization in the Late Twentieth 
Century, pp. 47-61. New York: Bergin and Garvey. 
Smith, Arthur H. 1894. Chinese Characteristics. New York: Fleming H. Revell. 
--. 1899. Village China. New York: Fleming H. Revell. 
--. 1965 [1914]. Proverbs and Common Sayings from the Chinese. New York: Dover. 
Smith, Carol A. 1981. "Reconstructing the Elements of Petty Commodity Production." Ms. 
Smith, Thomas C. 1977. Nakahara: Family Farming and Population in a Japanese Village,. 
1717-1830. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
So, Alvin Y. 1986. The South China Silk District: Local Historical Transformation and 
World-System Theory. Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Spence, Jonathan. 1990. "Western Perceptions of China from the Late Sixteenth Century 
to the Present." In Paul S. Ropp, ed., Heritage of China. Contemporary 
Perspectives on Chinese Civilization, pp. 1-14- Berkeley: University of California 
Press. 
--. 1992a. "Taxes." In Spence, Chinese Roundabout: Essays in History and Culture, pp. 
219-27. New York: W. W. Norton. 
--. 1992b. "Collapse of a Purist." In Spence, Chinese Roundabout: Essays in History 
and Culture, pp. 124-31. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Sources 
313 
Stacey, Judith. 1983. Patriarchy and Socialist Revolution in China. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
Staunton, Sir George Thomas, trans. 1810. Ta Tsing Leu Lee, Being the Fundamental 
Laws, and a Selection from the Supplementary Statutes, of the Penal Code of 
China. London: T. Cadell and W. Davies. 
Stevens, Rob. 1983. Classes in Contemporary Japan. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Stites, Richard. 1982. "Small-scale Industry in Yingge, Taiwan." Modern China 8, 
2:247-79· 
--. 1985. "Industrial Work as an Entrepreneurial Strategy:' Modern China 1, 1:227-46. 
Stockard, Janice M. 1989. Daughters of the Canton Delta: Marriage Patterns and Economic 
Strategies in South China, 1860-1930. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Sung Hok-pang. 1974. "Legends and Stories of the New Territories." Journal of the Hong 
Kong Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 1p6o-8o. 
Sung Lung-shen. 1981. "Property and Family Division:' In Ahern and Gates, eds., The 
Anthropology of Taiwanese Society, pp. 361-80. 
Taibei City Government. 1974. Taibei City Temples [Taibei shi si miao yaolan]. Taibei. 
Taiwan. Provincial Government, Bureau of Accounting and Statistics. [Various years.] 
Report on the Survey of Family Earning and Expenditure. Taibei. 
Takahashi Kohachiro. 1976. "A Contribution to the Discussion." In Rodney Hilton, ed., 
The Transition from Feudalism to Capitalism, pp. 68-97. London: Verso. 
Tambiah, S. J. 1973. "Dowry and Bridewealth and the Property Rights of Women in 
South Asia." In Goody and Tambiah, Bridewealth and Dowry, pp. 59-169. 
Tang Mei-chun. 1978. Urban Chinese Families. Taibei: National Taiwan University. 
--. 1985. "Equal Right and Domestic Structure." In Hsieh Jih-chang and Chuang Ying-
chang, eds., The Chinese Family and Its Ritual Behavior, pp. 61-69. [Taibei]: 
Institute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica. 
Taussig, Michael. 1975. The Devil and Commodity Fetishism in South America. Durham: 
University of North Carolina Press. 
Teng, Jinhua Emma. 1990. "Religion as a Source of Oppression and Creativity for 
Chinese Women." Journal of Women and Gender Studies 1:165-91. 
Ter Haar, Barend J. 1990. "The Genesis and Spread of Temple Cults in Fukien." In 
Vermeer, ed., The Development and Decline of Fukien Province, pp. 349-96. 
Thomas, Janet. 1988. "Women and Capitalism: Oppression or Emancipation: A Review 
Article." Comparative Studies in Society and History 30, 3:534-49. 
Thompson, E. P. 1966. The Making of the English Working Class. New York: Vintage. 
Thompson, Lawrence G. 1973. The Chinese Way in Religion. Encino, Calif.: Dickenson. 
Thorbecke, Erik. 1979. "Agricultural Development." In Galenson, ed., Economic Growth 
and Structural Change in Taiwan, pp. 200-22. 
T'ien Ju-k'ang. 1990. "The Decadence of Buddhist Temples in Fukien in Late Ming and 
Early Ch'ing." In Vermeer, ed., The Development and Decline of Fukien Province, 
pp. 83-100. 
314 
Sources 
Tokei, Ferenc. 1966. Sur le mode de production asiatique. Budapest: Akadamia Kiado. 
Tong, James W. 1991. Disorder under Heaven. Collective Violence in the Ming Dynasty. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Top ley, Marjorie. 1975. "Marriage Resistance in Rural Kwangtung." In Margery Wolf and 
Roxanne Witke, eds., Women in Chinese Society, pp. 67-88. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press. 
Torr, Dona, ed. 1951. Marx on China, 1853-1860. London: Lawrence and Wishart. 
Treudley, Mary Bosworth. 1971 [1947, ms.]. The Men and Women of Chung Ho Ch'ang. 
Taibei: Orient Cultural Service. 
Tseng, Osman. 1991. "Steps toward a Mature Market." Free China Review 41, 4:49-53. 
Tsui Yi-lan. 1987. Are Married Daughters "Spilled Water"? A Study of Working Women in 
Urban Taiwan. Taibei: Women's Research Program, National Taiwan University. 
--. 1989. "The Changing Role of Working Women in Taiwan." In Chang Kwang-chih 
et al., eds., Anthropological Studies of the Taiwan Area, pp. 285-318. 
Tsurumi, E. Patricia. 1994. Factory Girls: Women in the Thread Mills of Meiji Japan. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Twitchett, Denis. 1963. Financial Administration under the Tang Dynasty. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Tzu, Y. Y. 1927. "Diary of a Chinese Buddhist Nun: T'ze Kuang:' Journal of Religion 7, 
5-6:612-18. 
Vander Sprenkel, Sybille. 1962. Legal Institutions in Manchu China: A Sociological 
Analysis. London: Athlone. 
VanSlyke, Lyman P. 1988. Yangtze: Nature, History, and the River. Reading, Mass.: 
Addison-Wesley. 
Vermeer, Eduard B., ed. 1990a. The Development and Decline of Fukien Province in the 
Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 
--. 1990b. "The Decline of Hsing-hua Prefecture in the Early Ch'ing."In Vermeer, ed., 
The Development and Decline of Fukien Province, pp. 101-62. 
--. 1990c. "Introduction:' In Vermeer, ed., The Development and Decline of Fukien 
Province, pp. 5-34. 
Vertente, Christine, Hsiu Chi Hsueh, and Wu Mi-cha. 1991. The Authentic Story of 
Taiwan: An Illustrated History, Based on Ancient Maps, Manuscripts, and Prints. 
Knotke, Belgium: Mappamundi. 
Wade, Robert. 1990. Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role of 
Government in East Asian Industrialization. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 
Wakeman, Frederick J. 1980. Ming and Qing Historical Studies in the People's Republic 
of China. Berkeley: Center for Chinese Studies, University of California. 
Walder, Andrew G. 1986. Communist Neo-Traditionalism: Work and Authority in 
Chinese Industry. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Waltner, Ann Beth. 1981. The Adoption of Children in Ming and Early Ch'ing China. 
Ph.D. diss., Department of History, University of California Press. 
Sources 
315 
--. 1990. Getting an Heir: Adoption and the Construction of Kinship in Late Imperial 
China. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
Walton-Vargo, Linda Ann. 1978. Education, Social Change, and NeoConfucianism in 
Song-Yuan China: Academies and the Local Elite in Ming Prefecture (Ningpo). 
Ph.D. diss., Department of History, University of Pennsylvania. 
Wang Fangzhong. 1987 [ 1959]. "The Socio-Economic Nature of Song Dynasty Private 
Handicraft Industry" [Song dai minying shougongye di shehui jingji xingzhi]. In 
Zhongguo zibenzhuyi mengya wenti taolun ji, pp. 1-34. Taibei: Gufong chubanshe. 
Wang Sung-hsing. 1974. "Taiwanese Architecture and the Supernatural." In Arthur P. 
Wolf, ed., Religion and Ritual in Chinese Society, pp. 183-93. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press. 
--. 1985. "On the Household and Family in Chinese Society:' In Hsieh Jih-chang and 
Chuang Ying-chang, eds., The Chinese Family and Its Ritual Behavior, pp. 50-60. 
Wang Sung-hsing and Raymond Apthorpe. 1974. Rice Farming in Taiwan: Three Village 
Studies. Taibei: Institute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica. 
Wang Yeh-chien. 1980. "The Sprouts of Capitalism in China:' In Frederick J. Wakeman, 
Jr., ed., Ming and Qing Historical Studies in the People's Republic of China, pp. 
96-103. Berkeley: Center for Chinese Studies, University of California. 
Ward, Barbara. 1972. "A Small Factory in Hong Kong: Some Aspects of Its Internal 
Organization." In W. E. Willmott, ed., Economic Organization in Chinese Society, 
pp. 353-86. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
--. 1985. "Regional Operas and Their Audiences: Evidence from Hong Kong." In 
Johnson eta!., eds., Popular Culture in Late Imperial China, pp. 161-87. 
Watson, James L. 1975. Emigration and the Chinese Lineage: The Mans in Hong Kong 
and London. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
--. 1977. "Hereditary Tenancy and Corporate Landlordism in Traditional China: A 
Case Study." Modern Asian Studies, 11:161-82. 
--. 198oa. "Transactions in People: The Chinese Market in Slaves, Servants, and 
Heirs." In Watson, ed., Asian and African Systems of Slavery, pp. 223-50. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
--. 198ob. "Slavery as an Institution, Open and Closed Systems." In Watson, ed., Asian 
and African Systems of Slavery, pp. 1-15. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
--. 1985. "Standardizing the Gods: The Promotion of T'ien Hou ('Empress of 
Heaven') along the South China Coast, 960-1960." In Johnson eta!., eds., Popular 
Culture in Late Imperial China, pp. 292-324. 
--. 1988. "The Structure of Chinese Funerary Rites: Elementary Forms, Ritual 
Sequence, and the Primacy of Performance." In Watson and Rawski, eds., Death 
Ritual in Late Imperial and Modern China, pp. 3-19. 
Watson, James L., and Evelyn S. Rawski. 1988. Death Ritual in Late Imperial and Modern 
China. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Watson, Rubie. 1984. "Women's Work and Inheritance in Chinese Society: An 
Anthropologist's View." In Barbara D. Miller and Janice Hyde, eds., Women in 
316 
Sources 
Asia and Asian Studies. Association for Asian Studies, Committee on Women in 
Asian Studies Monograph Series 1, pp. 7-23. 
--. 1984. "Women's Property in Republican China: Rights and Practice." Republican 
China 10, 1A:1-12. 
--. 1985. Inequality among Brothers: Class and Kinship in South China. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
--. 1990. "Corporate Property and Local Leadership in the Pearl River Delta, 1898-1941." 
In Joseph W. Eshrick and Mary Backus Rankin, eds., Chinese Local Elites and 
Patterns of Dominance, pp. 239-60. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Watters, T. 1874. "Chinese Fox-Myths." Journal of the North China Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society 8:45-65. 
Weber, Max.1977. [1948]. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. Trans., ed., and with an 
intra. by H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Weinbaum, Batya. 1976. "Women in Transition to Socialism: Perspectives on the Chinese 
Case." Review of Radical Political Economics 8, 1:34-58. 
Weller, Robert P. 1985. "Beggars, Bandits, and Ghosts: The Failure of State Control over 
Religious Interpretation in Taiwan." American Ethnologist 12: 46-61. 
--. 1986. Unities and Diversities in Chinese Religion. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press. 
--. 1987. "The Politics of Ritual Disguise: Repression and Response in Taiwanese 
Popular Religion." Modern China 13, 1:17-39. 
Wessman, James W. 1981. Anthropology and Marxism. Cambridge, Mass.: Schenkman. 
Wheatley, Paul. 1971. The Pivot of the Four Quarters. Chicago: Aldin e. 
Wiens, Herold J. 1967. Han Chinese Expansion in South China. North Haven, Conn.: 
The Shoestring Press. 
Will, Pierre-Etienne. 1991. Nourish the People: The State Civilian Granary System in 
China, 1650-1850. Ann Arbor: Center for Chinese Studies, University of Michigan. 
Willmott, W. E. 1970. The Political Structure of the Chinese Community in Cambodia. 
London: Athlone. 
Winchester, Simon. 1990. "Dream Has Died for an Old Communist." The Guardian, 17 
April:7. 
Winckler, Edwin, and Susan Greenhalgh. 1988. Contending Approaches to the Political 
Economy of Taiwan. Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe. 
Wittfogel, Karl. 1957. Oriental Despotism. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Wolf, Arthur P. 1968. "Childhood Association, Sexual Attraction, and the Incest Taboo: A 
Chinese Case." American Anthropologist 68, 4:883-98. 
--. 1970. "Chinese Kinship and Mourning Dress." In Maurice Freedman, ed., Family 
and Kinship in Chinese Society, pp. 189-207. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
--. 1974a. "Introduction." In Wolf, ed., Religion and Ritual in Chinese Society, pp. 
1-18. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
--. 1974b. "Gods, Ghosts, and Ancestors." In Wolf, ed., Religion and Ritual in Chinese 
Society, pp. 131-82. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Sources 
317 
--. 1976. "Aspects of Ancestor Worship in Northern Taiwan:' In William H. Newell, 
ed., Ancestors, pp. 339-64. The Hague: Mouton. 
--. 1980-81. Fieldnotes. 
--. 1981. "Women, Widowhood, and Fertility in Pre-modern China:' In J. Dupaquier 
et al., eds., Marriage and Remarriage in Populations of the Past, pp. 139-47. New 
York: Academic Press. 
--. 1985a. "Fertility in Prerevolutionary Rural China." In Susan B. Hanley and Arthur 
P. Wolf, eds., Family and Population in East Asian History, pp. 154-85. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 
--. 1985b. "Chinese Family Size: A Myth Revitalized:' In Hsieh Jih-chang and Chuang 
Ying-chang, eds., The Chinese Family and Its Ritual Behavior, pp. 241-60. 
--.1989a. "The Origins and Explanation of Variation in the Chinese Kinship System:' In 
Chang Kwang-chih et al., Anthropological Studies of the Taiwan Area, pp. 241-60. 
--. 1989b. "Social Hierarchy and Cultural Diversity: A Critique of G. Willian1 
Skinner's View of Chinese Peasant Culture." Proceedings of the Second 
International Conference on Sinology, Academia Sinica, pp. 311-18. Taibei. 
--. 1995. Sexual Attraction and Childhood Association: A Chinese Brief for Edward 
Westermarck. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Wolf, Arthur P., and Huang Chieh-shan. 1980. Marriage and Adoption in China, 
1845-1945. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Wolf, Eric R. 1959. Sons of the Shaking Earth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
--. 1966. Peasants. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. 
--. 1982. Europe and the Peoples without History. Berkeley: University of California 
Press. 
--. 1990. "Facing Power -
Old Insights, New Questions:' American Anthropologist 
92, }:586-96. 
Wolf, Margery. 1968. The House of Lim. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
--. 1972. Women and the Family in Rural Taiwan. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
--. 1985. Revolution Postponed: Women in Contemporary China. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press. 
Wolpe, Harold, ed. 1980. The Articulation of Modes of Production. London: Routledge 
& Kegan Paul. 
Wong, Freeman J. 1990. Nothing Comes of Nothing: A Treasury of Chinese Mini-Stories. 
Oakville, Canada: Mosaic Press. 
World Bank. 1983. China. Washington, D.C.: Office of the World Bank. 
Worseley, Peter. 1968. The Trumpets Shall Sound. London: MacGibbon and Kee. 
Wright, Tim. 1988." 'The Spiritual Heritage of Chinese Capitalism': Recent Trends in the 
Historiography of Chinese Enterprise Management." Australian Journal of 
Chinese Affairs, 19!20:185-214. 
Wu, David Y. H. 1985. "The Conditions of Development and Decline of Chinese 
Lineages and the Formation of Ethnic Groups." In Hsieh Jih-cheng and Chuang 
Ying-chang, eds., The Chinese Family and Its Ritual Behavior, pp. 192-209. 
318 
: Sources 
Wu Ching-tzu. 1973. The Scholars. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press. 
Wu Fongyi. 1990. Bulo fujia de xiguan yi Guangzhou sheng, Shunde xian [Delayed 
transfer marriage customs of Shun de, Guangzhou ]. Honors thesis, Department of 
Anthropology, National Taiwan University. 
WuDunn, Sheryl. 1991. "Market Revives Feudal Evil: The Sale of Wives." New York 
Times, 4 August:A8. 
Xie Zhimin. 1991. Jiangyong nushu zhimi [The secret women's writing of Jiangyong], 3 
vols. Zhengzhou: Henan renmin chubanshe. 
Xu Xinwu. 1988. "The Struggle of the Handicraft Cotton Industry against Machine 
Textiles in China:' Modern China 14, 1:31-49. 
Yale-in-China Association. 1989. "Recent Developments in China." China Update 3:6-8. 
Yanagisako, Sylvia Junko, and Jane Fishburne Collier. 1987. "Toward a Unified Analysis of 
Gender and Kinship." In Sylvia Junko Yanagisako and Jane Fishburne Collier, eds., 
Gender and Kinship: Essays toward a Unified Analysis, pp. 14-50. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 
Yang, C. K. 1967. Religion in Chinese Society. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Yang,). Y. 1953. "Sugar Industry of Formosa." Far Eastern Economic Review 15:274. 
Yang, Martin C. 1945. A Chinese Village: Taitou, Shantung Province. New York: 
Columbia University Press. 
--. 1970. Socio-economic Results of Land Reform in Taiwan. Honolulu: East-West 
Center Press. 
Yang Lien-sheng. 1952. Money and Credit in China: A Short History. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press. 
--. 1979. "Government Control of Urban Merchants in Traditional China:' Tsing Hua 
Journal of Chinese Studies 8, 1:186-206. 
Yao, Esther S. Lee. 1983. Chinese Women Past and Present. Houston, Tex.: Mesquite 
Press. 
Yu Guang-hong. 1986. "Meiyu zuchan jiu meiyu zuzong paiwei?" (No Property, No 
Tablets?: A Reanalysis of Emily Ahern's Ch'inan Data). Bulletin of the Institute of 
Ethnology, Academia Sinica, Taiwan 2:115-77. 
Yue Zumou. 1994. A Regional Analysis of Early Chinese Urbanization. Ph.D. diss., 
Department of Anthropology, Stanford University. 
Zelin, Madeleine. 1987. The Magistrate's Tael. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Zhang Boshu. 1994. Marxism and Human Sociobiology. The Perspective of Economic 
Reforms in China. Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Zhou Ye [recounted by Zhou Jianren]. 1988. An Age Gone By: Lu Xun's Clan in Decline. 
Beijing: New World Press. 
Zipf, G. K. 1949. Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press. 
Zito, A. R. 1987. "City Gods, Filiality, and Hegemony in Late Imperial China." Modern 
China 13, 3=333-69. 
Sources 
319 
General Index 
Accumulation, 204, 208, 219, 223; of ancestral 
property,49, 99-102,108,118-19, 122-23; 
capitalist, 99, 112, 118, 223-24, 228; flexible, 
223-24, 238; petty capitalist, 8, 26, 35, 37-38, 
40,42,78,94,99, 109,111,113-15,118,172, 
200,222,227,231, 235; primitive, 37-38, 100, 
225-26 (see also Proletarianization); socialist, 
250-51, 259; tributary, 8, 25, 28, 104,216 
Adoption, 87, 92,96--97, 101, 106, 110-12, 
115-16,127,130,195,224 
Affines,86, 122,123,179 
Agnates, 29, 31, 49, 78, 86, 88, 90, 92, 93, 96, 
104, 105-6, 113, 118-20, 247; of women, 40, 
88,93,122,129 
Agriculturalists, 24, 34, 43, 61; subsistence, 26, 
41, 60. See also Petty capitalism 
Ancestral property. See Accumulation; Firms 
Artisans. See Class: petty-capitalist 
Asiatic mode of production, 18-19, 29, 276-77 
Bondservants/slaves, 78, 96, 101, 112, 125, 132, 
249 
Bridal laments, 124, 188-89 
Brideprice. See Dowry/Brideprice 
Brokers, 27-8, 35, 48, 257 
Business methods, 27,31-34,76, 105, 140, 153, 
165, 223, 228-29, 241-42. See also Class; 
Firms 
Capitalism, 2, 4, 8, 10, 13-14,24,29,34, 37, 43, 
45-46,79,82,95, 99,104,110,112,119,129, 
140,141,169-70,172-75,183,196,205-6, 
208,216,217,221-30,240,245,251,255, 
259-60, 266-68; sprouts of, 17, 32, 38, 45, 48, 
52, 71. See also Petty capitalism: versus capi-
talism 
Celibacy, 38, 161, 177, 187-96,208 
Central place theory, 63-83, 152-53 
Childbirth, 183, 186, 188, 195, 202 
Class, defmition of, 7, 29-38,71,97-99, 
135-36, 249, 271-74; employer/ 
landlord/merchant, 21, 26, 104, 108, 161-62, 
220-21,224,249;gentr~26,37-38,53,64, 
68, 123, 162; petty capitalist: owner-operator, 
21,26-27,34,39, 74,101, 110,220,224-25; 
petty-capitalist: waged labor, see Labor: 
waged; scholar: upper/lower, 21, 24, 72-73, 
75, 77; tributary (rulers/commoners), 21, 24, 
148, 177,208-9,217,241,249,265-68.See 
also Merchants 
Commoditization, 34, 43-44, 47, 93-95, 
123-25, 127, 147, 188, 193, 197, 266; of labor, 
29, 49, 94, 117, 224; of people, 4, 9, 12, 25, 
30,42,84,95, 100,122-36,142-43,166,191, 
194,247,257 
Communism, 9-10,23,36, 131,200,209-10, 
213,239,247,251-54 
Concubines, 131-32, 181, 197 
Confucianism, 47, 49, 53, 59, 74-75, 78, 87, 90, 
98,104,135-36,140,173,180,181,198,208, 
224,242,253,269 
Contracts, 27, 33, 107, 112, 114, 117, 156,253, 
257, 260; familial, 93, 95-99, 122, 133, 147, 
173, 180, 198 
Cultural reductionism, 16, 21, 151-53, 177,202 
Daughters (-in-law), 57, 84,86-87,93,96-103, 
115, 121-32, 138-43, 147, 157, 179-85, 188, 
191-92,225,236-37,247-48,256;bride-
daughters, 87, 124, 132 
Debt, 13,34,88,97, 104,163,193, 197,242;su-
pernatural, 170-75 
Democracy, 33, 183, 199,208,237-38,240-42, 
265 
Demographics, 9, 20, 25, 40, 42, 48, 54-60, 73, 
80,94, 112,131,202-3,210,221,248-51, 
259-60 
Divorce, 88, 123, 125, 142,246-47 
321 
Dowry/brideprice, 10, 42, 93, 95, 100, 115, 
121--47, 192, 236, 281-85; costs of, 125, 131, 
138-39, 142, 283-85; indirect, 126, 134-35, 
137 
Dualism, 9, 28-29, 150, 157-62, 184, 203, 243, 
269 
Ecology, 44, 60-65, 68, 78-80, 109, 111, 220, 
242. See also Intensification 
Ethnicity, 63, 71, 73, 78, 85-86, 93, 116-18, 153, 
161-62,176,201,211,216,229,238--40 
Feudalism, 12, 14, 20, 24-25, 29, 39, 43, 45, 49, 
74,79,91, 120,155,173,245,249,251, 
253-54,266,268-69 
Filiality, 91, 93, 97-98, 141 
Firms, 1 05; household, see Petty capitalism; lin-
eage, 124,29, 111, 119; state, see State: as pro-
ducer. See also Business methods 
Footbinding,47,88,156, 178,183,187,192-93, 
197 
Gangs,34, 155,165,167-68,199,225,268 
Gentry. See Class: gentry 
Girls, 42, 57, 84, 98, 100, 120, 125, 127, 131-32, 
178, 185 
Guilds, 27, 30,33 
Guomindang!GMD, 9-10, 88, 130, 205-221, 
224,227,236--42,246,250,259,268 
Households, 85, 95-99, 103--4, 118, 141, 153, 
235, 244, 246--49, 255, 257, 266. See also Petty 
capitalism 
Ideology, as resistance, 199-201. See also Con-
fucianism; Lineage; Petty capitalism: as resis-
tance; Religion/ritual 
Industry, 15, 31, 51-52, 94, 97, 99, 112, 153, 194, 
205,210,214-20,225-27,242,247-62,268 
Infanticide, 4, 9, 55, 57, 191 
Informal economy, 20, 205, 224-25, 229, 231 
Inheritance, 33, 59, 91-96, 118-24, 133, 248, 
261 
Inns,22-23,262-63 
Intensification, 51-55, 58-62, 73, 127 
Jia, definitions of, 95-96, 99, 120, 24 
Jokes,156, 186,198-99 
Labo~47,51,59,69,78,92,111,147,239--40, 
252, 259, 264, 269; allocation of 29-30, 
36-37,53,221,247--49;household, 15-16,19, 
34-35, 36, 50, 223-24, 256-57; serf, 38-39, 
113; state, 4, 50,244,247, 261-67; waged, 11, 
15,19,21,28-30,35,38-39,45--46,50,79, 
94, 99, 101, 112, 115, 117, 142, 172, 189-91, 
213,218,221,225-26,235,247,256 
Land,35-36,44,51,61,85,88,94, 115; 123, 
141, 168; household, 24, 100; lineage, 103, 
107-8, 112, 114, 119; market, 31, 92, 93; re-
form, 208, 218-21, 244, 268; state, 21, 24, 71 
Landlord. See Class 
Law,12,24,26-28,31,33,40,86-92,96-97, 
100,105,107,112,115,117,122-24,129, 
147,156,164,173,198,206,229,243, 
246--47,253,256 
Lineage, 10,44,49,72,73-74,77,85,90,95-97, 
103-20, 247; variation, 115-119. SeealsoAg-
nates; Firms; Land 
Marriage, 4, 24, 85-87, 94, 97, 103, 121--47, 
168,177,180, 187-88,224,246;delayed 
transfer, 87, 94, 124, 128, 132; major, 116, 
122; major marriage with dowry (MMD), 
122-28, 136 (see also Dowry/brideprice); 
major marriage with brideprice (MMB), 126, 
136 (see also Dowry/brideprice); minor, 52, 
94-95, 125, 127, 130, 132; by official man-
date, 61, 129, 195; resistance to, 189-92, 196, 
199; variant forms of, 122-23, 126-28, 131 
Marx, Karl, ix, 5-6, 14-20, 29, 36, 45, 83-84,99, 
108,153,169,173-75,205-6,225,244-45 
Materialism, 5, 15-16,70,83, 135, 143, 148-55, 
163,195,199,201-3,245,248 
Menstruation, 122, 125, 161, 186, 202 
Merchants, 41, 48, 64, 68, 78, 86, 105; private, 
28-29, 33-38, 96, 109, 153, 162, 207; state 
franchised, 25-28, 67, 111 
Migration, 60-63, 76, 100, 104, 106-8, 112, 119, 
130,136,160,169,190,207,212-14,216, 
255,258,260 
Military, 21,26-27,68,71, 75, 77, 111,207, 
209-16,220,240,250,254,262,265,268 
Ming!Qing commercialization, 45, 50, 54, 
60-61,70,110,151,189,255-56,258 
Mode of production: articulation of, 17, 42--46, 
153, 178; definitions of, 7, 16-17; 
kinship/gender in, 20, 178. See also Asiatic 
mode of production; Capitalism; Feudalism; 
Petty capitalism; Socialism, Tributary mode 
of production 
Mothers (-in-law), 97, 98, 120, 123, 129, 
138--40,179,181-83,187-88,195-97,230, 
237,248 
322: GENERAL 
INDEX 
Natural economy, 7, 28, 44, 74 
Nuns, 50,110,129,151,187,192-96,234 
Offerings, 165-76, 180-83,204,230,232-36 
Patricorporation, 29-38, 59-60, 84-123, 129, 
132. See also Agnates; Firms 
PCMP. See Petty capitalism 
Peasants, 24, 27, 34, 44, 55, 59, 79, 101, 109, 123, 
130-31, 153, 185, 221, 260, 268; definition of, 
24. See also Agriculturalists; Petty capitalism 
Petty capitalism, 2-3, 12, 15, 19-20, 26-43, 56, 
59,61, 71,78,91,93,97, 100,108,132,148, 
151,162,168,172,196,204-43,248,265, 
268-69; versus capitalism, 7, 9, 28-32,38-41, 
54,64,71,94,99, 104,112,174-76,208, 
222-28, 256-58, 269; as resistance, 43, 148, 
239, 246, 255-56. See also Accumulation; 
Class; Labor; Mode of production; Women 
Petty commodity production, 19-20, 120, 
278-79. See also Petty capitalism 
Proletarians. See Labor, waged 
Proletarianization. See Accumulation: primitive 
Prostitution, 9, 42, 47, 52, 79, 129, 132, 156, 
182, 186, 188, 193, 263 
Protoindustrialism, 20, 53, 61 
Public works, 24, 62-63, 66-68, 74-78, 80, 87, 
210, 219, 221, 240, 263. See also Accumula-
tion 
Putting-out/subcontracting, 48, 78, 172,214, 
221,223,255,256 
Rape,131, 186,189 
Regionalization, 10, 65-73, 81, 116-120, 124, 
133,135,142-46,179,206,241,281-85 
Religion/ritual, 24, 49, 113, 117, 119, 143, 
150-76;folk,4,48,90,96, 150,157,180,196, 
199, 230-42; petty capitalist, 34, 107, 110, 
124, 195; political, 208-9, 238; state, 170, 
174, 180. See also Lineage; Women 
Scholars. See Class 
Sexuality, 88, 91, 124, 168-69, 177-78, 183-89, 
192-94, 199 
Sisters, 93, 129-30, 191 
Slaves. See Bondservant/ slaves 
Socialism, 3-4, 7, 9, 11-14,39, 140,243-54, 
266, 279-80. See also Accumulation; Labor: 
state 
Song commercialization, 23, 27, 39, 43-58, 61, 
70-71,78,104,108,174,254,256 
State: as consumer, 23, 40, 60, 81, 212, 254, 265; 
controls kinship/gender, 7-8, 10, 20, 29, 
37-38,43,50-51,59,84-103,106,108,112, 
133, 194-95, 221, 246-49, 254; as distribu-
tor/employer, 22-26, 67, 75, 89, 105, 133, 
194,207,226-27,247, 254-65; as producer, 
9,25-26,50,67-68,89,96,115,209,214-18, 
220,222,227,237,239-43,249,251,257, 
260, 262-64; and violence, 33, 46, 89, 106, 
206-14,220,236-37,244,246,254-62, 
265-68. See also Class; Public works 
Subcontracting. See Putting-out 
Surplus value, 39-40,45, 109, 199 
Taxes,7, 13,21,25,27-28,41,43-44,46,48-49, 
56,60,67-68,74-80,90-91,103-4,117,182, 
205,208-9,214,216,237,239,249,251,254, 
258-59; 268; evasion of, 107, 205, 227-30, 
239 
Textiles, 15-16,27,31,35,42,45,47-54,76-79, 
94,109,123,128,142,145,186,189-91, 
214-15, 222, 254-62 
TMP. See Tributary mode of production 
Transport, 1-3, 10,22-23,26-27,30,64-83, 
210,216,222,251,261,263 
Tributary mode of production, 7, 20-29, 35-37, 
43-46,56,60-61,206-21,243-69 
Underworld, 91, 155-57, 162-68, 170-72, 183 
Vegetarian hall. See Nuns 
Virgins, 181, 186-88, 191, 193, 195 
Wage. See Labor: waged 
Widows, 47, 59, 84, 88, 113, 131, 177, 189 
Wives, 30, 52, 86, 92-93, 96, 98, 101, 127-32, 
142, 147, 166, 169, 179, 182, 185, 188, 195, 
197-98,230,237,247-48 
Women: institutions of, 51, 160, 190-91, 
194-95; petty-capitalist, 15-16, 52, 137-42, 
192, 194, 197; rituals of, 86, 121, 177-88, 191, 
208; sale of, see Commoditization: of people; 
violence toward, 47, 91 (see also Footbind-
ing); as workers, 16, 42, 47-54, 66, 75, 94, 97, 
99,121,124-25,172-73,180,186-91,194, 
247-48, 254, 259. See also Agnates; Affines; 
Celibacy; Childbirth; Daughters (-in-Law); 
Divorce; Dowry/brideprice; Footbinding; 
Marriage; Nuns; Sisters; Virgins; Widows; 
Wives 
General Index 
323 
Index of Place Names 
Jlnhui,79, 107,111,233 
llnping, 76, 84 
Beijing, 67, 69, 72, 74, 129, 142-45, 182, 185, 
249,266-68 
Chaozhou,76,121,145,172,194-95 
Chengdu,68, 70,75,98, 134,137-42,182,197, 
260-61,267-68,281-85 
Chongqing (Chungking), 68, 70,75 
Fujian, 23, 28, 32, 54, 72, 76, 79, 96, 103, 108, 
110-11,115,119-20,125,140,142-46,159, 
169,172,180-81,188-91,195-96,207,238, 
241,261-63,268,281-85 
Fuzhou,23,76,169,268 
Gansu,62,146,281-85 
Guangdong,IS-16,52,73,76-77,95,111-l2, 
146,185,188-91,281-85 
Guangxi, 73, 77-78, 115 
Guangzhou (Canton), 51, 66, 74, 76, 78-79, 87, 
90,97, 109,119,169,194-95,198 
Guizhou, 72, 80, 148, 183 
flangzhou,52,67,72,80, 105,111,258-60 
flankou (flankow), 26-27, 32-33, 70, 105, 198, 
262 
flongkong,3, 104,106,108,114,131,153,180, 
188,198,226 
Japan, 3, 13-14, 18, 79, 207-11, 214-20, 222, 
227,229,239,250,259,268 
}iangbei, 77, 79-80 
Jiangnan. See Yangzi 
Jiangsu, 79, 89, 125, 124-25, 254, 258-61 
Jiangxi, 61, 103 
Korea,3, 13,79,212,220,243 
Nanyang!SoutheastAsia, 8, 44, 72, 76, 173,207, 
251 
Ningbo, 67,70 
North China, 35, 67, 72, 74, 118, 128, 142-46, 
173,180,185,281-85 
Pearl River delta, 15-16, 35, 72-73, 76-78, 87, 
94,110,128,256,281-85 
Prosperity Settlement, 221-22, 230-31 
Qingdao,79,141 
Qinan, 90, 129 
Quanzhou,76, 106 
Shandong,27,57,74,79,87,90, 125,129-30, 
143-45,148,164,177,179-80,182-83,192, 
197-99, 213, 254 
Shanghai, 79, 173, 267 
ShaDJd,l42-45, 182,196 
Shaoxing, 111,125,258 
Shengze,258-61 
Shunde,90,189-91,195 
Sichuan,28,65,68,72,74-75,89,96,98, 
129-31,141,143-46,156,159,169,173, 
182-83,188,194,197-98,238,241,256, 
260-62,281-85 
Singapore,3, 131,226 
Southeast Asia, see Nanyang!Southeast Asia 
Suzhou,49, 106,108,258 
Taibei, 4, 90, 98, 130, 134, 137-42, 156, 160, 
166,169, 196-97,211,213,231,233-35;see 
also Prosperity Settlement 
Truwan, 1-4,9-10,26,35,52,58,72,76,87-91, 
93-95,98,106,108-9,114,118,125,127, 
130, 136-45, 149, 152, 157, 164, 169, 173-74, 
179-88,196,202,204-42,244,246,250,264, 
268-69 
325 
Xiarnen,32,76,171,174,261,267 
Yangzi,72-73, 75-76,79-80,115,118-119, 
143-46,254,256,281-85 
Yunnan,72,80,148 
Zhangzhou,76,106 
Zhejiang, 51, 53, 67, 76, lll, 125, 131, 143-45, 
159,183,185,196 
326 
INDEX 
OF 
PLACE 
NAMES 
