DIFFICULT A TH E IS M
Crosscurrents
Exploring the development of European thought through engagements 
with the arts, humanities, social sciences and sciences
Series Editor
Christopher Watkin, University of Cambridge
Editorial Advisory Board
Andrew Benjamin
Martin Crowley
Simon Critchley
Frederiek Depoortere
Oliver Feltham
Patrick ffrench
Christopher Fynsk
Kevin Hart
Emma Wilson
Titles available in the series
Difﬁ cult Atheism: Post-Theological Thinking in Alain Badiou,
Jean-Luc Nancy and Quentin Meillassoux by Christopher Watkin
Politics of the Gift: Exchanges in Poststructuralism by Gerald Moore
Visit the Crosscurrents website at www.euppublishing.com/series/cross
DIFFICULT ATHEISM
Post-Theological Thinking in 
Alain Badiou, Jean-Luc Nancy 
and Quentin Meillassoux
Christopher Watkin
EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY PRESS
© Christopher Watkin, 2011
Edinburgh University Press Ltd
22 George Square, Edinburgh
www.euppublishing.com
Typeset in 10.5/13 Sabon
by Servis Filmsetting Ltd, Stockport, Cheshire, and
printed and bound in Great Britain by
CPI Antony Rowe, Chippenham and Eastbourne
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978 0 7486 4057 7 (hardback)
The right of Christopher Watkin
to be identiﬁ ed as author of this work
has been asserted in accordance with
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Contents
Acknowledgements 
vii
Abbreviations 
viii
Series Editor’s Preface 
xii
Introduction: Atheisms Today 
1
1. The God of Metaphysics 
22
2. The God of the Poets 
58
3. Difﬁ cult Atheism 
95
4. Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
132
5. The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
168
6. The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
206
General Conclusion: How to Follow an ‘Atheism’ That
 Never Was 
239
Bibliography 
244
Index 
277
For Alison, with all my love
BB
vii
Acknowledgements
I owe a debt of gratitude to those who very kindly read all or part of 
this book in its latter stages, saving my blushes on a number of points 
and improving the text in countless ways. I would like to register par-
ticular thanks to Frederiek Depoortere, Emma Gilby, John O’Brien, 
Joeri Schrijvers and Kenneth Watkin. I would like to thank Ian James 
and Martin Crowley for providing feedback and encouragement at an 
early stage in the project’s life, along with three anonymous readers for 
Edinburgh University Press who offered incisive and detailed feedback 
on the ﬁ rst chapter at a critical point in the book’s development, and to 
two anonymous readers for French Studies whose invaluable comments 
on arguments from the second chapter led to a substantial re-write. The 
problems that no doubt still remain are all my own.
My gratitude goes to Carol Macdonald at Edinburgh University 
Press for the care and professionalism with which she has handled the 
project from start to ﬁ nish. I am grateful to the Master and Fellows 
of Magdalene College, Cambridge, and the President and Fellows of 
Murray Edwards College, Cambridge, for their encouragement with 
the project at every phase.
My profoundest admiration is reserved for Alison, who has lived 
with my tinkering away on this book at unconventional hours with a 
grace and largeness of spirit that speak of a greater love than I can here 
express. ‘We love because he ﬁ rst loved us.’
viii
Abbreviations
BADIOU
15T 
‘Fifteen Theses on Contemporary Art’
19R 
‘Dix-neuf réponses à beaucoup plus de questions’
2M 
Second Manifeste pour la philosophie
AMP 
Abrégé de métapolitique
AP 
Ahmed le philosophe
APBE 
‘Author’s preface’ in Being and Event
APTW 
‘Author’s preface’ in Theoretical Writings
ASR 
‘Afterword: some replies to a demanding friend’
BE 
Being and Event
BF 
‘Beyond formalisation’
BN 
‘Being by numbers’
BOE 
Brieﬁ ngs on Existence
C 
Conditions
CCBT 
‘Can change be thought?’
Cen 
The Century
CH 
The Communist Hypothesis
Circ1 
Circonstances 1
Circ2 
Circonstances 2
Circ3 
Circonstances 3
Circ4 
Circonstances 4
Circ5 
Circonstances 5
Con 
Conditions [English translation]
ConM 
Le Concept de modèle
CT 
Court Traité d’ontologie transitoire
D 
Deleuze: La Clameur de l’être
Del 
Deleuze: The Clamor of Being
DP 
Monde contemporain et désir de philosophie
E 
L’Ethique
EE 
L’Être et l’événement
 
Abbreviations 
ix
Eth 
Ethics
HJD 
‘Homage to Jacques Derrida’
HOI 
Handbook of Inaesthetics
IT 
‘L’Investigation transcendantale’
LM 
Logiques des mondes
LW 
Logics of Worlds
M 
Manifeste pour la philosophie
M&P 
‘Mathematics and philosophy: the grand style and the little 
style’
Man 
Manifesto for Philosophy
MetP 
Metapolitics
MOS 
The Meaning of Sarkozy
NN 
Le Nombre et les nombres
NuN 
Number and Numbers
ONTS 
‘Ours is not a terrible situation’
OPI 
‘Ontology and politics: an interview with Alain Badiou’
OR 
‘L’Offrande réservée’
OTP 
On the Truth Process
PAF 
‘Préface’ in Après la ﬁ nitude
PE 
La Philosophie et l’événement
PLN 
‘Peut-on penser le nouveau en situation?’
PLP 
Peut-on penser la politique?
PMI 
Petit Manuel d’inesthétique
PND 
‘Politics: a non-expressive dialectics’
Pol 
Polemics
PoP 
‘Politics and philosophy’
PoPa 
Pocket Pantheon
PP 
‘Philosophy and politics’
PPP 
Petit Panthéon portatif
S 
Le Siècle
SA 
‘The subject of art’
SP 
Saint Paul: La Fondation de l’universalisme
SPe 
Saint Paul: The Foundation of Universalism
SR 
‘Some replies to a demanding friend’
TC 
Théorie de la contradiction
ThS 
Theory of the Subject
TS 
Théorie du sujet
TW 
Theoretical Writings
W 
L’Antiphilosophie de Wittgenstein
x 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
MEI LLA S S OU X
AF 
Après la ﬁ nitude
AfF 
After Finitude
HE 
‘Histoire et événement chez Alain Badiou’
ID 
‘L’Inexistence divine’
NE 
‘Nouveauté et événement’
PV 
‘Potentiality and virtuality’
SD 
‘Spectral dilemma’
SR 
‘Speculative realism: presentation by Quentin Meillassoux’
TES 
‘Temps et surgissement ex nihilo’
TWB 
‘Time without becoming’
NA NC Y
ADC 
L’Adoration: Déconstruction du christianisme II
AfS 
‘Answering for sense’
AL 
L’Absolu littéraire
BSP 
Being Singular Plural
BST 
‘Between story and truth’
BTP 
The Birth to Presence
CA 
La Communauté affrontée
CalP 
‘Calculation of the poet’
CC 
‘The confronted community’
CD 
La Communauté désœuvrée
CM 
La Création du monde, ou, la mondialisation
Com 
‘La Comparution’
Comp 
‘La Comparution/The compearance’
Cor 
Corpus
Corp 
Corpus [English translation]
CP 
Chroniques philosophiques
CWG 
The Creation of the World, or, Globalization
DDC 
La Déclosion: Déconstruction du christianisme 1
DisDC 
Dis-Enclosure: The Deconstruction of Christianity
DLD 
Des Lieux divins
EF 
The Experience of Freedom
EL 
L’Expérience de la liberté
ES 
Ego sum
ESP 
Être singulier pluriel
FP 
‘The future of philosophy’
FT 
A Finite Thinking
GOI 
The Ground of the Image
 
Abbreviations 
xi
GT 
The Gravity of Thought
HIN 
Hegel: L’Inquiétude du négatif
HRN 
Hegel: The Restlessness of the Negative
IC 
L’Impératif catégorique
InC 
The Inoperative Community
LA 
The Literary Absolute
Mu 
Les Muses
Mus 
The Muses
NMT 
Noli me tangere
NMTe 
Noli me tangere [English translation]
ODP 
‘Of divine places’
OP 
L’Oubli de la philosophie
PC 
Philosophical Chronicles
PD 
La Pensée dérobée
PF 
Une Pensée ﬁ nie
PHS 
‘Postface’ in L’Homme sans
Poids 
Le Poids d’une pensée
PSC 
‘Philosophie sans conditions’
PWC 
‘Philosophy without conditions’
RP 
Retreating the Political
RS 
L’‘il y a’ du rapport sexuel
RSAV 
‘Responsabilité – du sens à venir’
SM 
Le Sens du monde
SW 
The Sense of the World
TD 
The Truth of Democracy
UJ 
‘Un Jour, les dieux se retirent . . .’
VD 
Vérité de la démocratie
Series Editor’s Preface
Two or more currents ﬂ owing into or through each other create a 
turbulent crosscurrent, more powerful than its contributory ﬂ ows 
and irreducible to them. Time and again, modern European thought 
creates and exploits crosscurrents in thinking, remaking itself as it 
ﬂ ows through, across and against discourses as diverse as math-
ematics and ﬁ lm, sociology and biology, theology, literature and 
politics. The work of Gilles Deleuze, Jacques Derrida, Slavoj Žižek, 
Alain Badiou, Bernard Stiegler and Jean-Luc Nancy, among others, 
participates in this fundamental remaking. In each case disciplines 
and discursive formations are engaged, not with the aim of perform-
ing a pre-determined mode of analysis yielding a ‘philosophy of x’, 
but through encounters in which thought itself can be transformed. 
Furthermore, these fundamental transformations do not merely seek 
to account for singular events in different sites of discursive or artistic 
production but rather to engage human existence and society as such, 
and as a whole. The cross-disciplinarity of this thought is therefore 
neither a fashion nor a prosthesis; it is simply part of what ‘thought’ 
means in this tradition.
Crosscurrents begins from the twin convictions that this re-making 
is integral to the legacy and potency of European thought, and that 
the future of thought in this tradition must defend and develop this 
legacy in the teeth of an academy that separates and controls the cur-
rents that ﬂ ow within and through it. With this in view, the series 
provides an exceptional site for bold, original and opinion-changing 
monographs that actively engage European thought in this funda-
mentally cross-disciplinary manner, riding existing crosscurrents and 
creating new ones. Each book in the series explores the different ways 
in which European thought develops through its engagement with 
disciplines across the arts, humanities, social sciences and sciences, 
recognising that the community of scholars working with this thought 
is itself spread across diverse faculties. The object of the series is 
 
Series Editor’s Preface 
xiii
therefore nothing less than to examine and carry forward the unique 
legacy of European thought as an inherently and irreducibly cross-
disciplinary enterprise.
Christopher Watkin
Cambridge
1
Introduction: Atheisms Today
Lightning and thunder require time; the light of the stars requires 
time; deeds, though done, still require time to be seen and heard. This deed 
is still more distant from them than most distant stars – and yet they have 
done it themselves.1
Dieu est mort, mais l’homme n’est pas, pour autant, devenu athée.2
There is a new move in French philosophy today to come to terms with 
the death of God more rigorously than ever, and it cannot be under-
stood under the banner of ‘atheism’. No longer can we think in terms 
of a monolytic atheism or of a single agenda of thinking ‘without God’, 
for what we see developing is a plurality of perhaps incommensurable 
approaches to thinking after God. We must not mistake this for a return 
to God after God, or for the growth of a new postsecular or postreli-
gious philosophy; it is a thinking that tries more fully than ever to have 
done with God, that tries to remake itself fundamentally as ‘without 
God’, and on this basis moves beyond the simple term ‘atheism’. This 
new thinking casts doubt on the claims of all previous atheisms to be 
without God and its contours indicate the possible future trajectory of 
French philosophy more broadly. This book will comparatively analyse 
its different branches and ask whether French thought has yet attained 
a thinking that is truly without God.
THE OLD GA ME: I M I TA TI V E  A N D 
R ESI DU AL A THE I S M S
As a prolegomenon to understanding this novelty, we shall begin 
by brieﬂ y sketching two dominant tendencies in post-Enlightenment 
French atheism, tendencies that are by no means mutually exclu-
sive. The ﬁ rst tendency, to which we shall assign the name ‘imitative 
2 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
atheism’, merely replaces ‘God’ with a supposedly atheistic placeholder 
such as ‘Man’ or ‘Reason’, explicitly rejecting but implicitly imitating 
theology’s categories of thinking, changing merely the terms in which 
those categories are articulated. The placeholder might furnish the 
reason and the end – the Alpha and the Omega – of the world, provide 
the source of Truth or Value, or stand god-like like a divinity outside 
the ﬂ ux of intramundane becoming. Imitative atheism is inaugurated 
by Enlightenment humanism’s more or less explicit substitution of Man 
for God, shifting onto human shoulders the weight of (almost literally) 
holding the universe together:
Pourquoi n’introduirons-nous pas l’homme dans notre ouvrage, comme il 
est placé dans l’univers? Pourquoi n’en ferons-nous pas un centre commun? 
Est-il dans l’espace inﬁ ni quelque point d’où nous puissions, avec plus 
d’avantage, faire partir les lignes immenses que nous nous proposons 
d’étendre à tous les autres points?3
This move is itself foreshadowed in the Cartesian cogito, where the 
cogito apes God in being distinct and detached from the world which 
it contemplates. The poster girl of imitative atheism is the ‘goddess 
of reason’ (by many accounts in fact Sophie Momoro, wife of artist 
Antoine-François Momoro) installed on the altar of Notre Dame 
 cathedral in November 1793 by decree of the Convention Nationale.
In the nineteenth century imitative atheism is given most vivid form 
by Auguste Comte’s secular ‘religion of humanity’, with man as its 
New Supreme Great Being,4 and complete with chapels and its own cat-
echism. Ludwig Feuerbach similarly inscribes Man in the place of God, 
arguing in his Essence of Christianity that ‘Man – this is the mystery of 
religion – objectiﬁ es his being and then again makes himself an object 
to the objectivised image of himself thus converted into a subject’.5 In 
this ‘anthropotheism’ Man is not only the guarantor of truth, but also 
of freedom, justice and dignity:
If human nature is the highest nature to man, then practically also the 
highest and ﬁ rst law must be the love of man to man. Homo homini Deus 
est: – this is the great practical principle: – this is the axis on which revolves 
the history of the world.6
Notwithstanding Feuerbach’s atheistic intention in taking the posi-
tion that ‘God become man merely reveals man become God’,7 his 
understanding of a Humanity that takes the place of God cannot but be 
parasitic on theological categories; it may be explicitly atheistic but it 
cannot be implicitly without God.
Imitative atheism assumes that Truth or Justice can be grounded by 
appealing to Man in the same way that Platonic thinking appeals to 
 
Atheisms Today 
3
the Ideas and Augustinian Christianity to the Mind of God. Imitative 
atheism has ﬂ ung wide its gates to welcome in theology’s Trojan horse. 
As the ship’s captain who scours the main with his telescope and afﬁ rms 
that there are no lenses on the high seas, this parasitic atheism can be 
blind in the midst of its own insight to the conditions of possibility of 
its own afﬁ rmations.
Care, however, should be taken to distinguish imitative atheism 
from the casual use of religious or theological terms within an athe-
istic context. If a philosopher uses terms such as ‘miracle’, ‘faith’ or 
even ‘God’, it does not necessarily follow that her thought is imitative. 
An atheism is parasitic upon theology only when it deploys concepts 
that cannot be accounted for in exclusively atheistic terms but require 
assumptions proper to theology, whether or not those concepts happen 
to carry theological labels. This, of course, raises the question of what 
assumptions are proper to theology. This is a question that receives dif-
ferent, often contradictory answers; it will be one focus of the studies 
in this book.
The twentieth century in France saw a widespread rejection of this 
parasitic atheism on the grounds of its complicity with the theological 
and religious paradigms it seeks to replace. Raymond Aron denounces 
the ‘secular religion’ of communism in which ‘l’eschatologie marxiste 
attribue au prolétariat le rôle d’un sauveur collectif’,8 and its combina-
tion of prophetism and scholasticism that produces a new set of theo-
logical virtues: ‘foi dans le prolétariat et dans l’Historie, la charité pour 
ceux qui souffrent et vont triompher demain, l’espérance en l’avenir 
radieux d’une société sans classes’.9
The existentialism of the mid twentieth century marks a signiﬁ cant 
moment in the rejection of imitative atheism. Albert Camus struggles 
in the tension between an old imitation and a new refusal of parasitic 
thinking:
Je continue à croire que ce monde n’a pas de sens supérieur. Mais je sais que 
quelque chose en lui a du sens et c’est l’homme, parce qu’il est le seul être à 
exiger d’en avoir. Ce monde a du moins la vérité de l’homme et notre tâche 
est de lui donner ses raisons contre le destin lui-même.10
Camus’s absurd holds itself in the impossible breach of imitative 
atheism, claiming concepts to which it knows it has no right; it is ‘le 
péché sans Dieu’.11 His thought adumbrates the second tendency within 
post-Enlightenment atheism, a tendency that arises in part as a critique 
of imitative atheism. This second tendency seeks, in rejecting all that 
might be considered parasitic upon theology, to elaborate with more 
rigour an atheism that is truly without God. It takes inspiration in part 
4 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
from the displacement of the Cartesian cogito by Heideggerian Dasein 
in the ‘Letter on humanism’ and Being and Time.12 The cogito imitates 
a deity who sits outside the world it objectively observes, and if such a 
God is no longer believed in, then the Man made in his image must be 
renounced also.
This second current of atheism, a renunciation of any imitation of 
the dead God, is pressed among others by Maurice Blanchot in his 
reading of Camus. The renunciation of any pseudo-theological redemp-
tion of the human condition issues in an ascetically meagre consolation, 
the iconic moment of which is the end of Camus’s Mythe de Sisyphe:
Je laisse Sisyphe au bas de la montagne! On retrouve toujours son fardeau. 
Mais Sisyphe enseigne la ﬁ délité supérieure qui nie les dieux et soulève les 
rochers. Lui aussi juge que tout est bien. Cet univers désormais sans maître 
ne lui paraît ni stérile ni fertile. Chacun des grains de cette pierre, chaque 
éclat minéral de cette montagne pleine de nuit, à lui seul, forme un monde. 
La lutte elle-même vers les sommets sufﬁ t à remplir un cœur d’homme. Il 
faut imaginer Sisyphe heureux.13
We must imagine Sisyphus happy? This is an empty, impersonal impera-
tive, a weak afﬁ rmation of a value that has become aware of its ground-
lessness. Having heroically renounced any theologically redemptive 
eschatology, Sisyphus can only gather the meagre crumbs of ﬁ nding hap-
piness in his relentless torture. Blanchot presses the necessity of renounc-
ing all redemption in Le Mythe de Sisyphe and L’Homme révolté:
Du moment que, de toutes mes forces, je m’attache comme seul possible à 
un univers où ma présence n’a aucun sens, il faut que je renonce totalement 
à l’espoir; du moment que, envers et contre tout, je maintiens ma volonté de 
voir clair tout en sachant que l’obscurité ne diminuera jamais, il faut que je 
renonce totalement au repos; du moment que je ne puis que tout contester 
sans donner à rien, même à cette contestation, une valeur absolue, il faut que 
je renonce à tout et même à cet acte de tout refuser. Absence totale d’espoir, 
insatisfaction consciente, lutte sans ﬁ n, telles sont les trois exigences de la 
logique absurde; elles déﬁ nissent désormais le caractère de l’expérience qui 
consiste à vivre sans appel.14
Blanchot sees in Camus an ongoing unwillingness to embrace the athe-
istic absurd, a manipulation of the absurd into an atheism that once 
more imitates theology:
« Il faut imaginer Sisyphe heureux. » Heureux? Voilà qui est vite écrit. [. . .] 
C’est que lui-même n’est pas ﬁ dèle à sa règle, c’est qu’à la longue il fait de 
l’absurde non pas ce qui dérange et brise tout, mais ce qui est susceptible 
d’arrangement et ce qui même arrange tout. Dans son ouvrage, l’absurde 
devient un dénouement, il est une solution, une sorte de salut.15
This call to systematic renunciation exempliﬁ es the second tendency 
in post-Enlightenment atheism, a tendency that we shall call ‘residual 
 
Atheisms Today 
5
atheism’, an atheism that seeks, with a heroic or despairing asceticism, 
to make do with the meagre residue left over after the departure of God, 
Truth, Justice, Beauty and so on. Residual atheism traces its geneal-
ogy through Heidegger’s Dasein to Nietzsche’s pronouncements of the 
death of God. Nietzsche’s madman in the marketplace is speaking to 
unbelievers,16 the imitative atheists who do not yet realise their contin-
ued parasitism on the God they reject. In The Gay Science Nietzsche 
warns of the extent to which modern thought still relies on the God it 
has replaced:
It is still a metaphysical faith upon which our faith in science rests – that 
even we seekers after knowledge today, we godless anti-metaphysicians still 
take our ﬁ re, too, from the ﬂ ame lit by a faith that is thousands of years 
old, that Christian faith which was also the faith of Plato, that God is the 
truth, that truth is divine. – But what if . . . God should prove to be our most 
enduring lie?17
It is imitative atheism’s ‘faith in Plato’ that must be challenged, the faith 
in the ‘heavenly place’ (topos ouranios) of Truth, Justice, and Meaning, 
the Ideas that, in parasitic atheism, radiate out in ‘immense lines’ as 
from Diderot’s Man.18 Thought in the wake of Nietzsche is no longer 
warranted in evoking a suprasensory world as the custodian of Truth. 
The Ideas of which the suprasensory God was guarantor cannot survive 
the death of that God, a death that, though it has happened, still lies in 
the future for an unsuspecting humanity:
Much less may one suppose that many people know as yet what this event 
really means – and how much must collapse now that this faith has been 
undermined because it was built upon this faith, propped up by it, grown 
into it; for example, the whole of our European morality.19
In resisting imitative atheism, Nietzsche’s own position is deprived of 
the certainties and horizons of the Platonic or Judaeo-Christian supra-
sensory by the death of God. In addition to morality, the Christian 
eschatological and redemptive view of history must be jettisoned, along 
with the Platonic idea of truth, and hypostatised Reason and Meaning, 
which cannot survive the washing away of the horizon that comes with 
the death of God: ‘ “Reason” in language – oh, what an old deceptive 
female she is! I am afraid we are not rid of God because we still have 
faith in grammar.’20
Nietzsche has been received in France as rejecting the certainties, 
truths and values of imitative atheism’s parasitism upon theology, 
with a recognition that the place of God is not occupied by man, but 
empty, and with a realisation that parasitic atheism’s naïve humanism 
is nothing more than the assumption that ‘la nature humaine avait pour 
6 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
attributs la vérité et la justice, comme d’autres espèces ont pour elles 
la nageoire ou l’aile.’21 In denying itself the Truths and Values of the 
suprasensory, this post-Nietzschean residual atheism cuts a somewhat 
ascetic ﬁ gure. To be sure, Nietzsche’s rhetoric around the death of 
God is itself far from ascetic. It leaves us as ‘free spirits’ upon whom 
a new dawn has shone.22 Nevertheless, deprived of the eternal truths 
previously underwritten by God, ‘Man alone among the animals has no 
eternal horizons and perspectives’.23 Far from triumphantly acceding to 
God’s vacated throne, Man ﬁ nds himself unable to survive the divine 
demise. The rhetoric of Progress and Reason gives way to a recognition 
that ‘Nietzsche a mis en évidence ce fait primordial que, la bourgeoisie 
ayant tué Dieu, il en résulterait tout d’abord un désarroi catastrophique, 
le vide et même un appauvrissement sinistre.’24 Instead of an idolatrous 
humanism, this ascetic atheism issues in the death of Man:
A tous ceux qui veulent encore parler de l’homme, de son règne ou de 
sa libération, à tous ceux qui posent encore des questions sur ce qu’est 
l’homme en son essence, à tous ceux qui veulent partir de lui pour avoir 
accès à la vérité, à tous ceux en revanche qui reconduisent toute connais-
sance aux vérités de l’homme lui-même [. . .] on ne peut qu’opposer un rire 
 philosophique c’est-à-dire, pour une certaine part, silencieux.25
Even so, this asceticism does not succeed in disengaging residual 
atheism from the parasitism it denounces. In limiting itself to the 
sensory world as opposed to the suprasensory, the immanent as 
opposed to the transcendent, residual atheism ﬁ nds itself – just like 
imitative atheism – deﬁ ned in terms of that which it seeks to escape. 
This is the thrust of Heidegger’s critique of Nietzsche in ‘Nietzsche’s 
word: God is dead’.26 For Heidegger, the very way in which Nietzsche 
understands the death of God inscribes it ineluctably in terms of refer-
ence dictated by the theology of the God whose death is being declared. 
Glossing Nietzsche’s parable of the madman in The Gay Science, 
Heidegger warns us not to forget ‘what is said at the beginning of the 
passage that has been elucidated: that the madman “cried incessantly: 
I seek God! I seek God!” ’27 The madman’s cry ‘God is dead’ is not a 
simple cry of triumph but a lament, issuing in his requiem aeternam 
deo. The problem for Nietzsche, as far as Heidegger is concerned, is 
that ‘the terms “God” and “Christian god” in Nietzsche’s thinking are 
used to designate the suprasensory world in general’,28 and Nietzsche 
himself parasitises that Platonic-Christian dichotomy of, on one hand, 
the ‘suprasensory’ or ‘true and genuinely real’ world of Ideas and Ideals, 
and on the other hand the sensory world which is by contrast ‘change-
able, and therefore the merely apparent, unreal world’. The madman’s 
cry concerns this Platonic world of Ideas: ‘The pronouncement “God 
 
Atheisms Today 
7
is dead” means: The suprasensory world is without effective power. It 
bestows no life. Metaphysics, i.e., for Nietzsche Western philosophy 
understood as Platonism, is at an end.’29
However Nietzsche may insist on the inaccessibility of the suprasen-
sory, the division into sensory/suprasensory is itself already a theologi-
cal move: ‘if God in the sense of the Christian God has disappeared 
from his authoritative position in the suprasensory world, then this 
authoritative place itself is still always preserved, even though as that 
which has become empty’.30 Nietzsche’s sensory universe is still com-
plicit, therefore, with Kant’s determination in the Preface to the second 
edition of the Critique of Pure Reason (1787) to ‘deny knowledge in 
order to make room for faith’.31 The problem for Nietzsche is that in 
his residual atheism the sensory is limited by the suprasensory that has 
been swept away. Not only is it thereby denied Truth, Meaning and 
Justice, but the boundaries of the sensory stand now as a de facto limit 
beyond which philosophy cannot stray and therefore outside which it 
is unable to secure its atheism. If for Kant ‘the principles of [reason’s] 
natural use do not lead at all to any theology’,32 then conversely theol-
ogy remains untouched either by the empirical or by the rational, and 
post-Kantian philosophies struggle to exorcise the same theological 
ghost.
It is not only Nietzsche who runs the risk of making room for God, 
however. Any philosophy that limits itself in respect of the sensory/
suprasensory or rational/mystical dichotomies, or that remains silent on 
the question of God, is implicitly, if not explicitly, re-inscribing Kant’s 
‘making room’. Such a re-inscription is Wittgenstein’s famous ‘whereof 
one cannot speak, thereof must one be silent’,33 or Husserl’s insistence 
in Ideas 1 that the transcendence of God is ‘suspended’: ‘Naturally 
we extend the phenomenological reduction to include this “absolute” 
and “transcendent” being. It shall remain excluded from the new ﬁ eld 
of research which is to be provided, since this shall be a ﬁ eld of pure 
consciousness.’34
In seeking to wipe away the theological suprasensory, residual 
atheism struggles to articulate itself in terms other than as the negative 
residue of theology’s plenitude or a renunciation, along with theology, 
of truth and goodness. It is not hard to mount a theological critique of 
this residual atheism at the point of its insistence on immanence, for 
‘[c]’est par référence à la transcendance et par l’exclusion de celle-ci 
hors de sa structure interne que l’immanence a été déﬁ nie’.35
Jacques Derrida presents us with a sophisticated version of ascetic 
atheism. From his early writings onwards Derrida resists his thought 
being understood as a residue of metaphysico-theological structures:
8 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
on n’aurait pas fait un pas hors de la métaphysique si l’on n’en retenait 
qu’un nouveau motif du « retour à la ﬁ nitude », de la « mort de Dieu », etc. 
C’est cette conceptualité et cette problématique qu’il faut déconstruire. Elles 
appartiennent à l’onto-théologie qu’elles contestent. La différance est aussi 
autre chose que la ﬁ nitude.36
It is in this very resistance to the conceptuality of theology’s prob-
lematic, however, that Derrida’s thought opens itself to the charge 
of asceticism, for in the process of avoiding one asceticism, namely 
the retreat into ﬁ nitude as opposed to the inﬁ nite, it opens itself to 
the charge of a second asceticism, namely quietude and inactivity. An 
ascetic reticence before the passage à l’acte and before the decision are 
to be seen in Derrida’s later qualiﬁ cation of the notion of universal 
justice as a demand, horizon or surprise and an absolute dissymmetry 
with the present: justice, if there is such a thing, can never be here and 
now and it is utterly unforeseeable, a justice that is ‘to come’, always to 
come.37 Can atheism claim that a certain action is or is not just, without 
the judgment immediately dying the death of a thousand qualiﬁ cations? 
Derrida remains ascetically open to justice to come, without knowing 
if there is such a thing, and his anti-parasitic re-working of atheism 
is vulnerable to the accusation that justice can no longer determine 
ethical and/or political decisions. Badiou’s despair at the deconstruc-
tive position is indicative of those who express exasperation with this 
asceticism:
« Une pensée tout entière à venir! » Comme est irritant le style post-
heideggérien de l’annonce perpétuelle, de l’à-venir interminable, cette sorte 
de prophétisme laïcisée ne cesse de déclarer que nous ne sommes pas encore 
en état de penser ce qu’il y a à penser, ce pathos de l’avoir-à-répondre de 
l’être, ce Dieu qui fait défaut, cette attente face à l’abîme, cette posture 
du regard qui porte loin dans la brume et dit qu’on voit venir l’indistinct! 
Comme on a envie de dire: « Écoutez, si cette pensée est encore tout entière 
a venir, revenez nous voir quand au moins un morceau en sera venu! » (OR 
15–16)38
It is hardly surprising, then, that this ascetic atheism leaves the door 
open for a ‘theological turn’ in French phenomenology,39 a ‘return to 
religion’ or the ‘return of religion’ that ‘has become perhaps the domi-
nant cliché of contemporary theory’.40 This theological turn can be 
understood as theology’s colonisation of residual atheism by exploit-
ing its gesture of ‘making room’. In the case of Emmanuel Lévinas, 
the exploitation of ‘making room’ is the evocation of an Alterity that 
comes ‘d’un pays où nous ne naquîmes point’.41 This position is quite 
at home with the ascetic strategy of excluding religious language from 
philosophy’s rational or empirical domain, indeed its alterity relies on 
 
Atheisms Today 
9
such an exclusion. Similarly, Lévinas is in no way compromised by the 
suggestion that it is meaningless to talk of God at all, but re-afﬁ rms 
such meaninglessness in a quasi-mystical register:
Les questions relatives à Dieu ne se résolvent pas par des réponses où cesse 
de résonner, où s’apaise pleinement, l’interrogation [. . .] On se demande s’il 
est possible de parler légitimement de Dieu, sans porter atteinte à l’absoluité 
que son mot semble signiﬁ er.42
What is more, this is a non-ontological theology quite at peace with the 
death of the God of metaphysics, for we have moved ‘vers une pensée 
peut-être déjà post-métaphysicienne’.43 More than merely leaving the 
door open for the return of the theological, however, ascetic atheism 
ﬁ nds itself quickly consumed by the unfolding narrative of the God 
whose death it hails; it is dialectised as a necessary renunciation of the 
God of metaphysics in preparation for a non-metaphysical faith:
Si le titre « signiﬁ cation religieuse de l’athéisme » n’est pas vain, il implique 
que l’athéisme n’épuise pas sa signiﬁ cation dans la négation et la destruction 
de la religion, mais qu’il libère l’horizon pour quelque chose d’autre, pour 
une foi susceptible d’être appelée [. . .] une foi post-religieuse44
To deny the Being of God is simply to hold that God gives himself 
to be known according to a ‘more radical horizon’ than Being;45 it is 
not to condemn God to nonbeing but to save God from Being and to 
announce the co-option of atheism by a post-religious or post-secular 
faith. Furthermore, the death of God understood as a rejection of the 
suprasensory is easily co-opted as an articulation of Christ’s death on 
the cross, as Merleau-Ponty notes in Le Primat de la perception:
L’idée nietzschéenne que « Dieu est mort » est déjà contenue dans l’idée 
chrétienne de la mort de Dieu. Dieu cesse d’être objet extérieur pour se 
mêler dans la vie humaine; et cette vie n’est pas simple retour à une solution 
intemporelle46
This systematic occupation of residual atheism’s territory by a return-
ing post-religious or post-secular theology is demonstrated by Jean-Luc 
Marion in Dieu sans l’être and L’Idole et la distance.47 To afﬁ rm the 
Being of God for Marion is merely to afﬁ rm the God of Being, the God 
who gives himself according to the horizon of Being,48 and it amounts 
to claiming not that God has attained Being but that Being has attained 
God, that Being deﬁ nes the ﬁ rst and the highest of the divine names.49 
Though God for Marion undoubtedly is, his relation to Being does not 
radically determine him. To free God from being is to afﬁ rm that the 
absolute God is ‘défait de tout rapport, donc aussi de tout rapport pen-
sable, qui le lierait à un absurde « autre que lui ».’50 The ‘death of God’, 
in so far as it is the death of the God of Being, serves merely to liberate 
10 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
the God who gives himself as agape¯ from the idolatry of radically deter-
mining God as Being, for the ‘death of God’ sets forth a contradiction: 
that which dies does not have any right to claim, even when it is alive, 
to be ‘God’.51 And in so far as this idol is summarily dispatched, ‘the 
death of God’ understood as the death of the God of being expresses 
the death of the ‘death of God’ itself.52 Not only is the ‘death of God’ 
no threat to any God worthy of the name, and in this case to the God 
who gives himself as agape¯, it is in addition a positive succour to the 
true religion which has always sought to rid itself of idols, the God 
of Being chief among them. With this move, a certain post-religious 
theology has colonised ascetic atheism, incorporating atheism’s moves 
within its own trajectory:
now, when Nietzsche says that god is dead, as a matter of fact he is only 
developing this extreme point introduced to the world by Christianity of the 
historicity of history. In other words, no structure, no objective on eternal 
god, just as Christianity has always said.53
This Christianity of the death of God has succeeded in colonising resid-
ual atheism with the argument that ‘real religiosity relies on secularisa-
tion’.54 Furthermore, the death of God is seen to be the enemy not of 
religion but of atheism itself, for ‘the end of metaphysics and the death 
of the moral God have liquidated the philosophical basis of atheism’,55 
if atheism consists in denying those particular deities. We ﬁ nd that 
a transformed religious discourse has effectively come to occupy the 
 territory of the atheism which sought to resist it:
The idea of some kind of postsecular moment emerges precisely from what 
Nietzsche calls the ‘death of god’ because it’s the death of any version of 
monism or reductionism, including secularism. Nietzsche fancied himself a 
prophetic voice, but he didn’t see that coming.56
Atheism is left defending the Maginot line of rationality while the 
 postsecular tanks rumble on behind its lines.
Despite his antipathy to the ‘theological turn’, Dominique Janicaud’s 
position in Le Tournant théologique de la phénoménologie française 
does nothing to address this theological colonisation of the death of 
God. Janicaud argues for an expulsion of the question of God outside 
the ﬁ eld of legitimate phenomenological enquiry57 against Lévinas’s re-
inscription of Husserlian phenomenological rigour,58 and for an afﬁ r-
mation of the ‘insurmountable difference’ between phenomenology and 
theology.59 But this does nothing more than reafﬁ rm residual atheism, 
along with all its problems. Such an atheistic phenomenology has no 
means to engage with and resist theological discourse. If ‘la phénomé-
nologie a été prise en otage par une théologie qui ne veut pas dire son 
 
Atheisms Today 
11
nom’,60 then it is also true that a phenomenology refusing to speak the 
language of theology is equally prey to a God it has explicitly given 
itself no means to engage. Such a phenomenology may be agnostic, but 
can never be atheistic. Once more, residual atheism ﬁ nds itself unable 
to refute the turn to religion; in fact it is the very seedbed in which the 
turn can take root and bloom.
To the extent that ascetic atheism conﬁ nes itself to the sensory 
domain bequeathed to it by theology, it is irrelevant whether theological 
language be labelled ‘irrational’ or ‘nonsense’, or whether God’s exist-
ence be denied; atheism will never be rid of God because it can only ever 
chase God to the borders of the rational, or the sensory. Ascetic atheism 
is condemned to a perpetual game of defence, always beating the 
bounds of its own territory (whether that be the limit of the sensory or 
of the rational) but never able to pursue the theological intruder beyond 
those bounds. In seeking to rid herself of God the would-be atheist has 
only succeeded in prooﬁ ng God against her own attacks. Furthermore, 
atheism has consigned itself to playing the role of religion’s ascetic poor 
relation, prone to deﬁ ne itself in terms of what it lacks (no Truth, no 
Goodness, no ‘eternal horizons and perspectives’ . . .). The dirty secret 
of residual atheism is that under the guise of heroically repelling the 
religious intruder it is in fact an abject  accommodation to religion’s 
terms of engagement.
Parasitism keeps the fruit of the Platonic-Christian structure, but 
does nothing to attack its root. Asceticism destroys the root, but 
denies itself the fruit of Truth, Goodness and Justice. What is more, 
neither parasitism nor asceticism – this Scylla and Charybdis of 
modern atheism – succeed in taking full account of the death of God, 
for both rely upon the dichotomy of the sensory and suprasensory, 
and both are open to being occupied or colonised by theology. A 
dissatisfaction with this situation is motivating a search for a new 
atheism in French thought, an atheism that can combine the fruit 
enjoyed by parasitism with the uprooting of theological categories 
attempted by asceticism.
T H E NEW GA ME: POST -TH E O L O GI C A L 
I NTEGR A TI ON
If thinking without God is to move beyond the impasse of parasit-
ism and asceticism it cannot simply produce – to adopt a Lyotardian 
idiom – a new move in atheism’s old game of the sensory and the 
suprasensory. It cannot simply take religion’s categories for its own, 
but neither can it afford to leave religion alone, expelled merely beyond 
12 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
its own sensory or rational bounds. It must learn from the postsecular 
 colonisation of atheism in order not to resist but to occupy theism’s 
territory, re-deploying theism’s notions in its own cause, just as the 
postsecular co-opts atheism to do its own work of denouncing idols. 
Only this will provide an escape from being theology’s parasitic or 
ascetic poor relation. It is this project of escaping theism’s shadow, 
we will argue, that makes sense of French philosophy’s attempt, in the 
opening decades of the third millennium, to follow the death of God 
more  rigorously than before.
It might at ﬁ rst blush appear that the opening of the twenty-ﬁ rst 
century has seen one more ‘turn to religion’, not by writers confessing 
an afﬁ nity to some version of theology but by those seeking to be rid of 
God. Much has been written on the apostle Paul by recent Continental 
thinkers,61 and the early 2000s saw a cottage industry of books and 
articles on religion by Slavoj Žižek.62 In France, Alain Badiou has revis-
ited the death of God in his the prologue to his Court Traité d’ontologie 
transitoire, crystallising themes developed ever since his early Théorie 
du sujet and still deployed in his most recent interviews. In 2010 
Jean-Luc Nancy published the second volume of his deconstruction of 
Christianity, L’Adoration, reworking ideas that stretch back to his early 
‘Des lieux divins’ (1987). As yet less well known than Badiou or Nancy 
but rapidly receiving the wider readership and following that his auda-
cious thought deserves, Quentin Meillassoux lays claim to a unique 
position in current debates about God. His Après la ﬁ nitude begins to 
unfold arguments that, in the as yet unpublished ‘L’Inexistence divine’, 
blossom into the most sustained direct engagement with and rejection 
of atheism in recent years, as Meillassoux indicts all existing atheisms 
as complicit with theology. Our aim in the chapters that follow is not 
to provide an exhaustive map of this new direction in thinking, but to 
explore in depth the writing of Badiou, Nancy and Meillassoux, the 
three key writers who, in three different ways, are seeking to move the 
contemporary debate beyond parasitic and ascetic atheism, and who 
provide three radically different ways of thinking without God, forcing 
us to re-cast ‘atheism’ as only one of a new palette of terms that express 
the complexity of how French thought is seeking to follow the death 
of God.
In the pages that follow we shall use the term ‘post-theological’ as 
an umbrella term for different ways of thinking after God.63 The preﬁ x 
‘post-’ is merely an indication of chronology: to think in the West today 
is to think after God, with concepts and a tradition bequeathed by the-
ology and theologically informed thinking, and even if the aim of such 
thinking is to be atheological it cannot avoid the task of disengaging 
 
Atheisms Today 
13
itself from the theological legacy.64 The common impulse of the three 
post-theological philosophies we shall consider is that they seek 1) to 
move beyond imitative and residual atheism in order fundamentally 
to re-think philosophy without God or the gods and without parasi-
tising any assumptions dependent on them (hence post-theological, 
not merely post-theistic), while nevertheless 2) refusing ascetically to 
renounce the notions associated with such gods – namely, truth and 
justice – relinquished by residual atheism. A thinking radically without 
God is integrated with a retention of the notions otherwise associated 
with God. These two ideas taken together account for our characterisa-
tion of thinking after atheism as a ‘post-theological integration’. It is 
this integration that makes the new post-theological thought truly new: 
it is a turn to religion in order to turn the page on religion. In the chap-
ters which follow we shall attempt to evaluate whether these integrating 
approaches succeed.
Above all, we must not see these thinkers as performing a new ‘theo-
logical turn’ or ‘return of religion’. Badiou has short shrift for such a 
notion, arguing that the ‘return of religion’ is merely a mask for the 
contemporary decomposition of politics (PE 40) and the notion that 
the world is consumed by a violent quarrel between free-thinkers and 
men of the cloth is obsolete and absolutely astounding (PE 41). As for 
Nancy, the ‘return to religion’ is just as decrepit and insipid as any 
other ‘return’ (DDC 129/DisDC 85), and in fact there is no return 
of the religious but only the contortions and turgidity of its exhaus-
tion (DLD 33/ODP 136). It is also incorrect, we shall argue, to paint 
Nancy as a defender of sceptical agnosticism in contrast to Badiou’s 
supposedly materialistic atheism. The terms ‘agnostique’ and ‘agnosti-
cisme’ do not signiﬁ cantly appear in Nancy’s work, although he does 
argue that atheism is the only possible contemporary ethos, or way of 
holding oneself in the world (DDC 30/DisDC 17). Nancy, we shall 
argue, recognises that atheism is fatally compromised by asceticism and 
 parasitism, and requires a new direction.
There is a further twist in the new post-theological integration: its 
frequent foregrounding of religious ideas, language and themes. Much 
has been made of Badiou’s use of the terms ‘grace’ and ‘faith’, ‘hope’ 
and ‘love’ and Nancy’s deconstruction of Christianity, especially in its 
second volume, is conspicuous in its recourse to a number of terms 
drawn from a religious lexicon: ‘spirit’, ‘agapic love’, ‘praise’, and of 
course ‘adoration’ itself. As for Meillassoux, the prevalence of religious 
and theological terms is even more striking: ‘conversion’, ‘immortal-
ity’, ‘incarnation’, the ‘Child of man’ and even the ‘philosophical 
God’ tumble approvingly off the pages of ‘L’Inexistence divine’. There 
14 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
are two errors to avoid in trying to make sense of this peppering of 
 religious terms. The ‘parasitic’ reading is that this theological vocabu-
lary indicates the same old reliance on religious forms of thinking that 
we encounter in Comte and Feuerbach, such that post-theological 
integration is living off the borrowed religious capital of imitative 
atheism, and is therefore a fortiori ripe for the same postsecular colo-
nisation. The ‘ascetic’ interpretation is that that the prevalence of reli-
gious vocabulary and ideas in these thinkers is a complete irrelevance, 
a semantic blip of no interest to a serious study of their thought. It is 
our argument in the pages that follow that neither the ‘parasitic’ nor 
the ‘ascetic’ way of trying to account for these religious and theological 
terms is adequate to make sense of what is at stake in post-theological 
thought for Badiou, Nancy or Meillassoux. What post-theological inte-
gration attempts is not to oppose theism but to occupy it, not to expel 
theism but to ingest it, taking terms and patterns of thought previously 
associated with theism and re-inscribing them in a way that is not to be 
confused either with parasitism or with asceticism.
Three questions will guide our exploration of this post-theological 
integration. First, how do Nancy, Badiou and Meillassoux seek 
to articulate a new position or positions beyond the problems of 
parasitism/asceticism? Secondly, can one coherent understanding of 
what it means to think without God emerge from Nancy, Badiou 
and Meillassoux, or do they develop different, perhaps incommen-
surable approaches to the post-theological? Thirdly, do the different 
approaches to a post-theological integration in fact succeed in avoid-
ing the problems identiﬁ ed with parasitism and asceticism? Do they 
succeed in occupying religion’s territory without letting the religious 
Trojan horse into their own camps? Though our own position will 
inevitably become clear in the course of the discussion, our aim 
throughout will be to respect the maxim audi alteram partem. The 
reader’s pardon is begged in advance for the failures there will no 
doubt be in this respect.
The six chapters of our study fall into three groups of two. Chapters 
1 and 2 interrogate Badiou’s and Nancy’s reception of the death of 
God. Taking our lead from Badiou’s distinction in the prologue of 
his Court Traité d’ontologie transitoire, the ﬁ rst chapter addresses the 
death of the God of the philosophers, and the second chapter looks at 
the death of the God of the poets. In Chapter 1 we encounter a fun-
damental differend between Badiou’s ‘Platonism of the multiple’ and 
Nancy’s ‘deconstruction of Christianity’ which will structure much 
of the debate that follows. In the second chapter we show the central 
importance for Badiou’s post-theological integration of the motif of the 
 
Atheisms Today 
15
Idea and the assertion that ‘nothing is inaccessible’, and for Nancy of 
the double movement of dis-enclosure’s ‘yet without’ and the relation 
between sense and signiﬁ cation.
Chapter 3 moves from considering the place of the death of God in 
Badiou’s and Nancy’s thought to interrogating their articulations of 
atheism per se. Entitled ‘Difﬁ cult Atheism’, this third chapter is a com-
parative study of Badiou’s axiomatic atheism and Nancy’s re-inscrip-
tion of faith as the ‘nothing at all’ of reason, without which reason 
cannot be what it is. While Nancy moves away from the language 
of atheism to ‘atheology’, we argue that neither Badiou nor Nancy 
unproblematically secures a position that is ‘without God’, and that 
they develop divergent post-theological positions that cannot easily be 
reconciled with each other.
In the fourth chapter, ‘Beyond A/theism’, we invite Quentin 
Meillassoux into the discussion. Meillassoux goes further than Nancy 
in distancing himself from ‘atheism’, rejecting both theism and atheism 
in favour of ‘philosophy’. Distinct from both Badiou’s axiomatic 
atheism and Nancy’s ‘faith that is nothing at all’, Meillassoux defends 
the bold claim that his position relies not on a decision or on a moment 
of faith but on a demonstration. Meillassoux’s position is startling for 
its willingness to colonise religious terms and ideas, and he claims to 
be articulating for the ﬁ rst time a thinking that enjoys all the ‘beneﬁ ts’ 
of religion without being beset by any of the problems attendant on 
what we are calling imitative and residual atheisms. Furthermore, 
Meillassoux’s philosophy poses an explicit challenge to Badiou’s 
atheism and an implicit critique of Nancy’s atheology. We argue that, 
for all its boldness, Meillassoux’s move beyond atheism does not 
succeed in freeing itself from the shadow of religion.
In the ﬁ nal two chapters we move to consider a case study of post-
theological integration, namely how it proposes to think and act politi-
cally without falling either into parasitism or asceticism. In asking the 
question ‘What politics are possible after God?’, our main concern in 
the ﬁ fth chapter is to see how Meillassoux, Badiou and Nancy lay claim 
to ethical and political imperatives without partaking in a re-theologi-
sation of the political. The ﬁ nal chapter focuses on the idea and politics 
of justice, and on the different ways in which our three thinkers under-
stand justice in terms of their respective post-theological integrations. 
We consider Meillassoux’s audacious claim to bring justice for both the 
living and the dead, and examine the similar way in which Badiou and 
Nancy articulate the place of capital and communism in their notions of 
justice, contrasting Badiou’s communist hypothesis with Nancy’s onto-
logical communism. The investigation of justice also allows us to ask 
16 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
whether the political positions that each thinker adopts are a  necessary 
consequence of their post-theological thought, and whether any one 
particular political position or set of positions can be said to ﬂ ow from 
their thinking.
In the conclusion we return to the central concern of the inadequacy 
of ‘atheism’ to capture current complexities in French thought. We 
argue that the term is too blunt an instrument with which to make sense 
of the diversity of current approaches to thinking in the wake of the 
death of God, and that it would avoid much confusion to stop using it 
as a blanket term to refer to thinking without God. We also argue that 
the future of post-theological thought will be determined by its ability 
to account for the choice for one fundamental philosophical orientation 
over another.
‘Deeds, though done, still require time to be seen and heard’, warned 
Nietzsche’s madman,65 and his admonition echoes through the chapters 
of Difﬁ cult Atheism. The death of God still requires time to be fully 
seen and heard, but it is not that this death itself is slow in reaching con-
temporary thought, rather that contemporary thought is still straining 
to do justice to it. The process of understanding how philosophy in the 
twenty-ﬁ rst century continues to come to terms with the death of God is 
important for French philosophy’s re-negotiation of the religious legacy 
and for the future shape of that philosophy more broadly. This book is 
a contribution to that process.
NOTE S
 1. Nietzsche, The Gay Science, p. 182.
 2. Jean-Paul Sartre, Critiques littéraires, p. 153. ‘God is dead, but man has 
not, for all that, become atheistic’ (author’s  translation).
 3. Diderot, Œuvres complètes, ed. Jane Marsh Dieckmann, vol. 7, 
pp. 212–13.
Why will we not introduce man into our work, in the same way he is 
placed in the universe? Why do we not make him a common centre? Is 
there any point in inﬁ nite space from where we can, with greater advan-
tage, send out the immense lines that we propose to stretch to all other 
points? (author’s translation)
 
This passage is cited by Stefanos Geroulanos in An Atheism that is not 
Humanist (p. 13), a ﬁ ne analysis of the relation between humanism and 
atheism to which the present volume owes a debt.
 4. The New Supreme Great Being is discussed at length in Comte, System of 
Positive Polity.
 5. Feuerbach, The Essence of Christianity, p. 52.
 
Atheisms Today 
17
 6. Feuerbach, The Essence of Christianity, p. 341.
 7. Feuerbach, The Essence of Christianity. p. 335.
 8. Raymond Aron, L’Opium des intellectuels (Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1955), 
p. 78. ‘In Marxist eschatology, the proletariat is cast in the role of 
 collective savior’ (Aron, The Opium of the Intellectuals, p. 66).
 9. Aron, L’Opium des intellectuels, p. 278. ‘Faith in the proletariat and in 
history, charity for those who suffer today and who tomorrow will inherit 
the earth, hope that the future will bring the advent of the classless society’ 
(Aron, The Opium of the Intellectuals, p. 267).
10. Camus, Lettres à un ami allemand, pp. 72–3.
I continue to believe that the world has no ultimate meaning. But I 
know that something in it has meaning, and that is man, because he 
is the only creature to insist on having one. This world has at least the 
truth of man and our task is to provide its justiﬁ cation against faith 
itself. (Camus, Resistance, Rebellion, and Death, p. 22)
11. Albert Camus, Le Mythe de Sisyphe (Paris: Gallimard, 1942), p. 60; ‘sin 
without God’ (Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus, p. 38).
12. Heidegger, Being and Time; Heidegger, ‘Letter on humanism’, 
pp.  189–242.
13. Camus, Le Mythe de Sisyphe, p. 168.
I leave Sisyphus at the foot of the mountain! One always ﬁ nds one’s 
burden again. But Sisyphus teaches the higher ﬁ delity that denies the 
gods and raises up rocks. He, too, concludes that all is well. The universe 
henceforth without a master seems to him neither sterile nor futile. Each 
atom of that stone, each mineral ﬂ ake of that night-ﬁ lled mountain, in 
itself forms a world. The struggle itself towards the heights is enough 
to ﬁ ll a man’s heart. One must imagine Sisyphus happy. (Camus, The 
Myth of Sisyphus, p. 99; translation altered)
14. Blanchot, Faux pas, 1975, p. 69.
From the instant that, with all my strength, I link myself as the only 
possibility to a universe where my presence has no meaning, I must 
completely renounce hope; from the instant that, toward and against 
everything, I maintain my will to see everything clearly, knowing that 
the obscurity will never diminish, I must completely renounce rest; from 
the instant that I can do nothing but question everything without giving 
anything, even this questioning, an absolute value, I must renounce 
everything, even this act of refusing everything. Total absence of hope, 
conscious dissatisfaction, endless struggle, those are the three demands 
of absurd logic; from now on they deﬁ ne the character of the experi-
ence that consists of living without appeal. (Blanchot, Faux Pas, trans. 
Charlotte Mandell, p. 56)
18 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
15. Blanchot, Faux pas, 1975, p. 70.
‘One must imagine Sisyphus happy.’ Happy? That is easy enough to 
write [. . .] It is because he himself is not faithful to his rule, because in 
the long run he makes of the absurd not that which disturbs and breaks 
everything but that which is amenable to arrangement and which even 
arranges everything. In his work the absurd becomes a denouement; it 
is a solution, a kind of salvation. (Blanchot, Faux Pas, trans. Charlotte 
Mandell, p. 57; translation altered) 
16. ‘As many of those who did not believe in God were standing around just 
then, he provoked much laughter’ (Nietzsche, The Gay Science, p. 181).
17. Nietzsche, The Gay Science, p. 344.
18. See note 3.
19. Nietzsche, The Gay Science, p. 279.
20. Nietzsche, The Anti-Christ, Ecce Homo, Twilight of the Idols, and Other 
Writings, p. 170.
21. Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Signes (Paris: Gallimard, 1960), p. 368; ‘human 
nature had truth and justice for attributes, as other species have ﬁ ns or 
wings’ (Merleau-Ponty, Signs, p. 355).
22. Nietzsche, The Gay Science, p. 181.
23. Nietzsche, The Gay Science, p. 192.
24. Bataille, Écrits posthumes, 1922–1940, Œuvres complètes, vol. 2, p. 102. 
‘Nietzsche revealed this primordial fact: that once the bourgeoisie had 
killed God, the immediate result would be catastrophic confusion, emp-
tiness, and even a sinister impoverishment’ (Bataille, Visions of Excess, 
p. 38).
25. Foucault, Les Mots et les choses, pp. 353–4.
To all those who still wish to talk about man, about his reign or his 
liberation, to all those who still ask themselves questions about what 
man is in his essence, to all those who wish to take him as their starting-
point in their attempts to reach the truth, to all those who, on the other 
hand, refer all knowledge back to the truths of man himself, [. . .] we 
can answer only with a philosophical laugh – which means, to a certain 
extent, a silent one. (Foucault, The Order of Things, pp. 342–3)
26. Martin Heidegger, ‘Nietzsche’s word: God is dead’, in The Question 
Concerning Technology and Other Essays, pp. 53–114.
27. Heidegger, ‘Nietzsche’s word’, p. 111.
28. Heidegger, ‘Nietzsche’s word’, p. 61.
29. Heidegger, ‘Nietzsche’s word’, p. 61.
30. Heidegger, ‘Nietzsche’s word’, p. 69.
31. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, p. 117.
32. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, p. 586.
33. Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, trans. C. K. Ogden 
(New York: Barnes and Noble, 2003), p. 157.
 
Atheisms Today 
19
34. Husserl, Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology, p. 134.
35. Henry, L’Essence de la manifestation, p. 349. ‘Immanence has been 
deﬁ ned by reference to transcendence and through the exclusion of the 
latter from its internal structure’ (Henry, L’Essence de la manifestation, 
p. 281).
36. Derrida, De la Grammatologie, p. 99.
it would not mean a single step outside of metaphysics if nothing more 
than a new motif of ‘return to ﬁ nitude,’ of ‘God’s death,’ etc., were the 
result of this move. It is that conceptuality and that problematics that 
must be deconstructed. They belong to the onto-theology they ﬁ ght 
against. Differance is also something other than ‘ﬁ nitude’ (Derrida, Of 
Grammatology, p. 68)
37. Derrida, Force de loi, p. 60; Derrida, ‘Force of Law’, p. 27.
38.
‘A thinking that is entirely to come!’ How irritating is this post-
Heideggerian style of the perpetual announcement, of the interminable 
to-come; this sort of secularised prophecy never ceases to declare that 
we are not yet in a position to think what is to be thought, this pathos of 
having-to-respond to being, this God who is lacking, this waiting before 
the abyss, this posture of gazing far into the mist and saying that we see 
the indistinct approaching! How we long to say: ‘Listen, if this thinking 
is still entirely to come, come back and see us when at least a piece of it 
has arrived!’ (author’s translation)
39. See in particular Hent de Vries, Philosophy and the Turn to Religion 
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999), and Janicaud, Le 
Tournant théologique de la phénoménologie française [Phenomenology 
and the ‘Theological Turn’].
40. Critchley, ‘Mystical anarchism’, p. 272.
41. Lévinas, Totalité et inﬁ ni, p. 22; ‘from a land not of our birth’ (Lévinas, 
Totality and Inﬁ nity, p. 33).
42. Lévinas, De Dieu qui vient à l’idée, p. 8.
Questions relative to God are not resolved by answers in which 
the interrogation ceases to resonate or is wholly paciﬁ ed. [. . .] One 
wonders whether it is possible to speak legitimately of God without 
striking a blow against the absoluteness that this world seems to signify. 
(Lévinas, Of God who Comes to Mind, pp. xi–xii)
43. Marion, Réduction et donation, p. 7; ‘toward a thought that is perhaps 
already postmetaphysical’ (Marion, Reduction and Givenness, p. 1).
44. Ricœur, Le Conﬂ it des interprétations, p. 431.
If the title ‘The Religious Meaning of Atheism’ is not nonsensical, 
it implies that atheism does not exhaust its signiﬁ cation in the mere 
20 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
negation and destruction of religion but that, rather, it opens up the 
horizon for something else, for a type of faith that might be called [. . .] 
a postreligious faith. (Ricœur, The Conﬂ ict of Interpretations, p. 436; 
translation altered)
45. Jean-Luc Marion, ‘Preface to the English edition’, in God Without Being, 
p. xxiv.
46. Merleau-Ponty, Le Primat de la perception et ses conséquences philos-
ophiques, p. 72.
Nietzsche’s idea that God is dead is already contained in the Christian 
idea of the death of God. God ceases to be an external object in order to 
mingle in human life, and this life is not simply a return to a non-tem-
poral conclusion. (Merleau-Ponty, The Primacy of Perception, p. 27)
47. Marion, Dieu sans l’être, L’Idole et la distance.
48. Marion, ‘Preface’, in God Without Being, p. xxiv.
49. Marion, ‘Preface’, in God Without Being, pp. xix–xx.
50. Marion, L’Idole et la distance, p. 185; ‘undone from any relation and 
therefore also from any thinkable relation, which would tie it to an absurd 
“other than it” ’ (Marion, The Idol and Distance, p. 141).
51. Marion, L’Idole et la distance, p. 16; The Idol and Distance, p. 1.
52. Marion, L’Idole et la distance, p. 16; The Idol and Distance, p. 1.
53. Vattimo, ‘A prayer for silence’, p. 91; GV’s italics.
54. Vattimo, ‘A prayer for silence’, p. 95.
55. Vattimo, After Christianity, p. 17.
56. Caputo, ‘On the power of the powerless’, p. 133.
57. Janicaud, Le Tournant théologique, p. 86; Phenomenology and the 
‘Theological Turn’, p. 99.
58. Janicaud, Le Tournant théologique, p. 28; Phenomenology and 
the ‘Theological Turn’, p. 38.
59. Janicaud, Le Tournant théologique, p. 89; Phenomenology and the 
‘Theological Turn’, p. 103.
60. Janicaud, Le Tournant théologique, p. 31; ‘phenomenology has been taken 
hostage by a theology that does not want to speak its name’ (Janicaud, 
Phenomenology and the ‘Theological Turn, p. 43).
61. A cluster of texts in recent years has brought Paul up the philosophical 
agenda. See: Giorgio Agamben, The Time That Remains: A Commentary 
on the Letter to the Romans (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2005); 
Badiou, Saint Paul: La Fondation de l’universalisme [Saint Paul: The 
Foundation of Universalism]; Daniel Boyarin, A Radical Jew: Paul and the 
Politics of Identity (London: University of California Press, 1994); Jacob 
Taubes, The Political Theology of Paul; John D. Caputo and Linda Martin 
Alcoff (eds), St Paul Among the Philosophers (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 2009).
62. See Žižek, The Fragile Absolute; On Belief; The Puppet and the Dwarf; as 
well as extended treatments of religious themes in other texts, notably The 
 
Atheisms Today 
21
Parallax View, not to mention the numerous articles and interviews on 
themes such as faith, fundamentalism, the suffering God and divine love, 
and Žižek’s self-deﬁ nition as a ‘ﬁ ghting atheist’.
63. The term ‘post-theological’ has been employed by the theologian Stanley 
James Grenz to indicate what he perceives to be the theological con-
sequences of a ‘post-Christian’ and ‘postmodern’ culture. See Grenz, 
Renewing the Center. David Crownﬁ eld equates the term to a via negativa 
and Mark Taylor’s ‘atheological erring’; see Crownﬁ eld, ‘Extraduction’, 
in Lacan and Theological Discourse, p. 162. Scattered English references 
elsewhere, and references in French to the post-théologique, tend to mean 
either ‘atheistic’ in the traditional sense, or postmodern. In these pages we 
are using the term with quite a different meaning.
64. To use the term ‘atheology’ would confuse this umbrella term with 
Nancy’s atheology, and to use ‘atheism’ would confuse it with Badiou’s 
atheism. ‘Post-theological’ is a neutral term intended to predispose to 
neither a Nancean nor a Badiousian reading.
65. Nietzsche, The Gay Science, p. 182.
22
1. The God of Metaphysics
On dit fort bien que si les triangles faisaient un Dieu, ils lui donneraient 
trois côtés.1
Mathematics is the science in which we never know what we are talking 
about, nor whether what we are saying is true.2
‘Je prends au pied de la lettre la formule « Dieu est mort ». [. . .] Dieu, 
c’est ﬁ ni. Et la religion aussi, c’est ﬁ ni’ (CT 12).3 This striking interven-
tion in the prologue of Badiou’s Court Traité d’ontologie transitoire is 
not merely a claim that the moral God is dead, much less that the death 
of God is one move in a wider Christian dialectic. By claiming that 
God is dead Badiou is doing more therefore than echoing Nietzsche’s 
madman. For Badiou as for Heidegger, Nietzsche’s claim that God is 
dead is not yet without God, for the theistic schema of the sensory and 
the suprasensory still dominates Nietzsche’s thought.4 In other words, 
there remains in Nietzsche’s thinking the Pascalian inﬁ nite abyss that 
can be ﬁ lled only with an inﬁ nite and immutable object.5 When pressed, 
therefore, Badiou maintains a position more radical than Nietzsche’s: 
‘Mon propos n’a rapport à aucune religion, et c’est pourquoi il peut 
librement les traiter toutes comme schèmes de l’esthétique historiale. 
Dieu n’est pas même mort, pour moi (ce mort est encore l’interlocuteur 
constant de Nietzsche)’ (19R 262).6
Badiou concurs in his analysis of the death of God, so he tells us, 
with Jean-Luc Nancy’s assertion that the death of God is irreversible 
(CT 12/BOE 23). But this moment of supposed agreement between 
Badiou and Nancy belies the fact that, despite the respect they dem-
onstrate for each other’s work, their readings of the ‘death of God’, 
present to us two radically divergent attempts to move beyond athe-
ism’s impasse of parasitism (seeking to be rid of God in ways that 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
23
assume or require God) and asceticism (renouncing, along with God, 
the notions of truth, goodness and beauty that he underwrites). The 
stakes of this antagonism are double: not only do the arguments that 
pass between Badiou and Nancy shape our sense of what the death of 
God can mean for the future of post-theological thought, as well as for 
philosophical ethics and politics, but in addition they stage en abyme 
an encounter the stakes of which will do much to direct the future 
of Continental thought itself: the encounter between philosophies of 
 ﬁ nitude and philosophies of the inﬁ nite.
Starting from Badiou’s account of the death of God, this chapter 
begins our exploration of the contrasting treatment of theological 
themes in Badiou and Nancy, and also opens a concurrent investigation 
into the scope for staging a productive encounter between Nancean 
ﬁ nitude and the Badiouian inﬁ nite.7 We begin to explore how Nancy 
and Badiou understand ﬁ nitude and the inﬁ nite differently, to probe 
the reasons for – and consequences of – their divergent understand-
ings, and to ask to what extent they may eventually be commensurable. 
Our intention is to resist sliding into either a Nancean or a Badiouian 
 position – though our sympathies will no doubt be evident and we 
make no pretence of disguising them – and to seek instead to vindicate 
the hypothesis that bringing Badiou’s and Nancy’s thinking into con-
versation will be productive for our understanding of each of the two 
thinkers, the current possibilities of post-theological integration, and 
the possible futures of French thought.
1 . 1  THE D EA TH OF  THE GOD O F M E TA PH Y S I C S
Peter Hallward is surely correct in his emphatically ambiguous comment 
that ‘[n]o one, perhaps, has taken the death of God as seriously as 
Badiou’,8 a seriousness manifest not least in the care with which Badiou 
disambiguates the different meanings of ‘God is dead’. In the prologue 
to Court Traité d’ontologie transitoire he identiﬁ es three ‘major gods’ 
(dieux capitaux, CT 22/BOE 30), each requiring its own mode of des-
patch: the God of religions, the God of metaphysics and the God of the 
poets. For the God of religions it is sufﬁ cient merely to declare that he is 
dead; the God of metaphysics must be brought to an end by a thinking 
of inﬁ nity disseminated in multiplicity rather than gathered in the One, 
and the God of the poets is expunged by breaking the poetic disposition 
to think in terms of the Romantic loss and return of the divine (CT 23/
BOE 31). While the death of the God of religions is considered a his-
torical datum and – somewhat problematically – receives little further 
mention from Badiou, there is so much at stake in his treatment of the 
24 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
gods of metaphysics and the poets that we need to take them one at a 
time, and slowly. The present chapter will consider Badiou’s account of 
the death of the God of metaphysics, while Chapter 2 will examine the 
death of the God of the poets.
Badiou’s God of metaphysics9 is the God of Aristotle, an intellec-
tual agent separate from the material world, a set of operations that 
completes the Aristotelian theory of substance by accounting for the 
relationship between matter and form, and between the one and the 
many. It is the Prime, Unmoved Mover that, in its immobile eternity, 
remains completely indifferent to that which it moves (CT 15/BOE 25). 
It is the conceptual God of Descartes, the placeholder of the inﬁ nite, 
the glue bonding mathematical truths to the world of extension, or the 
(Kantian) big Other as guarantor of the validity of judgments. In short, 
it is a god-as-principle (dieu-principe, CT 18, 19/BOE 28).10
Badiou identiﬁ es the supposed transcendence of the God of meta-
physics as a construct of the philosophical identiﬁ cation of the One 
with inﬁ nity, made possible by philosophy’s adherence to the disastrous 
notion of ﬁ nitude. That is to say, since at least as far back as Galileo 
and Descartes, God has occupied the inaccessible and impregnable 
position of being the only actual inﬁ nity (CT 10/BOE 22), a position 
which residual atheism endorses through its denial that there exists an 
actual inﬁ nite. Badiou cites Leibniz as the emblematic exponent of this 
position in his assertion that ‘« Il appartient à l’essence du nombre, de 
la ligne, et d’un tout quelconque, d’être borné. » Et « le vrai inﬁ ni à la 
rigueur n’est que dans l’absolu, qui est antérieur à toute composition, et 
n’est point formé par l’addition de parties »’ (CT 115).11 Furthermore, 
metaphysics can be deﬁ ned as the enframing of Being by the One (arrai-
sonnement de l’être par l’un, CT 26/BOE 34). Once more Badiou turns 
to Leibniz for the paradigmatic formulation of this position, for it is 
Leibniz who establishes the norm of the reciprocity of being and the 
One in the maxim ‘« Ce qui n’est pas un être n’est pas un être »’ (CT 26; 
AB’s emphasis).12
Given that the God of metaphysics is a god-principle it is misplaced, 
Badiou insists, to suggest that this God is dead, for that would imply 
that it was once alive, or is capable of life, which as a principle it is 
not.13 The God of metaphysics is properly neither ‘alive’ nor ‘dead’. 
However, in so far as it entertains no relationship either with life or 
with death, from the point of view of life and religion it is perfectly 
dead (CT 16/BOE 26), dead since the beginning, and no religion can 
nourish its faith on this non-existent corpse (CT 14/BOE 25). The 
god-principle, a pseudonymous deity of many guises, has not been 
quashed, merely chased into ever remoter corners of the philosophical 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
25
landscape: it is holed up in actual inﬁ nity by Descartes and Galileo, 
relieved of its providential oversight of the world by the Enlightenment, 
transmuted into the ﬁ gure of ‘man’ in the imitative atheism of post-
Cartesian humanism (S 237/Cen 168), evicted from actual inﬁ nity by 
Georg Cantor, and sequestrated in projections of familial organisation 
by Feuerbach and psychoanalysis (CT 10–11/BOE 22). It is clear, then, 
that the demise of the god-principle of metaphysics is no swift affair.
1.1.1 The Birth of Philosophy
The tool which Badiou employs both to have done with the God of 
metaphysics and to loosen the inﬁ nite from the grip of the One is 
mathematics, and he ﬁ nds a model for its employment in the birth of 
philosophy, which he traces to Plato. In contrast to the poetic form that 
allows Parmenidean thought to maintain its discourse in the proximity 
of the sacred, for his part Badiou insists that philosophy can only begin 
with a desacralisation, installing a regime of discourse that provides 
its own, resolutely worldly, legitimation. Philosophy began in Greece 
because there alone the matheme allowed for the interruption of the 
sacred mytheme (C 95/Con 37).14 The philosophical miracle of Greece 
is to be ascribed not to the mythic and poetic richness of that culture, 
nor to its poetry’s grasp of the sacred, but rather to its interruption of 
sacred cosmogonies and opinion by secularised and abstract thought, 
and truth (M 14/Man 34): ‘la mathématique est le seul point de rupture 
avec la doxa qui soit donné comme existant, ou constitué. La singu-
larité absolue des mathématiques est au fond leur existence’ (C 167).15
For his own part, Badiou describes his recourse to mathematics in 
terms that resemble those of a crusade:
it is by donning the contemporary matheme like a coat of armour that I 
have undertaken, alone at ﬁ rst, to undo the disastrous consequences of phi-
losophy’s ‘linguistic turn’; to demarcate philosophy from phenomenological 
religiosity; [. . .] to identify generic multiplicities as the ontological form of 
the true. (M&P 16–17)
It is by recourse to the matheme that Badiou seeks to have done with 
residual atheism’s implicit assumption of a domain beyond its own 
purview.
Although the Platonic interruption of the mytheme by the matheme 
took place within a given historico-cultural context, Badiou insists that 
it must not be viewed in a historicist perspective. In the essay ‘Le (Re)
tour de la philosophie elle-même’ (C 57–78/Con 3–22), he expands on 
ﬁ ve propositions concerning the relation of philosophy to history, ﬁ ve 
26 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
propositions which will provide the framework for our comparison of 
Nancy and Badiou in this chapter. They amount to an attack on what 
Badiou sees as the danger of inscribing philosophy within a ﬁ nite his-
torical horizon. Philosophy today is paralysed by its relation to its own 
history (proposition 1) because philosophy no longer knows whether it 
has a place of its own, scattered and subordinated as it is in a host of 
disciplines including art, poetry, science, political action and psychoa-
nalysis, with the desultory consequence that philosophy has become 
little more than its own museum (C 57/Con 3). It therefore becomes 
imperative for philosophy to break decisively with historicism (propo-
sition 2), which means that philosophy’s self-presentation must in the 
ﬁ rst instance make no reference to its history; its concepts must be pre-
sented without having to appear before the tribunal of their historical 
moment, for it is philosophy which judges history, and not the reverse 
(C 58/Con 5). If philosophy is thus to be freed from the vicissitudes of 
historicism it must be deﬁ ned in a historically invariable way (proposi-
tion 3), and in a way that distinguishes it from sophism (proposition 
4), where Badiou understands the emblematic contemporary sophism 
to be the Wittgenstinian reduction of thought to the ascetic dichotomy 
of language games and pure, silent ‘indication’ (C 60/Con 6, cf. W 
55–7). So philosophy as understood by Plato is both possible and nec-
essary (proposition 5) in the face of the modern sophism of Nietzsche, 
Wittgenstein, Vattimo and Rorty.
For Badiou, the sundering of philosophy from mathematics is a state 
from within which our contemporary situation cannot fully prosecute 
the agenda of the death of God:
L’embarras contemporain quant au thème de la mort de Dieu, sinon dans 
son énoncé, du moins dans son effectivité, doit être renvoyé à ceci que le 
délaissement de la pensée mathématique par la philosophie livre l’inﬁ ni, 
dans le médium de l’Histoire, à un nouvel avatar de l’Un. (C 164)16
In order to crush odious superstition, we must turn to the solid, secular 
eternity of the sciences (C 164/TW 26), and forge a wholly new relation 
for mathematics and philosophy (C 165/TW 27). Badiou’s prognosis is 
categorical: ﬁ nitude is constitutive of the residual atheism that always 
leaves room for God: ‘Athées, nous n’avons pas les moyens de l’être, 
tant que le thème de la ﬁ nitude organise notre pensée’ (C 164),17 and, 
conversely, ‘[l]a thèse de l’inﬁ nité de l’être est nécessairement postchré-
tienne’ (EE 162).18 However, it is far from clear that the thesis of the 
inﬁ nity of being is indeed necessarily post-Christian. Was not Georg 
Cantor, the pioneer of set theory and the mathematician to whom 
Badiou credits the ‘genuine killing’ of God (C 303/Con 225), himself a 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
27
Catholic who saw no necessary tension between his transﬁ nite numbers 
and his faith? For Cantor, God is neither ﬁ nite nor inﬁ nite. If such 
a God were to feature in a given philosophy, Badiou could gain no 
purchase on it by his insistence on the inﬁ nity of being. Such a God is 
sketched by Adam Drozdek,19 who, starting from the position that, for 
Augustine, ‘all inﬁ nity is certainly made ﬁ nite to God’,20 concludes that 
the Augustinian God ‘is neither ﬁ nite nor inﬁ nite and his greatness sur-
passes even the inﬁ nite’.21 Like Virgil’s reed, when one god is plucked 
another grows in its place;22 there are potentially as many gods of the 
philosophers as there are philosophers.
Drozdek sees an afﬁ nity to Augustine’s position in the Cantorian 
‘absolute inﬁ nite’, which Cantor situates beyond the ﬁ nite/inﬁ nite 
dichotomy. After distinguishing between the bad inﬁ nite of endless 
succession and the actual inﬁ nite, Cantor subdivides the latter into the 
transﬁ nite and the absolute inﬁ nite.23 The absolute inﬁ nite is beyond the 
dichotomy of the ﬁ nite and the inﬁ nite; by contrast with the transﬁ nite, 
the absolute inﬁ nite cannot be surpassed in cardinality by ever greater 
inﬁ nities, and again unlike the transﬁ nite it cannot be determined by 
mathematics: ‘It belongs particularly to speculative theology to inves-
tigate the absolute inﬁ nite and to determine what can be humanly said 
about it. On the other side, the questions about the transﬁ nite belong 
chieﬂ y to the domain of metaphysics and mathematics.’24
The Cantorian absolute inﬁ nite, if it is admitted, would prove deadly 
to Badiou’s prosecution of the death of God, for the transﬁ nite multipli-
cation of inﬁ nities and the position that ‘the One is not’ would no longer 
be sufﬁ cient to foreclose the possibility of the god-principle of metaphys-
ics. For Badiou’s position to hold, there can be nothing that is beyond or 
otherwise than the dichotomy of the ﬁ nite and the inﬁ nite; if there were 
it would reinscribe Badiou’s mathematising move as an ascetic atheism, 
placing God beyond the purview of the mathematical inﬁ nite, serenely 
untouched by any set-theoretical proclamation that ‘the One is not’. 
The absolute inﬁ nite opens an alternative reading of Badiou’s recourse 
to mathematics, not this time as the triumph of post-theological think-
ing but rather as a fact that ‘can be used by theologians [to substantiate] 
that God simply must surpass all inﬁ nities and in this sense he is not 
inﬁ nite – he is the Absolute’.25 Such a God, outside the ﬁ nite/inﬁ nite 
dichotomy, would simply not be  thinkable set-theoretically.
Not surprisingly, therefore, Badiou gives short shrift to the Cantorian 
absolute inﬁ nite. He ascribes it to ‘la folie de sauver Dieu, c’est-à-dire 
l’un, de toute présomption absolue du multiple’ (EE 54),26 and dis-
misses the move as a mathematical god of the gaps. Furthermore, 
Zermelo-Fraenkel axiomatised set theory provides Badiou with a 
28 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 mathematically orthodox alternative to Cantor’s absolute inﬁ nity.27 
ZFC indeed furnishes possible, but not necessary, grounds to reject 
Cantor’s absolute inﬁ nite, and a complete account of Badiou’s foreclos-
ure of residual atheism through his rejection of the Cantorian absolute 
inﬁ nite in favour of ZFC requires an axiomatic move, namely that 
‘nothing is inaccessible’ to set-theoretical counting as one.28 It is not the 
recourse to set theory itself that secures Badiou’s post-theological think-
ing,29 but the particular version of set theory he chooses; Badiou can 
only escape the possibility of ascetic atheism through axiomatic deci-
sion. We shall scrutinise this reliance on axioms further in Chapter 3.
1.1.2 The Multiple And The Inﬁ nite
The mathematical rupture from the mytheme takes the form, in 
Badiou’s own thinking, of the radically new understanding of multi-
plicity and inﬁ nity brought about by set theory. What the death of God 
demands, Badiou argues, is a thinking of the inﬁ nite on the basis of a 
multiplicity that is no longer derived from a prior One: ‘Du Dieu de 
la métaphysique, il faut achever le parcours par une pensée de l’inﬁ ni 
qui en dissémine la ressource sur l’étendue entière des multiplicités 
 quelconques’ (CT 22).30
Much of twentieth century French thought is an attempt to think 
just such a multiplicity, but for Badiou all previous endeavours fall 
short. Derridean dissémination, the Lyotardian différend, Lacan’s 
‘dispersive punctuality of the real’ and the virtual/actual distinction in 
Deleuze31 all seek to elaborate an ontology beginning with a multiple 
irreducible to any One, but do so, for Badiou, in an ‘impure’ way. In 
each case the multiple is the multiple of something, or in other words 
what is presented as multiple is something other than presentation 
itself (EE 38/BE 30); presentation makes reference to some substantial 
difference outside itself.32 To these various expressions of ‘impure’ 
multiplicity Badiou contrasts his own pure or ‘inconsistent’ multiplic-
ity which cannot be deﬁ ned (CT 31/BOE 37) and which is reduced, in 
the absence of any immanent uniﬁ cation, to the sole predicate of its 
 multiplicity (CT 34/BOE 40).
For Badiou inconsistent multiplicity is the ‘phantom’ of the count 
(EE 66/BE 53). Nothing can be known about the inconsistent multi-
plicity that is counted as one, other than that it is not one. Furthermore, 
it can only be retroactively assumed (EE 65/BE 52) to be not-one in 
the wake of the axiomatic decision that one-ness itself is only ever the 
result of a counting-as-one (EE 33/BE 25). The recourse to inconsist-
ent multiplicity is the result of a decision on Badiou’s part, a decision 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
29
intended to allow him to elaborate an ontology in which God – as the 
metaphysical One – is not simply absent, peripheral or irrelevant, but 
strictly impossible.33
Though the ‘inconsistent multiplicity’ that is presented in the count 
as one of being is not one, it is important to note that, for Badiou, it is 
not strictly multiple either: ‘Est-ce à dire que l’être n’est pas non plus 
multiple ? A la rigueur, oui, car il n’est multiple qu’autant qu’il advient 
à la présentation’ (EE 32).34 It is therefore not correct to say that, for 
Badiou, pure being is multiple; it is the presentation of being that is 
multiple: what presents itself is always multiple, but what presents itself 
is neither one nor multiple. Being itself is simply inaccessible outside its 
presentation as multiple. Badiou passes through this point only brieﬂ y 
in the ﬁ rst meditation of L’Être et l’événement, but Peter Hallward 
clariﬁ es the idea as he glosses Badiou’s inconsistent multiplicity, insist-
ing that any determination of being as multiple ‘would reintroduce a 
kind of one beyond the multiple or reduce the sphere of the multiple 
itself to a kind of bounded unity. Pure multiplicity must not itself be 
made to consist.’35 But this purity of being occupies a problematic place 
in Badiou’s thought. The ‘multiplicity’ of this inconsistent multiplicity 
is arrived at in a roundabout manner, through a deduction from the 
decision that the One is not, namely that ‘if the one is not, only what 
is not one, or multiple, can be’.36 In a move from which it is hard to 
dispel all shadows of begging the question, the retroactive reasoning is 
that ‘[t]he one is not, precisely because ones, uniﬁ cations, come to be 
as results’.37 This is the ﬁ nal reason why Badiou’s mathematics must be 
axiomatic; there is no other way to eradicate the one and, with it, the 
God of metaphysics.
Inconsistent multiplicity can be secured only by recourse to math-
ematics, and its implications are given ontological purchase by Badiou’s 
equation of ontology with mathematics. The meta-mathematical state-
ment ‘ontologie = mathématique’ (see, for example EE 12/BE 6, CT 55/
BOE 59) is not a thesis about the world, but about discourse (EE 14/
BE 8); it does not mean that, for Badiou, ontology is nothing but the 
language of mathematics, but rather that set-theoretical mathematics 
provides us with a way to speak of being qua being, that is, of pure 
multiplicity. But how can Badiou hold this equation of ontology and 
mathematics? Badiou can jump the gap between formalised mathemat-
ics and ontology by virtue of his understanding of the one point at 
which formalised mathematics asserts existence, namely the void or 
empty set. The empty set is the one point of contact between mathemat-
ics and ontology, unifying matheme and logos. Even though inconsist-
ency cannot be intuited or accessed directly it is not correct to assert 
30 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
that inconsistency does not exist; we must rather say: inconsistency is 
nothing (EE 67/BE 54). There is no intuition of this nothing (or, more 
precisely, of this void), but there is nevertheless a ‘being of nothing’, 
that Badiou calls the unpresentable (l’imprésentable) (EE 67/BE 54). 
Every ontological situation has its unpresentable: that which does not 
appear in the situation because it is not counted as one. Once Badiou 
has asserted that all countings as one are modalities-according-to-the-
one of the void (EE 70/BE 57), it follows that the only thing that exists 
is the void (EE 71/BE 58). The empty set of set theory, from which all 
other sets can be constructed, is to a set as, ontologically speaking, the 
unpresentable is to a situation. Both ontologically and set-theoretically 
speaking, all that exists is the void in its inﬁ nite modalities.
Yet this alone does not secure for the matheme an ontological reach. 
The second element of Badiou’s link between ontology and math-
ematics is that the empty set is the object of an axiom (EE 73/BE 60). 
Inconsistency cannot be intuited or presented, and there is no deﬁ nition 
of the multiple, so the existence of the empty set can only be the object 
of an axiom. It is by virtue, then, of the axiom of the empty set, that 
Badiou seeks to justify his equation of ontology and mathematics. We 
shall explore the place of axioms in Badiou’s thought in more detail in 
Chapters 2 and 3.
For Badiou, the pure multiplicity of being after the death of God 
can have only one name: mathematical set theory (NN 86/NuN 65). 
Nevertheless, it is far from clear why ‘ontology = mathematics’ should 
be the same as ‘ontology = ZFC set theory’. As Quentin Meillassoux 
points out in his critique of Badiou in ‘Nouveauté et événement’, not 
all mathematical perspectives are equally compatible with Badiou’s 
philosophy of truth and the event (NE 41). In fact, only the doctrine of 
the generic will do, to the exclusion of the axioms of constructability 
or large cardinals.38 For Badiou, the history of mathematics must be 
subordinated to thinking the event. To say that mathematics = ontol-
ogy is to give to ontology a history, but in order truly to afﬁ rm that 
mathematics has a history, we would need to consider truth and event 
themselves as notions that could be historically superseded (NE 43). 
In the words of Jean-Michel Salanskis, ZFC set theoretical mathemat-
ics is for Badiou the right ontology (la bonne ontologie), the one that 
allows us to think being as multiple,39 and thereby to banish the God of 
 metaphysics identiﬁ ed with the One.
As for the inﬁ nite, Badiou argues that reserving the category of 
‘actual inﬁ nity’ for God in Western monotheistic thought brought no 
radical break with Greek ﬁ nitism. Inﬁ nity – or ‘inﬁ nitude’, as we can 
call this monotheistic inﬁ nite, to distinguish it from Badiou’s actual 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
31
inﬁ nity40 – is ascribed not to the natural world but to the divine One, 
preserving the ﬁ nitude of natural being (EE 163/BE 144). Badiou’s cri-
tique of inﬁ nitude is a critique of ascetic atheism, for inﬁ nity is merely 
the transcendent region of being-as-a-whole and does not threaten the 
essential thesis of the ﬁ nitude of being. In fact, it relies upon it, as it 
secures a dwelling place for the divine beyond the ﬁ nite limits of being. 
A theology of the inﬁ nite is perfectly compatible with an ontology 
of the ﬁ nite (EE 161/BE 143), and so it remains that ‘the only really 
contemporary requirement for philosophy since Nietzsche is the secu-
larisation of inﬁ nity’ (BN 86). This is a necessary requirement not least 
because Badiou identiﬁ es the inﬁ nite as a site for the re-insinuation of 
the one (C 164/TW 27).
The ‘desacralising’ remedy for this latent unity is the set-theoretical 
actual inﬁ nite, an inﬁ nite which is ﬂ at (as opposed to transcendent), 
plural (as opposed to unique), local (as opposed to universal) and 
natural (as opposed to divine) (CT 22/BOE 30; LM 121/LW 111; C 
164/Con 99; EE 169/BE 150). Badiou admires and adopts Richard 
Dedekind’s (1831–1916) deﬁ nition of the inﬁ nite: ‘« Un système S est 
dit inﬁ ni quand il est semblable à une de ses parties propres; dans le cas 
opposé, S est dit un système ﬁ ni »’ (NN 51).41
This deﬁ nition of inﬁ nity is simple, primary and positive: an inﬁ nite 
system has the positive characteristic of a biunivocal correspondence 
between itself and one of its own parts. By comparison with this simple, 
afﬁ rmative elegance, ﬁ nitude is secondary, rare, complex and lacking; 
the ﬁ nite is that which lacks a biunivocal correspondence with one of its 
own parts. The ﬁ nite is that which is not inﬁ nite (NN 25/NuN 36), the 
negation or limitation of the simple and positive multiple (C 176/Con 
110; cf. NN 110/NuN 85; EE 179/BE 159). The difﬁ culty for philoso-
phy therefore is not in thinking the inﬁ nite, but in thinking the ﬁ nite.
The confusion in which philosophy ﬁ nds itself today over the impli-
cations of the death of God, if not over its pronouncement, is therefore 
due to philosophy’s own decoupling from mathematics, leaving the 
inﬁ nite trapped in a historicism that makes it a new avatar of the One 
(C 164/TW 27). By contrast, set theory admits an inﬁ nity of inﬁ nities, 
completing the Cantorian project of a total dissemination and dis-uni-
ﬁ cation of the concept of the inﬁ nite (EE 305/BE 277), and foreclosing 
the ‘forme retournée ou détournée de la ﬁ nitude, d’un horizon inappro-
priable, ou innommable, de divinité immortelle’ (C 164).42 We simply 
do not possess the capacity to be (post-theological) atheists so long as 
the theme of ﬁ nitude governs our thinking (C 163/TW 26).
The great achievement of mathematics for Badiou is to have 1) ren-
dered the inﬁ nite primary, more commonplace and easier to manipulate 
32 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
than ﬁ nitude and 2) irrevocably separated the concept of inﬁ nity from 
the divine or quasi-divine One. The primacy and ubiquity of the inﬁ nite 
also allow Badiou to make the claim that the death of God, far from 
ascetically robbing us of actual inﬁ nity and consigning our thinking 
thereby to an interminable ﬁ nitude, in fact delivers us to the omnipres-
ent inﬁ nity of thought, leaving ﬁ nitude itself simply as a vestige of the 
tyranny of the sacred (NN 110/NuN 86). Though we lose with the 
death of God the divine actual inﬁ nite, we gain an inﬁ nity of inﬁ nites.
We might question to what extent the primacy of the inﬁ nite over 
the ﬁ nite is a secularising move. Adam Miller argues that the position 
whereby ‘ﬁ nitude is derived from the pure multiplicity proper to inﬁ n-
ity’ is common to Badiou and St Paul.43 For Paul, the inﬁ nite gift of 
grace whereby ‘Jesus demonstrates that God’s commitment to us is inﬁ -
nite and that it holds nothing in reserve’ is contrasted to the ﬁ nite debt 
of sin where ‘we are sinfully engaged in the suppression of the truth 
about our dependence on God’s grace because we mistook that grace 
for a debt’.44 But Miller surely equivocates over ‘inﬁ nity’, for the divine 
inﬁ nite of Paul cannot be equated to the post-Cantorian dissemination 
of the inﬁ nite in multiplicity.
The thesis of the inﬁ nity of being, like the empty set, is necessarily 
axiomatic, for ‘sans cette décision, il restera toujours possible que l’être 
soit essentiellement ﬁ ni’ (EE 167),45 and a ﬁ nite being is open to the 
mystical apophaticism of ascetic atheism. Badiou’s verdict on the set-
theoretical conjunction of the multiple and the inﬁ nite is categorical: 
in giving rise to a thought in which the inﬁ nite is irreversibly separated 
from every instance of the One, mathematics has in fact accomplished 
the programme of the death of God (C 175/Con 110). In summary, 
Badiou claims to have comprehensively despatched the God of meta-
physics along with its support in ontological ﬁ nitude. Now we turn 
to Nancy, and to his very different account of the death of the God of 
metaphysics. We will soon ﬁ nd that Badiou’s philosophy of the inﬁ nite 
also faces accusations harbouring latent and undisclosed theological 
assumptions.
1 . 2  THE METAPHY SIC S OF TH E  DE A TH  O F GO D
In his discussion of the death of God in the prologue to the Court 
Traité, Badiou refers approvingly to Nancy with the words ‘Dieu, c’est 
ﬁ ni. Et la religion aussi, c’est ﬁ ni. Il y a là, comme Jean-Luc Nancy l’a 
fortement énoncé, de l’irréversible’ (CT 12).46 There are two candidate 
passages in the Nancean corpus that refer to the religious in such terms, 
but both of them challenge Badiou’s wider point about the birth of 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
33
philosophy. We begin our discussion of Nancy by quoting them both in 
context and at length:
Il n’y a pas de retour du religieux : il y a les contorsions et les boursou-
ﬂ ures de son épuisement. Que cet épuisement fasse place à un autre souci 
des dieux, à leur errance ou à leur disparition inﬁ nie, ou encore à pas de 
dieu, c’est une autre affaire: c’est une tout autre question, ce n’est rien dont 
on puisse s’emparer avec les pinces du religieux, ni du reste avec celles de 
l’athéisme. Pas de dieu: ce serait, ou ce sera, sans rapport avec l’athéisme – 
du moins avec cet athéisme métaphysique, pendant du théisme, et qui veut 
mettre quelque chose à la place du dieu nié ou réfuté. (DLD 33; author’s 
emphasis)47
Le « retour du religieux » dont on parle tant, et qui désigne un phénomène 
réel, ne mérite pas plus d’attention qu’aucun autre « retour ». Dans les 
phénomènes de répétition, de reprise, de relance ou de revenance, ce qui 
compte n’est jamais l’identique mais le différent. Car l’identique perd 
d’emblée son identité dans son propre retour, et la question devrait bien 
plutôt se poser sans cesse à nouveaux frais, de savoir ce que la « sécularisa-
tion » peut désigner et désigne inévitablement d’autre qu’un simple transfert 
de l’identique. (DDC 9; author’s emphasis)48
If the death of God for Nancy is irreversible, then it is not to the 
obvious beneﬁ t either of atheism or of secularisation, and it is around 
these initial dissonances between Nancy’s and Badiou’s accounts that 
we propose to begin the dialogue between them. We shall see that 
Nancy elaborates a very different account of the death of the God of 
metaphysics from Badiou’s, one that discerns in Badiou’s atheism a 
certain parasitism, but that cannot escape the same charge itself. We 
shall begin to discern two very different ways to appropriate the death 
of God that are vying to shape the future of Continental thought, for 
despite his rejection of Badiou’s atheism, Nancy still characterises his 
thought as atheistic, though not without hesitation.49 In order to under-
stand why these disagreements matter, we need to consider what Nancy 
says about metaphysics, the God of metaphysics, and the death of the 
God of metaphysics.
Nancy’s ‘Philosophie sans conditions’ details his response to some 
aspects of Badiou’s early philosophy in L’Etre et l’événement. In a 
remarkable interweaving of different levels of argument, the paper 
sets a meditation on the nature of metaphysics en abyme inside the 
question of the possibility of Badiou and Nancy sharing ‘cet espace 
commun dans lequel sont possibles de telles hétérotopies, et dans lequel 
elles sont mêmes nécessaires’ (PSC 65).50 Both elements of Nancy’s 
argument develop out of propositions from Badiou’s ‘Le (Re)tour de 
la philosophie elle-même’ (C 57–78/Con 3–22). Nancy’s resistance to 
the way in which Badiou dispatches the God of metaphysics focuses 
34 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
on Badiou’s second proposition, namely that philosophy must break 
decisively with historicism or, in other words, that philosophy does not 
have historical conditions (PSC 66–7/PWC 40). The question of the 
possibility of a heterotopic relation51 between Badiouian and Nancean 
philosophy takes issue with the third proposition, namely that phi-
losophy must be deﬁ ned in a historically invariable way, with Nancy 
insisting that ‘la déﬁ nition de la philosophie doit admettre sa propre 
démultiplication’ (PSC 66).52 Furthermore, Nancy’s two concerns are 
intertwined: the question of how metaphysics constitutes itself is, as we 
shall see, vital to the possibility of Nancy’s heterotopic philosophical 
relation to Badiou.
Nancy focuses his engagement with Badiou predominantly on one 
passage from ‘Le (Re)tour de la philosophie elle-même’, taken from the 
section dealing with Badiou’s ﬁ rst proposition, which we quote here in 
full, maintaining Nancy’s ellipses and insertion:
L’idée dominante [dans la veine heideggérienne] est que la métaphysique est 
historiquement épuisée, mais que l’au-delà de cet épuisement ne nous est pas 
encore donné. [. . .] La philosophie est alors prise entre l’épuisement de sa 
possibilité historiale et la venue sans concept d’un retournement salvateur. 
La philosophie contemporaine combine la déconstruction de son passé et 
l’attente vide de son avenir. Tout mon propos est de rompre avec ce diag-
nostic. [. . .] La philosophie doit rompre, de l’intérieur d’elle-même, avec 
l’historicisme. (C 58, as quoted in PSC 69)53
Nancy discerns here a double misunderstanding on Badiou’s part, ﬁ rst 
in relation to the ‘exhaustion of the historical possibility’ of metaphys-
ics and ‘the deconstruction of its past’, and secondly regarding ‘the 
non-conceptual arrival of a salutary overturning’ and ‘the empty expec-
tation of its future’. It will take us this chapter and the next to tease out 
all the vast consequences of Nancy’s response to this supposed double 
misunderstanding. This chapter will consider the deconstruction of 
philosophy’s past in relation to the God of metaphysics, and Chapter 
2 will reﬂ ect on the empty expectation of its future in terms of the God 
of the poets.
1.2.1 The ‘Death’ of God and the ‘End’ of Metaphysics
Nancy’s reading of Badiou on the history of philosophy culminates in 
the following argument: not to recognise the historicity of metaphysics, 
far from being a ﬁ nal break with the God of metaphysics, is itself an 
onto-theological move, and so the ‘God of metaphysics’ and Badiou’s 
atheism in fact share a particular situation in, and view of, history. In 
other words, Nancy is accusing Badiou’s atheism of a certain parasitism 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
35
upon the God he is trying to banish. To track how the argument builds 
to this conclusion, we need to follow three steps.
The ﬁ rst step concerns the relation between history and metaphysics, 
and the status of any claim that metaphysics is ﬁ nished. In ‘L’Offrande 
réservée’,54 a paper devoted to Nancy’s ﬁ nite thinking, Badiou reads 
Nancy as endorsing the Heideggerian announcement of the end of phi-
losophy, an announcement which itself forms a programme of thought 
(OR 17). This reading is inexact. Nancy’s preferred articulation is not 
that philosophy-as-metaphysics is ﬁ nished, but that it is exhausted, 
and that this exhaustion is what is indicated by the ‘death of God’ (OP 
64–5). Nancy clariﬁ es that we only say that metaphysics has ‘ended’ 
‘pour dire qu’elle épuise ce qui prétendrait achever aussi bien sa rétro-
spection que sa prospection. L’une et l’autre doivent être inachevables, 
elles doivent être l’inachèvement même, conformément à l’essence de la 
philosophie’ (PSC 73).55
To say that metaphysics is exhausted is not the same as saying that 
it has ended, because what metaphysics has exhausted is its end. For 
Nancy, metaphysics is understood, in terms of its history, as the double 
postulation of a step back into the immemorial and a step forward into 
unarrival (l’inadvenir) (PSC 73/PWC 48), and the end of metaphysics 
is thus the end of the possibility this sort of self-grounding: it cannot 
exhaustively account for its own origin (i.e. ‘complete its retrospection’) 
or exhaustively predetermine its own end (i.e. ‘complete . . . its prospec-
tion’). The end of metaphysics, the exhaustion of its self-completion, is 
nothing other than the opening of metaphysics.
In this context (step two), Nancy’s reading of the ‘death of God’ 
comes as a direct challenge to Badiou’s account of the ahistorical 
 condition of philosophy:
Ce qui fut nommé « mort de Dieu », et plus tard « ﬁ n de la métaphysique », 
ou même « ﬁ n de la philosophie », a consisté à mettre au jour ceci : il n’y a 
pas de condition première ou dernière, il n’y a pas d’inconditionné qui fasse 
principe ou origine. Mais cet « il n’y a pas » est inconditionné, et voilà, si 
j’ose dire, notre « condition humaine ». (CP 12–13)56
The meaning of the ‘death of God’ is just this: that there is no histori-
cally unconditioned intervention – in terms either of arche¯ or telos – 
which can rescue philosophy from its historical content, apart from the 
minimal condition of the ‘there is no’ itself. In other words, on Nancy’s 
reading Badiou’s account of the ahistorical condition of philosophy 
undermines Badiou’s own account of the death of God, which is pre-
cisely the thesis that Badiou claims it secures. But why would that be so, 
when Badiou is not claiming mathematics – ahistorical or not – to be 
36 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
of divine origin, nor arguing that his Platonism resolves to some crude 
substance dualism with a divine world of Ideas?
The problem for Nancy is this: Badiou divorces the history of meta-
physics from the metaphysics of history, and presumes to speak of the 
end of the former as if it had no impact on the latter. For Nancy this 
is a mistake because metaphysics cannot be thought independently 
of history, far less exhausted within history. In Nancy’s own words, 
‘l’épuisement de la métaphysique [. . .] n’est historique que pour autant 
qu’il est lui-même, précisément, l’épuisement de la possibilité historique 
elle-même (ou du sens de l’histoire)’ (PSC 69).57 The exhaustion of 
metaphysics cannot be something that happens within a historical nar-
rative that precedes and succeeds it, of which it forms but one chapter 
among many. The exhaustion of metaphysics has implications for 
‘history’ as such, because what is exhausted is history ‘as such’, history 
in so far as it has an origin and a telos. The exhaustion of metaphysics 
cannot be merely an exhaustion within history; it must inevitably be the 
 exhaustion of history.
There are two further nuances that need to be brought to an under-
standing of the relation between philosophy and history for Nancy: the 
idea of exhaustion 1) is itself metaphysical and 2) constitutes historical 
possibility proper. First, exhaustion is itself metaphysical because it is 
only by virtue of a history that posits its own principle and end (i.e. a 
metaphysical history) that it is possible to speak of ‘exhaustion’ at all, 
for what is exhausted (in the sense of fulﬁ lled) is precisely the approxi-
mation to history’s telos (PSC 70/PWC 42). Secondly, exhaustion 
constitutes historical possibility proper because it is metaphysics’ own 
construal of history that it build towards a telos, so exhaustion is itself 
a metaphysical idea. We can begin to see why the view Badiou is imput-
ing to Nancy, namely that philosophy or metaphysics has ended, could 
not in Nancy’s own terms be the straightforward end that Badiou sug-
gests, but must be a problematic statement irreducibly in tension with 
itself. This is our ﬁ rst encounter with a misprision on Badiou’s part of 
the meaning of deconstruction, which we shall explore at greater length 
below.
Whereas Badiou is seeing philosophy and historicism as separable 
– hence the second proposition of ‘Le (Re)tour de la philosophie elle-
même’, that philosophy must decisively break with historicism – Nancy 
is maintaining that historicism is a construction of philosophy as meta-
physics, that historicism is philosophy’s own product. It follows from 
this Nancean argument that to disengage philosophy from historicism 
would be to disengage philosophy from ‘philosophy’, from philosophy-
as-metaphysics, in other words it would be to envision a different phi-
 
The God of Metaphysics 
37
losophy, which in turn would be to concede the point that there are, 
after all, heterotopic deﬁ nitions of philosophy, and not just one deﬁ ni-
tion of philosophy as Badiou maintains in proposition 3. So Nancy 
is using proposition 2 of ‘Le (Re)tour de la philosophie elle-même’ to 
undermine proposition 3: Badiou cannot both say that there is only 
one philosophy and try to disengage philosophy from historicism. 
Badiou holds that philosophy must break with historicism from within 
itself (C 58/Con 4), but Nancy’s reply is that metaphysical philosophy 
can only break with historicism by breaking from itself, by becoming 
 incommensurable with itself, other than itself.
The third step in the Nancean argument is that this Badiouian rela-
tion to history – upon which his dispatch of the God of metaphysics 
relies, let us remember – is not merely metaphysical, but also Christian. 
The Christian faith, Nancy argues, is an experience of its own history, 
the experience of God’s plan of salvation, from which it follows that ‘la 
dimension de l’histoire en général, en tant que dimension occidentale, 
est fondamentalement chrétienne’ (DDC 212).58 This does not amount 
to claiming that all history is Christian history, or that all historians 
have the whiff of incense about them. Western history is fundamentally 
(though not necessarily essentially) Christian in that the relation it 
assumes between metaphysics and history conforms to the pattern of a 
Christian eschatology.
In his analysis of the complicity of parasitic atheism with theology, 
Nancy evokes the ‘Christmas projection’, according to which ‘une 
naissance pure et simple du christianisme [. . .] un beau jour, advient 
et change tout’ (DDC 121).59 It is in repeating this ‘Christmas projec-
tion’ that our tradition remains Christian: ‘toute notre tradition, aussi 
peu chrétienne qu’elle se veuille, maintient toujours quelque chose de 
la « projection de Noël » : à un moment donné, « ça » a lieu, et l’on se 
retrouve ensuite en état chrétien’ (DDC 121).60
Badiou’s account of philosophy’s ahistorical condition, crucial as 
it is for his reading of the death of God, is in Nancy’s eyes just such 
a Christmas projection, for it suggests that, at a given moment, the 
matheme interrupted the mytheme: ‘that’ takes place, philosophy is 
born. Philosophy itself may be ahistorical, but Badiou nevertheless 
requires it to effect a rupture with the mytheme at a particular histori-
cal moment. Nancy begins his essay ‘La déconstruction du christian-
isme’ with the question ‘en quoi et jusqu’à quel point tenons-nous au 
christianisme ?’ (DDC 203).61 In Badiou’s case, it appears that Nancy’s 
answer would be: up to and including the point of the death of God. 
It is to this extent that Badiou’s death of God is, on Nancy’s reading, a 
very Christian demise.
38 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
So, for Nancy, the way that Badiou frames the proposition that ‘God 
is dead’ categorically and literally – ‘Je prends au pied de la lettre la 
formule « Dieu est mort » [. . .] Dieu, c’est ﬁ ni. Et la religion aussi, c’est 
ﬁ ni’ (CT 12)62 – re-inscribes itself into metaphysical onto-theology, into 
the same arche-teleological structure from which it is ostensibly seeking 
to extricate itself. Bluntly, the charge is that Badiou is bootstrapping the 
death of God, for:
On se prend alors à se demander s’il y a quelque discours sur Dieu qui 
peut s’écarter, si peu que ce soit, de celui de Hegel (fût-il revu), c’est-à-dire 
du discours de la philosophie, ou encore de l’onto-théologie (qui culmine 
dans l’ontothéologie dialectique de la mort de Dieu). (DLD 5; author’s 
 emphasis)63
In other words, theism and atheism – we might use the contraction a/
theism – are of a pair, two species of the same genus, reliant on the 
same logic and differing only in the small matter of either afﬁ rming 
or negating. The discourse of ontotheology is not only confounded by 
the death of God, but also culminates in it (it is the latter of these two 
propositions that, on a Nancean reading, Badiou fails to appreciate). A 
true break with ontotheology cannot therefore be by the way of a self-
grounding, ahistorical assertion of the death of God, for such an asser-
tion is parasitic on the ontotheology it seeks to deny. If ontotheology 
is to be non-parasitically overcome, it is its arche-teleological structure 
that must be disrupted. This is what Nancy seeks to achieve with his 
‘deconstruction of Christianity’.
1.2.2 The Deconstruction of Christianity
Nancy’s own account of the death of God avoids being caught in the 
parasitic double bind in which Badiou – on Nancy’s reading at least 
– ﬁ nds himself. In the ‘deconstruction of Christianity’, deconstruc-
tion is understood not only as exhaustion but also as opening and 
 possibility:
« Déconstruire » signiﬁ e dès lors désassembler ce qui s’est édiﬁ é sur les com-
mencements pour laisser venir ce qui se creuse sous eux. C’est donc d’un 
même geste ébranler (non détruire) l’édiﬁ ce de la tradition philosophique 
(ou métaphysique) et l’auto-positionnement historique de cette tradition. 
(PSC 72)64
The exhaustion or evacuation of the fullness of history (in terms of its 
truth or salvation, that is to say of any self-sufﬁ cient arche¯ or telos) 
opens possibilities not in terms of a re-inscription of the Platonic (or 
Pauline or Augustinian) moment of the birth of philosophy, but an 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
39
opening of the beginning itself onto its own anteriority: to deconstruct 
is not to begin again, but to show that the beginning was already an 
‘again’; it is to seek the history of the beginning, to ask ‘quelle prov-
enance trouver à ces commencements?’ (PSC 72).65 This is one aspect 
of what Nancy sees in the deconstruction of Christianity, his own 
response to the death of God.
Nancy is at pains to stress that ‘deconstruction’ should not be 
equated with ‘destruction’, but is rather ‘le geste d’une ouverture ou 
d’une réouverture en direction de ce qui doit avoir précédé toute con-
struction’ (DDC 116).66 The deconstruction of Christianity is therefore 
double, its two senses captured by its double genitive. It is the decon-
struction of Christianity (subjective genitive) in so far as ‘la question 
est de savoir si nous pouvons, en nous retournant sur notre provenance 
chrétienne, désigner du sein du christianisme une provenance du chris-
tianisme plus profonde que le christianisme lui-même’ (DDC 208),67 
and it is the deconstruction of Christianity (objective genitive) in so far 
as ‘le christianisme lui-même, le christianisme comme tel est dépassé, 
parce qu’il est lui-même et par lui-même en état de dépassement’ (DDC 
206),68 a ‘self-surpassing’ that transforms Christianity ‘itself’ (NMT 10 
n.4/NMTe 108 n.4).69
The double genitive also exposes Nancy’s deconstruction of 
Christianity to a danger against which it cannot secure itself, namely 
that it will prove to have been all along a Christian hyperbole,70 and 
therefore once more parasitic upon the God whose death it articulates. 
This is the worry voiced by Derrida in Le Toucher; for Derrida the 
deconstruction of Christianity is as necessary as it is impossible. It is 
necessary because only Christianity can do the work of deconstruct-
ing itself; it is impossible because if only Christianity can deconstruct 
Christianity then ‘[l]a déchristianisation sera une victoire chrétienne’.71 
The problem is that, given Christianity’s structure as dis-enclosure, a 
‘deconstruction of Christianity’, if such a thing were possible, would 
have to begin by divesting itself of the Christian tradition of destruc-
tio.72 In other words, in deconstructing Christianity Nancy imitates 
Christianity, ot at least cannot conclusively be said not to imitate 
Christianity.
Nancy’s position is complicated by a further danger, however, for 
Nancy’s approach to escaping this theo-logic of parasitic imitation 
is itself a theological move, another instance of what Nancy would 
call the Christmas projection: ‘Il n’y a pas ici à être indemne, sauf, 
sauvé, à chercher un salut ou une immunité hors du christianisme. Ces 
valeurs seraient encore chrétiennes’.73 In other words, Nancy is either 
parasitic on a Christian deconstruction of Christianity or on a Christian 
40 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 salvation from Christianity, and to the extent that he avoids the one 
 parasitism he falls into the other. In seeking to avoid the imitation of 
the Christmas projection, Nancy exposes himself to the inevitability of 
another but equally theological imitation.
Nancy is aware of this danger of seeking to bootstrap his way to post-
theological thinking, and in L’Adoration he mounts a defence against 
this charge by claiming to be faithful to something in Christianity 
deeper than Christianity itself, for which God is only the ‘front man’ 
(ADC 31–2). It is the movement of self-surpassing that is crucial for 
Nancy’s purposes, he claims, not that this self-surpassing happens to 
be, in this instance, Christian:
Du christianisme, il faut extraire ce qui nous a portés et qui nous a produits: 
il faut, si c’est possible, extraire du fond plus profond que celui de la chose 
religieuse ce dont la religion aura été une forme et une méconnaissance. 
(ADC 40)74
Indeed, Nancy is not interested in Christianity for itself, for any reli-
gious, moral, spiritual or salviﬁ c virtue (ADC 39), and the self-surpass-
ing he discerns only in some currents of the Christian tradition (most 
prominently the Reformation, ADC 50–1) is deeper than religion itself. 
This is a classic move of what we are calling post-theological integra-
tion: rather than either parasitically adopting or ascetically renouncing 
theological notions, Nancy is seeking to retain the fruit of deconstruc-
tion while rejecting Christianity as its incidental husk, wresting decon-
struction from Christianity’s grasp by suggesting that Christianity is 
itself only one instance of a more fundamental self-surpassing gesture. 
Nevertheless, this move does not free Nancy from Derrida’s charge of 
Christian hyperbole, for the very move of discerning in Christianity a 
truth deeper than itself once more repeats a Christian move, namely the 
opposition between the outward appearance and the heart (kardia) and 
a preference for the latter. In this, Nancy’s defence against his decon-
struction of Christianity becoming a Christian hyperbole is once more 
a repetition of Christianity’s own movement of self-deconstruction. 
Though he discerns and seeks to avoid Badiou’s imitative recourse to 
the Christmas projection, Nancy’s own thinking is inevitably  implicated 
in parasitic imitation.
Notwithstanding this powerful critique, Nancy’s ‘deconstruction of 
Christianity’ is a movement which transforms the Christianity from 
which it cannot escape. Nancy describes this transformation, the objec-
tive genitive of the ‘deconstruction of Christianity’, in the following 
terms: ‘non seulement le christianisme se détache et s’excepte du reli-
gieux, mais il désigne en creux, au-delà de lui, le lieu de ce qui devra 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
41
ﬁ nir par se dérober à l’alternative primaire du théisme et de l’athéisme’ 
(NMT 10)75
According to this analysis, the deconstruction of Christianity would 
be less a parasitically atheistic account of the death of God and more 
a deeper rejection of the a/theism binary per se, for it not only decon-
structs Judaeo-Christian theism but it also deconstructs the logic of 
opposition in which theism dictates the terms of its own negation; it 
disrupts not only the content of theism – to speak somewhat reduc-
tively for a moment – but also its form, the formal conditions in which 
‘theism’ can either be afﬁ rmed or negated:
Il n’y a pas même « athéisme » ; « athée » ne sufﬁ t pas! c’est la position du 
principe qui doit être évidée. Il ne sufﬁ t pas de dire que Dieu s’absente, se 
retire ou bien est incommensurable. Il s’agit encore moins de placer un autre 
principe sur son trône – Homme, Raison, Société. Il s’agit de prendre à bras-
le-corps ceci: le monde repose sur rien – et c’est là le plus vif son sens. (ADC 
48; J-LN’s italics)76
Nevertheless, the way in which Nancy’s deconstruction of Christianity 
proceeds with the ‘religions of the book’ bears striking similarities on 
some levels to Badiou’s reading of the death of God, for the decon-
struction of Christianity ‘répond toujours à ceci: le dieu « Un » n’est 
précisément plus « un dieu »’ (NMT 10).77 Both Nancy and Badiou 
prosecute the death of God by displacing the One, but whereas Badiou 
proceeds through a Platonism of the multiple, Nancy pursues a decon-
struction of the origin of Christianity. This difference between, on one 
hand, atheism pursued in terms of a retroactively assumed inconsistent 
multiplicity in accordance with which the One is not (because all ones 
are countings-as-one) and, on the other hand, a/theism disrupted by a 
deconstruction of the One God that ﬁ nds non-foundation at the origin 
of monotheism itself, outlines the shape of a contrast between Nancy 
and Badiou, between the inﬁ nite and the ﬁ nite, that will prove to be 
of crucial importance as we move through the following chapters. For 
now, let us note that both Nancy and Badiou understand the death 
of God in terms of having done with the One, but for Badiou this is 
achieved with a philosophy of the inﬁ nite cast as a Platonism of the 
multiple, and for Nancy it is achieved with the ﬁ nite thinking of the 
deconstruction of Christianity.
In contrast to Badiou’s account which privileges the moment of math-
ematisation, the interruption of the mytheme by the matheme, as the 
singular moment of philosophy’s birth, Nancy argues in La Création du 
monde that when metaphysics arrives in the West it comes as the result 
of a number of different inﬂ uences, including the ﬂ ight of the gods, 
‘départ dont le monothéisme est en Occident le premier nom, en soi 
42 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
déjà gros de la « mort de Dieu »’ (CM 123).78 Rather than discounting 
the Platonic moment, Nancy’s account of the death of God co-opts it 
as a factor alongside that of monotheism: ‘et l’on pourrait ajouter: que 
fait Platon, sinon tresser ensemble la tragédie et le monothéisme, juste 
avant que le judaïsme hellénistique puis le christianisme ne parachèvent 
le travail?’ (CM 123).79 This allows Nancy to posit a contempora-
neity (or at least a ‘cohistoriality’) of philosophy and  monotheism, 
 notwithstanding their ‘enormous differences’ (RSAV 192).
For Nancy it is an inextricable mix of Hebrew, Greek and Roman 
inﬂ uences which forms both the West and the Christianity that is insep-
arable from it (DDC 207/DisDC 142). When Nancy argues that the 
death of God is a necessarily Western phenomenon he is not echoing 
the more straightforward point made by André Glucksmann and John 
Caputo, that the decline of religion in Western countries is not repli-
cated in other parts of the globe,80 but the more complex contention 
that the death of God is constitutively and inevitably Western, that 
the death of God is not only in the West, it is of the West (DLD 47–8/
ODP 148). All this does not mean, however, that outside the West God 
is ‘still alive’. Where there still is an ‘elsewhere’ of the West, Nancy 
clariﬁ es, the gods were long since exhausted in the excess of signs and 
powers, clergy, clans and castes, and in scrupulous observances (DLD 
47–8/ODP 148). It does mean, however, that the consummation of the 
death of God not only negates the religious forms and structures of 
Western thought (the death of God, we might say, as an objective geni-
tive); it also completes them (subjective genitive). In other words, simply 
asserting the death of God, however that is done, will always re-inscribe 
itself in the same structures it is seeking to surpass and leave behind. 
In his Genealogy of Nihilism Connor Cunningham argues persuasively 
that ‘ “radical” death of God theologians are reactively constituted by 
onto-theology, which is to say they propagate a “conservative” theol-
ogy’.81 It seems hard to escape the conclusion that Nancy’s reading of 
Badiou places him also among the conservatives in so far as he uses the 
tools of onto-theology (metaphysical self-positing and pre-destination) 
to despatch the God of onto-theology. It is Badiou’s failure to accept 
this complex, impure genesis of the West and its philosophy that leaves 
him, on Nancy’s reading, with a conservative and parasitic a/theism in 
tension with itself. In Nancy’s eyes, ‘seul peut être actuel un athéisme 
qui contemple la réalité de sa provenance chrétienne’ (DDC 205).82 But 
of course, an ‘atheism’ that does contemplate its Christian origin is not 
free from God either.
The constraints of a review article go some way to excusing Chris van 
Rompaey of stripping away layers of nuance as he simply suggests that 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
43
Nancy ‘misrepresents important elements of Badiou’s project’83 at this 
point. Such a ﬂ attened reading falls short not only of the painstaking 
development of Nancy’s response to Badiou in ‘Philosophie sans condi-
tions’ but also of Badiou’s own writing on Nancy. Critiquing Nancy’s 
account of Platonism-monotheism sketched above, van Rompaey sug-
gests that Nancy ‘blurs what for Badiou is a crucial distinction’ between 
the ‘generic form’ of the emergence of the discourse of philosophy amid 
the structures of a crumbling mythico-religious world, and the ‘articu-
lated content’ of wresting that discourse ‘from the clutches of the poem 
so as to constitute an independent, “properly” philosophical mode of 
enquiry’.84 However, only if we have decided a priori that Badiou’s 
‘crucial distinctions’ are beyond question can this be a ‘misrepresenta-
tion’. Nancy is not misrepresenting Badiou here, but rather challenging 
the neat dichotomy of form and content and the tidy separation of 
inﬂ uences upon which van Rompaey’s reconstruction of Badiou relies. 
Rather than being ‘based on the assumption that Badiou’s claims are 
other than they actually are’,85 Nancy’s critique is rather based on the 
argument that Badiou’s claims are actually other than he thinks they 
are.
So to accomplish the death of the God of metaphysics by a quintes-
sentially metaphysical gesture (the self-positing of an origin) takes with 
one hand only to give back with the other; it dispatches metaphysics 
with the help of metaphysics; it establishes not post-theological think-
ing but a parasitic a/theism. Or so Nancy’s argument goes. But now it 
is Nancy’s turn to be inexact, for Badiou is not simply claiming that the 
Platonic moment of the interruption of the mytheme by the matheme 
is the self-positing origin of philosophy. Rather, he is claiming that 
the deﬁ nition of philosophy is ahistorical, that qua philosophy it has 
no historical origin, and that the Platonic rupture with the mytheme 
is merely one historical instantiation of philosophy’s ahistorical 
 deﬁ nition.
This does not necessarily mean, however, that Nancy’s critique is 
rebutted. The critique can still be made to work if it is taken to be chal-
lenging the possibility of ahistoricity itself, not simply the metaphysics 
of the Platonic philosophical moment. Any philosophy issuing a his-
torical claim (for Badiou’s claim is also historically situated, let us not 
forget) for the ahistoricity of philosophy’s deﬁ nition might be asked 
to provide some substantiation for that claim in terms of historical 
instances which demonstrate the sort of philosophy that ﬁ ts the ahis-
torical deﬁ nition. If the privileged historical instance of this deﬁ nition 
of philosophy is shown not to ﬁ t the deﬁ nition after all – as is the thrust 
of Nancy’s argument for the complexity of the Platonic moment – that 
44 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
has consequences for the deﬁ nition itself, or at the very least for the 
claim that this sort of philosophy has ever in fact existed.
For his part, Badiou accuses Nancy’s ﬁ nitude (philosophy has no 
ahistorical, ‘eternal’ deﬁ nition) of amounting to the reintroduction of 
the One, and therefore of the God of metaphysics, into the heart of 
his thinking. Borrowing from a Lacanian register, Badiou argues that 
ﬁ nitude is the ‘master signiﬁ er’ of Nancy’s philosophical discourse (OR 
14). In other words, ﬁ nitude is not simply the ‘with’ of being-with that 
Nancy claims at all, but rather it inevitably becomes a term that names 
and gathers multiplicity. Finitude is Nancy’s master signiﬁ er in two 
senses: 1) because it is charged with naming thinking itself (OR 17), 
and 2) because it issues an injunction and a duty: the contemporary call 
to an ethics is the call ‘à conserver et à augmenter l’accès de l’existence 
à son propre sens inappropriable et sans fondement’ (PF 34, quoted by 
Badiou on OR 19)86 which Badiou interprets as the call to maintain 
thought in the responsibility of ﬁ nitude. Noting that, in Une Pensée 
ﬁ nie, Nancy afﬁ rms that he is concerned with nothing but ﬁ nitude, 
Badiou concludes ‘[n]ous tenons ici l’aveu de la souveraineté signiﬁ ante 
de « ﬁ nitude », de l’Un qu’elle impose au texte’ (OR 18).87 Finitude 
absorbs the totality of Nancy’s positive vocabulary – sense, the meaning 
(sens) of being, the responsibility of sense, existence, freedom, thought 
– and the task of philosophy for Badiou is to unravel these terms so 
that their absorption in ﬁ nitude is made clear (OR 19). What is more, 
Badiou sees this as a Hegelian move on Nancy’s part, for Hegel is the 
‘grand master’ of the re-absorption of terms in an essential recapitula-
tion under an ultimate name. In the same way that he accuses Deleuze 
of a ‘Platonism of the virtual’ (D 69/Del 46), Badiou’s charge against 
Nancy might be characterised as a ‘Platonism of ﬁ nitude’, with ﬁ nitude 
raised to a transcendental category that names thinking as such.
Nancy’s master signiﬁ er is exposed, without imposing its pres-
ence, and this is what Badiou calls Nancy’s ‘offrande réservée’ (OR 
20, ‘reserved/private offering’). But it is hard to see this as anything 
other than a misreading of Nancean ﬁ nitude. It is not that ﬁ nitude 
is in reserve, that it does not ‘impose its presence’ as Badiou claims, 
but rather that it has no presence to impose. Finitude is not a posi-
tive shared attribute, but the sharing-in-common of ﬁ nite existence 
irreducible to a possession ‘commune à tous, propre à aucun, impro-
priété commune communicante jamais communiquée ou communiée’ 
(SM 111).88 Badiou is reading ﬁ nitude as if it were a variant of his 
own inconsistent multiplicity that had tipped its hand too much. If 
the deconstruction of Christianity amounted simply to the exhaustion 
(qua end) of signiﬁ cation, then ﬁ nitude would indeed act as a parasitic 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
45
placeholder for onto-theological meaning. However, Nancy’s is not a 
ﬁ nitude in reserve; it is a ﬁ nitude in common, and it does not bestow 
sense upon existence from outside, it is (nothing but) the ‘with’ of 
being-with. The differend here comes down to the difference between 
Badiouian axioms and Nancean singular plurality. It is a crucial distinc-
tion for our investigation of post-theological integration: can either of 
these approaches yield thinking that is neither ascetic nor parasitic, and 
does the difference between the two approaches necessarily fracture our 
understanding of the coherence of post-theological thinking?
As we explore this difference in the coming chapters, one further 
relatively simple but important distinction between the approaches 
of Badiou and Nancy must be borne in mind: Badiouian thought is 
dichotomising, whereas Nancy works to deconstruct dichotomies. 
Badiou’s decision for multiplicity is secondary, for the way that he 
handles inconsistent multiplicity relies on a more fundamental decision, 
namely that the dichotomy of the One and the multiple utterly exhausts 
the possibilities of being. This is the heart of Badiou’s philosophical 
atheism: the dichotomy that the One (understood as theological) and 
the multiple (understood in terms of Badiou’s inconsistent multiplic-
ity) are the ‘properly primordial duality of being’,89 or in other (and 
perhaps less potentially misleading) words, that if being is not one 
in the theological sense, it must therefore and inevitably be multiple 
in Badiou’s set-theoretical sense. But must it? Nancy’s philosophy of 
ﬁ nitude challenges both the retroactive construction of inconsistent 
multiplicity and its grounding assumption that being, if it is not one, 
must be pure multiplicity.
For Nancy it is not accurate to suggest, with Peter Hallward, that the 
‘only genuine alternative’ to Badiou’s ontological atheism ‘is indeed, as 
Lévinas understood with particular clarity, to accept instead that ontol-
ogy itself is incoherent and so cannot fulﬁ ll the role of ﬁ rst philosophy 
– a move that prepares the way for an effective dismissal of philosophy 
by religion.90 The ontology of being-in-common that Nancy elaborates 
inhabits, as we shall see below, precisely the place between religion and 
Badiou’s atheism that Hallward’s dichotomy denies. Nancy’s is not an 
ontology that denies the death of God, but that seeks fully to embrace it:
L’ontologie du « commun » et du « partage » ne serait pas autre chose que 
l’ontologie de l’ « être » radicalement soustrait à toute ontologie de la sub-
stance, de l’ordre et de l’origine. La « mort de Dieu » n’est pas accomplie, ni 
surmontée, tant que nous n’en sommes pas là. (Com 57)91
Nancy’s ontology too is ‘pure’, so to speak: pure of any substantial 
relation, a pure sharing of ﬁ nitude where ﬁ nitude is nothing that is 
46 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
possessed. Nancy explicitly distances himself from Lévinas’s naming 
of God, characterising it as an inﬁ nite and non-thematisable revision 
of Hegel’s bad inﬁ nity, giving to the incomplete the dignity of divinity. 
The death of God, as we have seen, can all too easily become a dialec-
tic ontotheology (DLD 5/ODP 113), and Nancy sees the Hegelianism 
revised by Lévinas and the declaration of the death of God as equally 
onto-theological, equal and opposite so to speak, and his intention is to 
disrupt both of them. In other words, Lévinas for Nancy is no genuine 
alternative to Badiou at all, for they both inhabit the same site of 
thought (onto-theology) in equal and opposite ways: the only genuine 
alternative is to ﬁ nd a true alternative to this non-alternative.
Hallward is right in claiming ‘we know that Badiou takes it for 
granted that all genuinely contemporary philosophers agree that pure 
being as being (as opposed to being-this-or-that) must be thought as 
multiple rather than one’.92 We also know that a thinking that chal-
lenges this dichotomy, like Nancy’s singular plural, will always ﬂ y 
under Badiou’s ‘genuinely contemporary’ radar. Yet we must stress 
once again that this does not allow Nancy to emerge from the debate 
triumphant. The search for such an alternative is once more caught in 
the bind identiﬁ ed by Derrida between a parasitic deconstruction and 
a parasitic redemption of the death of God. Neither Baidou nor Nancy 
articulate the death of God in a way immune from imitative parasitism.
Badiou’s forcing of dichotomies (like one/multiple) is explicit and 
intentional. In describing the conjunction of Platonic philosophy and 
modern mathematics, he lays down as a principle that every thought 
(and therefore mathematics, because mathematics is thinking), takes 
decisions from the point of the undecidable but must maximally extend 
the principle of choice in those decisions:
Les contraintes de la construction [. . .] doivent être au contraire subordon-
nées aux libertés de la décision pensante. C’est pourquoi le platonicien ne 
verra rien à reprendre, pour peu que les effets de pensée soient maximaux, 
au libre usage du principe du tiers exclu et, par voie de conséquence, du 
raisonnement par l’absurde. (CT 103)93
Badiou’s excluded middle is the reverse engineered condition of the 
maximally extended principle of choice that his philosophy demands. 
He employs a similarly pragmatic reasoning in his critique of Derrida, 
arguing that the Derridean refusal of metaphysical dichotomies
does not suit tempestuous times, when everything is submitted to a law 
of decision, here and now. [. . .] The (Maoist) truth of those years insisted 
that ‘one can be divided into two’. This statement expresses poetically the 
metaphysics of radical conﬂ ict rather than the patient deconstruction of 
oppositions. (HJD 43) 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
47
Badiou’s taste for dichotomy and the excluded middle comes from the 
‘tempestuous times’ in which he and Derrida were writing, as much as 
from an ahistorical philosophical necessity.
C ONC LU SI ON
At the end of this ﬁ rst chapter we are presented with two very different 
accounts of the death of God. For Badiou, the only way to consum-
mate the death of God is by a rejection of ascetic humility before the 
divine inﬁ nite through a recourse to the Cantorian transﬁ nite which 
ﬁ nally leaves the God who lurks beyond ﬁ nitude’s ascetic horizons and 
limits with nowhere to hide. This requires the retroactive and axiomatic 
positing of a pure, inconsistent multiplicity and the equation of math-
ematics with ontology, by virtue of which the multiple is preserved as 
generic in the formal language of set theory. Nancy’s ﬁ nite thinking is 
not only impotent ﬁ nally to banish God, but it reintroduces the One in 
its very midst through its gathering of thinking under the single term of 
ﬁ nitude. Nancy, following the path of a ﬁ nite thinking, is powerless to 
extricate himself from ﬁ nitude’s irreducible religiosity.
Whereas for Badiou we simply do not have the means to be atheist 
so long as the theme of ﬁ nitude governs our thinking (C 164/TW 26), 
for Nancy the death of God will not be realised by any thinking that 
repeats the Christmas projection in its rejection of God (DDC 121/
DisDC 145). We must move beyond the a/theism dichotomy because 
the dichotomy itself is irremediably parasitic on the thought it seeks 
to deny. While Badiou reads Nancy’s thought as an ascetic atheism, 
denying itself the resources of the inﬁ nite, Nancy sees Badiou’s as 
harbouring elements of the parasitic in its Christmas projection. 
Nevertheless, both thinkers are seeking to move beyond the impasse of 
parasitism and asceticism in elaborating a post-theological integration, 
Nancy by arguing that we must extract from Christianity something 
deeper than religion which religion itself misunderstands (ADC 40), 
and Badiou by occupying the ground of actual inﬁ nity with a rigor-
ously secularised transﬁ nite. Neither of these positions can, in the ﬁ nal 
account, however, banish the ghost of parasitism.
For Nancy, it is the ahistorical inﬁ nite in Badiou’s thought that is 
theologically problematic, and for Badiou it is Nancy’s ﬁ nitude that is 
to be resisted on pain of reintroducing God. In Montesquieu’s Lettres 
persanes, Rica quips that, if triangles invented a god, that god would 
doubtless have three sides: the god is formed in the image of his human 
creators. When it comes to the death of God, things might seem little 
different: God is dispatched in an image appropriate to the philosophy 
48 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
that claims to follow his death, and the claim is made that only this 
philosophy, in each case, can adequately respond to that death.
Underlying the disagreements about ﬁ nitude and the inﬁ nite, unity 
and the multiple, is the fundamental question of the possibility of 
heterotopic sites of thought in contemporary French philosophy and, 
more speciﬁ cally for our purposes, the question of heterotopic under-
standings of the death of God and heterotopic post-theological integra-
tions. What can be made of the ‘difference’ between Badiou’s axioms 
and Nancy’s singular plurality, between the Badiouian inﬁ nite and the 
Nancean ﬁ nite? Can philosophy after the death of God still meaning-
fully employ the notion of a common space of thought and, if it does, is 
that employment itself necessarily ‘religious’? This is precisely the ques-
tion that is raised in the engagement between Nancy and Badiou qua 
engagement, and it is why the future of French thought, as well as that 
thought’s relation to the religious legacy of the West, plays itself out en 
abyme in the question of the ﬁ nite and inﬁ nite responses to the death 
of God. We develop our treatment of these questions now by observing 
that, when it comes to the God of the poets, Nancy and Badiou have 
much more in common than we have seen so far in our treatment of 
metaphysics.
NOTE S
 1. Montesquieu, Lettres persanes (Paris: Garnier, 1965), p. 124. Letter LIX, 
Rica to Usbek: ‘It has been well said that if triangles were to create a god, 
they would give him three sides’ (Montesquieu, The Persian Letters, p. 
129).
 2. Bertrand Russell, ‘Recent work on the principles of mathematics’, 
International Monthly, 4 (1901), p. 84.
 3. ‘I take the formula “God is dead” literally. [. . .] God is ﬁ nished. And reli-
gion is ﬁ nished, too’ (BOE 23).
 4. See Martin Heidegger, ‘Nietzsche’s word: God is dead’, in The Question 
Concerning Technology and Other Essays, p. 69.
 5. Blaise Pascal, Pensées [Lafuma] 425/[Brunschvicg] 148.
 6. ‘My position has no relation with any religion, and that is why it can freely 
treat them all as schemata of historic esthetics. God is not even dead, for 
me (this dead God is still Nietzsche’s constant interlocutor).’ Author’s 
translation.
 7. It is true that both Nancy (notably in HIN and VD) and Badiou (in LM 
and 2M) have recently elaborated a fuller account of the relationship 
between the ﬁ nite and the inﬁ nite in their work, one of the consequences of 
which is to problematise the terms ‘philosophy of the inﬁ nite’ and ‘philos-
ophy of ﬁ nitude’. We will treat this important shift and its consequences 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
49
in Chapter 2. Nevertheless, we will fail to understand what is at stake in 
this complication of the relationship if we have not ﬁ rst worked through 
the Badiouian inﬁ nite and Nancean ﬁ nitude as presented in the current 
chapter.
 8. Hallward, Badiou: A Subject to Truth, p. 7.
 9. The term ‘dieu de la métaphysique’ (God of metaphysics) is relatively 
stable throughout Badiou’s œuvre. He only once mentions the ‘Dieu des 
philosophes’ (God of the philosophers) (SP 50/SPe 47), and then only 
when quoting Pascal, and he makes no reference to the ‘god of onto-
theology’ as such. Other than this, traits of the god of metaphysics are 
reﬂ ected in Badiou’s characterisation of the god of Descartes who is 
required as guarantor of the truth (EE 237/BE 214; CT 12/BOE 23), and 
the  watchmaker god of Voltaire (EE 237/BE 214).
10. Badiou’s Dieu-principe resonates with Pierre Magnard’s ‘fonction dieu’ 
(God-as-function): not the true God but god qua truth (Magnard, Le Dieu 
des philosophes, p. 16).
11. Leibniz, Nouveaux Essais sur l’entendement humain II (Paris: Garnier-
Flammarion, 1966), ch. 17, p. 1. ‘It belongs to the essence of number, 
line and some such whole to be bounded.’ And the ‘true inﬁ nite, strictly 
speaking, is only in the absolute, which precedes all composition and is not 
formed by the addition of parts.’ G. W. Leibniz, New Essays on Human 
Understanding, ed. P. Remnant, J. Bennett, K. Ameriks and Desmond M. 
Clarke (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), p. 157, quoted in 
BOE 104.
12. ‘ “What is not truly one being is not truly a being either” ’ (G. W. 
Leibniz, ‘Letter to Arnauld’ (30 April 1687), The Leibniz–Arnauld 
Correspondence, ed. and trans. H. T. Mason (Manchester: Manchester 
University Press, 1967), quoted in BOE 34.
13. In this way Badiou avoids, in relation to the god of metaphysics, an ambi-
guity in Nietzsche’s pronouncements on the death of God. See Eric von 
der Luft, ‘Sources of Nietzsche’s “God is Dead!” ’: ‘Ironically, Nietzsche’s 
theology could be termed “apophatic.” In proclaiming that God has died, 
indeed, has been killed, he seems to suggest that God was once alive’ 
(p. 270).
14. The term mytheme (mythème) originates from Claude Levi-Strauss’s 1955 
‘La structure des mythes’, in Anthropologie structurale (Paris: Plon, 1958), 
pp. 227–55, where it is used of the constituent building blocks of myths. 
Matheme (mathème) is a Lacanian coinage. Part of Lacanian algebra, 
mathemes have no univocal meaning but serve the transmission of psy-
choanalytic concepts (see Jacques Lacan, Le Séminaire, livre XX, Encore, 
1972–73, ed. Jacques-Alain Miller, Paris: Seuil, 1975, p. 100). Badiou’s 
use of the term stresses the uniquely formalised, rigorous non-hermeneutic 
‘language’ of mathematics, antinomy of the poem, its truth the antinomy 
of knowledge (C 55).
15. ‘Mathematics is the only point of rupture with doxa that is given 
50 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
as  existent or constituted. The absolute singularity of mathematics is 
 basically its existence’ (Con 102).
16. ‘When it comes to the effectiveness, if not the proclamation of the death 
of God, the contemporary quandary in which we ﬁ nd ourselves must be 
ascribed to the fact that philosophy’s neglect of mathematical thinking 
delivers the inﬁ nite, through the medium of history, over to a new avatar 
of the One’ (TW 27; translation altered).
17. ‘We do not have the wherewithal to be atheists so long as the theme of 
ﬁ nitude governs our thinking’ (TW 26).
18. ‘the thesis of the inﬁ nity of being is necessarily post-Christian’ (BE 143).
19. Drozdek, ‘Beyond inﬁ nity: Augustine and Cantor’. The present discussion 
is indebted to Frederiek Depoortere’s treatment of Drozdek’s thesis in 
Badiou and Theology.
20. Augustine, The City of God, book XII, ch. 19, p. 527.
21. Drozdek, ‘Beyond inﬁ nity’, p. 133.
22.
At last we touched upon that lonely shore
that never yet has seen its waters sailed
by one who then returned to tell the tale.
There, as another willed, he girded me.
Oh, miracle! When he pulled out the reed,
Immediately a second humble plant
Sprang up from where the ﬁ rst one had been picked.
(Dante Alighieri, Purgatory, trans. Mark Musa,
London: Penguin, 1985, p. 5)
23. Drozdek, ‘Beyond inﬁ nity’, p. 138.
24. Georg Cantor, Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philoso-
phischen Inhalts (Berlin: Springer, 1932), p. 378; quoted by Jané, ‘The role 
of the absolute inﬁ nite in Cantor’s conception of set’, pp. 384–5.
25. Drozdek, ‘Beyond inﬁ nity’, p. 138.
26. ‘the folly of saving God – the one, that is – from any absolute presumption 
of the multiple’ (BE 43; translation altered).
27. Though there is no space to elaborate it here, the reader is directed to 
Reynhout, ‘Alain Badiou: hidden theologian of the void?’, and the appen-
dix in Hallward, Badiou: A Subject to Truth, for a presentation of ZFC in 
relation to Badiou’s thought.
28. ‘Every atheist philosophy posits that nothing, in principle, is inaccessible. 
Hegel is decisive on this point: the whole of the real is rational. My own 
thesis is not that the Inaccessible is accessible. It is that there is nothing 
inaccessible’ (letter to Peter Hallward, 19 June 1996, quoted in Hallward, 
Badiou: A Subject to Truth, p. 320).
29. Though Badiou does not describe his own thinking as ‘post-theological’, 
it is a true description of his system in the sense in which we deﬁ ned the 
term above. In order to avoid confusion between ‘atheism’ as a general 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
51
term for thinking without God and ‘atheism’ as Badiou’s characterisation 
of his own thought, we shall call Badiou’s thought ‘post-theological’ in 
contexts where what is meant is the impetus he shares with Nancy and 
Meillassoux in moving beyond imitative and residual atheism. ‘Atheism’ 
will be reserved for Badiou’s thought in contradistinction to Nancy’s 
 atheology and Meillassoux’s philosophical divine.
30. ‘Regarding the God of metaphysics, thought must accomplish its course 
in the inﬁ nite. The latter disseminates thought’s reserve over the entire 
expanse of manifolds’ (BOE 31).
31. The examples are taken from Hallward, Badiou: A Subject to Truth, p. 81.
32. Hallward mistakenly says that, in CT 141, Badiou claims that ‘the “death 
of god” enabled the conception of pure multiplicity as without One’ 
(Hallward, Badiou: A Subject to Truth, p. 393 n.39). Badiou does not 
in fact attribute pure multiplicity to the death of God explicitly, but to 
‘la crise de l’idéalité métaphysique de l’un’ (CT 141) (‘crisis in the One’s 
metaphysical ideality’, BOE 25).
33. The attempt to render the God of metaphysics impossible is complicated 
by the proliferation of forms that such a God can take, however. It is by 
no means clear that dispensing with the One deposes the Trinitarian God 
of Christian theology. John Milbank uses Badiou’s insistence on the retro-
active inaccessibility of pure multiplicity to argue that there is no internal 
necessity to Badiou’s identiﬁ cation of inaccessible inconsistency with pure 
multiplicity:
Certainly, one can agree with Badiou that, as already for Plato, and as 
in Trinitarian theology (as he notes!) the One is later than the Many and 
emerges only as their unity. Nevertheless, because there is only ever any 
speciﬁ c ‘set’ of the manifold by virtue of its unity, one might still decide, 
in divergence from Badiou’s fundamental decision, to accord to unity 
a retroactive primacy (as indeed in the case of Trinitarian theology). 
(Milbank, ‘The shares of being’, p. 22, accessed January 2010)
 
Inaccessible inconsistency may, but by no means must, be multiple.
34. ‘Does this mean that being is not multiple either? Strictly speaking, yes, 
because being is only multiple inasmuch as it occurs in presentation’ 
(BE 24). Graham Harman raises a similar problem, questioning whether 
Badiou’s inconsistent multiplicity is really multiple:
For me, the problem is [. . .] is the inconsistent multiple in Badiou really 
multiple? It doesn’t really seem to do anything other than haunt our 
current count, our current situation. But the proper multiple would 
actually need to interact apart from the subject. (Harman, ‘Speculative 
realism’, pp. 382–3)
 
Badiou’s problem is the difﬁ culty of holding both that inconsistent multi-
plicity is multiple, and that it is directly inaccessible. Either it is not truly 
inaccessible, or it is not veriﬁ ably multiple.
52 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
35. Hallward, Badiou: A Subject to Truth, p. 82.
36. Hallward, Badiou: A Subject to Truth, p. 82.
37. Hallward, Badiou: A Subject to Truth, p. 82.
38. The generic is a term Badiou borrows from Paul Cohen, and which he 
esteems indispensible for his own philosophical account of the event (EE 
23/BE 6). The generic for Badiou is inﬁ nitely subtracted from the sub-
sumption of the multiple under the One of a concept; it is a superabun-
dance of being that evades the clutches of language (C 184–5/Con 118). 
The generic subset contains ‘a little of everything’ such that no predicate 
can gather all its terms (C 184/Con 117). Truths for Badiou (be they 
scientiﬁ c, amorous, political or artistic) are without exception generic in 
this way. A ‘constructible’ subset of a set, by contrast, admits of a clear 
description, and the axiom of constructability simply states ‘all sets are 
constructible’, which Badiou glosses as ‘all multiplicity is under the law’ 
(PND 6). ‘Large cardinals’ require axioms supplementary to those of ZFC 
set theory and are as abyssally removed from aleph zero – the smallest 
inﬁ nite set, being the cardinality of the set of all natural numbers – as it 
is from ﬁ nite multiples. Because large cardinals are ‘inaccessible’ in this 
way, they are prey to an ascetic atheism. In Badiou’s succinct summary: 
‘Le constructible déplie l’être des conﬁ gurations du savoir. Le générique, 
avec le concept du multiple indiscernable, rend possible que soit pensé 
l’être d’une vérité. Les grands cardinaux approximent l’être virtuel que 
requièrent les théologies’ (EE 314). ‘The constructible unfolds the being 
of conﬁ gurations of knowledge. The generic, with the concept of the indis-
cernible multiple, renders possible the thought of the being of a truth. The 
grand cardinals approximate the virtual being required by theologies’ (BE 
284).
39. Salanskis, ‘Les mathématiques chez x avec x = Alain Badiou’, p. 83.
40. For a discussion of the difference between inﬁ nity and inﬁ nitude, see 
Bandres, ‘Badiou et l’atomisme ancien’, p. 49.
41. ‘A system S is said to be inﬁ nite when it is similar to a proper part of itself. 
In the contrary case, S is said to be a ﬁ nite system’ (NuN 36). Badiou is 
quoting Richard Dedekind, Les nombres. Que sont-ils et à quoi servent-
ils ?, trad. J. Milner and H. Sinacoeur (Paris: Seuil, 1978), p. 93; Richard 
Dedekind, The Nature and Meaning of Numbers, in Essays on the Theory 
of Numbers (La Salle, IL: Open Court, p. 190; reprinted New York: 
Dover, 1963), § 64.
42. ‘inverted or diverted form of ﬁ nitude, of a non-appropriable or unname-
able horizon of immortal divinity’ (TW 26).
43. Miller, Badiou, Marion and St Paul, p. 154.
44. Miller, Badiou, Marion and St Paul, p. 43.
45. ‘without this decision it will remain for ever possible for being to be 
 essentially ﬁ nite’ (BE 148; translation altered).
46. ‘God is ﬁ nished. And religion is ﬁ nished too. As Jean-Luc Nancy has 
strongly stated, there is something irreversible here’ (BOE 23).
 
The God of Metaphysics 
53
47.
There is no return of the religious: there are the contortions and the tur-
gescence of its exhaustion. Whether that exhaustion is making way for 
another concern for the gods, for their wandering or their inﬁ nite disap-
pearance, or else for no god, that is another matter: it is another ques-
tion altogether, and it is not something that can be grasped between the 
pincers of the religious, nor indeed between those of atheism. No god: 
this would be, or will be, unrelated to atheism – at least to that meta-
physical atheism that is the counterpart of theism, and that wants to 
put something in the place of the god that has been denied or refuted. 
(ODP 136)
48.
The much discussed ‘return of the religious,’ which denotes a real phe-
nomenon, deserves no more attention than any other ‘return.’ Among 
the phenomena of repetition, resurgence, revival, or haunting, it is 
never the identical but the different that invariably counts the most. 
Because the identical immediately loses its identity in returning, the 
question should rather be asked, ceaselessly and with new risks, what 
an identical ‘secularization’ might denote, inevitably, other than a mere 
transferal. (DisDC 1; translation altered)
49. Nancy equivocates on the term ‘atheism’. On occasion he treats it as a 
symmetrical concomitant of theism which, like theism, needs to be decon-
structed. The deconstruction of monotheism points the way to ‘un avenir 
du monde qui ne serait plus ni chrétien, ni anti-chrétien, ni monothéiste 
ni athéiste ou polythéiste, mais qui s’avancerait précisément au-delà de 
toutes ces catégories’ (DDC 54); ‘a future for the world that would no 
longer be either Christian or anti-Christian, either monotheist or atheist or 
even polytheist, but that would advance precisely beyond these categories’ 
(DisDC 34).
 
  Elsewhere, he seeks to retain a re-deﬁ ned notion of atheism:
Aussi longtemps que nous ne prenons pas en compte, sans réserve, le 
mondial comme tel, nous ne sommes pas quittes des démiurges et des 
créateurs. Autrement dit, nous ne sommes pas athées. Être athée ne 
signiﬁ e plus nier un divin qui s’est de lui-même résorbé (et cela ne peut 
donc peut-être plus s’appeler « athéisme »). Cela signiﬁ e: ouvrir le sens 
du monde. (SM 239)
As long as we do not take into account, without reserve, the worldly 
as such, we have not gotten rid of demiurges and creators. In other 
words, we are not yet atheists. Being an atheist is no longer a matter of 
denying a divine instance that has reabsorbed itself into itself (and this 
can perhaps therefore be called ‘atheism’). It is a matter of opening the 
sense of the world. (SW 158)
54 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 
It is in order to clarify this and other equivocations that we have insisted 
on ‘post-theological’ for the second of these two senses, a sense which 
Nancy himself concedes may need to be abandoned.
50. ‘this common space in which such heterotopias are possible, or indeed 
necessary’ (PWC 39).
51. Heterotopia (hétérotopie) is a complex term coined by Michel Foucault in 
‘Des espaces autres’ to refer to a real, localisable space, one of the features 
of which can be that it has ‘le pouvoir de juxtaposer en un seul lieu réel 
plusieurs espaces, plusieurs emplacements qui sont en eux-mêmes incom-
patibles’ (Michel Foucault, ‘Des espaces autres’, at: http://foucault.info/
documents/heteroTopia/foucault.heteroTopia.fr.html, accessed January 
2010); ‘The heterotopia is capable of juxtaposing in a single real place 
several spaces, several sites that are in themselves incompatible’ (Michel 
Foucault, ‘Of other spaces (1967), Heterotopias’, trans. Jay Miskowiec, 
at: 
http://www.foucault.info/documents/heteroTopia/foucault.heteroTo
pia.en.html, accessed January 2010). It is on this feature of ﬁ nding a 
common space for the otherwise incompatible that Nancy is wishing to 
draw with his use of the term.
52. ‘[t]he deﬁ nition of philosophy must allow for its own multiplication’ 
(PWC 39).
53.
The dominant idea [in the Heideggerian tradition] is that metaphysics 
has reached a point of historical exhaustion, but that what lies beyond 
this exhaustion has not yet been given to us [. . .]. Philosophy is then 
caught between the exhaustion of its historical possibility and the non-
conceptual arrival of a salutary overturning. Contemporary philosophy 
combines the deconstruction of its past with the empty expectation 
of its future. My entire thesis is to break with this diagnosis [. . .] 
Philosophy must break with historicism from within itself. (Con 3–4, as 
trans. Ray Brassier, quoted in PWC 42; translation altered)
54. Badiou, ‘L’Offrande réservée’.
55.
when we say that metaphysics has ‘ended’ we only say that it exhausts 
whatever would presume to complete its retrospection as well as its 
prospection. The former and the latter must be unachievable, they 
must be the unachievable as such, in conformity with the essence of 
 philosophy. (PWC 44)
56.
What was called ‘the death of God’ and later ‘the end of metaphysics,’ 
or even ‘the end of philosophy,’ consisted in bringing to light the fol-
lowing: there is no ﬁ rst or last condition; there isn’t any unconditioned 
that can be the principle or the origin. But this ‘there isn’t’ is uncondi-
 
The God of Metaphysics 
55
tioned, and there you have, if I dare say so, our ‘human condition’ (PC 
5; translation altered)
57. ‘the exhaustion of metaphysics is historical only insofar as it is the exhaus-
tion of historical possibility as such (or of the meaning of history)’ (PWC 
42).
58. ‘the dimension of history in general, as a Western dimension, is fundamen-
tally Christian’ (DisDC 146).
59. ‘a pure and simple birth of Christianity, which one ﬁ ne day comes along 
and changes everything’ (DisDC 145).
60. ‘our whole tradition, as unchristian as it would like to be, still retains 
something of the “Christmas projection”: at a given moment “that” takes 
place, and we ﬁ nd ourselves thereafter in a Christian condition’ (DisDC 
145).
61. ‘How and to what degree do we hold to Christianity’ (DisDC 139).
62. ‘I take the formula “God is dead” literally. [. . .] God is ﬁ nished. And 
 religion is ﬁ nished, too’ (BOE 23).
63.
One thus ﬁ nds oneself wondering whether any discourse on God can 
deviate, however slightly, from that of Hegel (even if revised), that is to 
say from the discourse of philosophy itself, or of ontotheology (which 
culminates in the dialectical ontotheology of the death of God). (ODP 
113; translation altered)
64.
‘To deconstruct’ means to disassemble that which has been erected over 
the beginnings so as to allow what has been hollowed out beneath them 
to arrive. Thus, it is at once to undermine (rather than destroy) the 
ediﬁ ce of philosophical (or metaphysical) tradition and the historical 
auto-positioning of that tradition. (PWC 43–4)
65. ‘what provenance can we ascribe to these beginnings?’ (PWC 44).
66. ‘the gesture of an opening or reopening in the direction of what must have 
preceded all construction’ (DisDC 189; translation altered).
67. ‘the question is to ﬁ nd out whether we can, by revisiting our Christian 
provenance, designate from the heart of Christianity a provenance of 
Christianity deeper than Christianity itself’ (DisDC 143; translation 
altered).
68. ‘Christianity itself, Christianity as such, is surpassed, because it is itself, 
and by itself, in a state of being surpassed’ (DisDC 141).
69. Roberto Esposito uses the same subjective/objective genitive structure to 
make a different point in relation to the ‘speciﬁ cally Christian character of 
all the “deaths of God” that have followed each other over time.’ These 
deaths, he argues, are ‘precisely and always of God, both in the objective 
and subjective genetive senses; all these deaths belong to him after all, 
56 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
or rather “before all”, since the beginning, in the ﬁ gure of God dying on 
the cross’ (Esposito, ‘Chair et corps’, p. 157; author’s translation). It will 
become clear in this chapter and the next why we prescribe severe limits to 
this ‘Christian atheism’ reading of the death of God.
70. Derrida, Le Toucher, p. 249/ On Touching, p. 220.
71. Derrida, Le Toucher, p. 68; ‘Dechristianization will be a Christian victory’ 
(On Touching, p. 54).
72. Derrida, Le Toucher, p. 74/On Touching, p. 60.
73. Derrida, Le Toucher, p. 248; ‘This is not about being free from harm, safe, 
and saved, seeking one’s salvation or immunity outside of Christianity. 
These values would still be Christian’ (On Touching, p. 220).
74. ‘We must extract from Christianity what has carried us and what has pro-
duced us: we must, if possible, extract, from the depths deeper than those 
of the religious thing, that from which the religion will have been a form 
and a misreading’ (author’s translation).
75. ‘not only does Christianity detach and exempt itself from the strictly reli-
gious, but it also marks out intaglio, beyond itself, the place of what will 
ﬁ nally have to abandon the simplistic alternative of theism or atheism’ 
(NMTe, p. 108 n.4).
76.
There is not even ‘atheism’; ‘atheist’ is not enough! What we need to 
hollow out is the positing of a principle. It is not enough to say that 
God absents himself, withdraws or again is incommensurable. Much 
less is it a case of placing another principle on his throne – Man, 
Reason, Society. It is a case of grasping this with both hands: the 
world rests on nothing – and that is its most vivid sense. (Author’s 
translation)
77. ‘always corresponds to the following: the “One” god is no longer precisely 
“one god” ’ (NMTe, p. 108 n.4).
78. ‘a departure whose initial name in the West is monotheism, already 
 pregnant with the “death of God” ’ (PWC 46).
79. ‘and one could add, what did Plato do if not weave together tragedy 
and monotheism just before Hellenistic Judaism, and then Christianity 
 completed their work?’ (CWG 85).
80. Glucksmann makes the point that God is only dead in Europe. In America 
and even more in the rest of the world Christianity is on the increase, as 
are Islam and other religions (see Glucksmann, La Troisième mort de dieu, 
p. 259). Caputo makes a similar observation, suggesting that
While something like that [the death of God: author] might be happen-
ing in Western Europe, nothing of the sort has happened in the United 
States, not to mention South America, the Middle East, Asia, Africa, or 
the post-Soviet Eastern Bloc. Sociologists who wrote about the ‘secu-
larisation’ of America in the 1960s were soon sent scurrying back to the 
 
The God of Metaphysics 
57
drawing board to write about its ‘desecularisation.’ (Caputo, ‘Atheism, 
a/theology and the postmodern condition’, p. 270)
81. Cunningham, Genealogy of Nihilism, p. 101.
82. ‘the only thing that can be current is an atheism that contemplates the 
reality of its Christian origins’ (DisDC 140; translation altered).
83. Van Rompaey, ‘A question of ﬁ delity’, p. 354.
84. Van Rompaey, ‘A question of ﬁ delity’, p. 354.
85. Van Rompaey, ‘A question of ﬁ delity’, p. 354.
86. ‘to conserve and to augment the access of existence to its own inappropri-
able and groundless sense’ (FT 18).
87. ‘We take from this the admission of the signifying sovereignty of 
 “ﬁ nitude”, of the One that it imposes on the text’ (author’s translation).
88. ‘common to all, belonging to none, as a common impropriety, commu-
nicating yet neither communicated nor communion’ (SW 68; translation 
altered).
89. Hallward, ‘Consequences of abstraction’, in Think Again, p. 6.
90. Hallward, Badiou: A Subject to Truth, p. 62.
91.
The ontology of the ‘common’ and ‘share’ would not be other than the 
ontology of ‘being’ radically removed from all ontology of substance, 
or order and origin. The ‘death of God’ is neither accomplished nor 
surmounted as long as we have not reached that one point. (Comp, 
p. 374; translation altered)
92. Hallward, ‘Depending on inconsistency’, p. 12; author’s emphasis.
93.
The constraints of construction [. . .] must be, on the contrary, sub-
ordinated to the liberties of thoughtful decision. This is the way the 
Platonist will see nothing to change, provided the effects of thought be 
maximal, regarding free use of the law of the excluded middle and con-
sequently of the reductio ad absurdum. (BOE 95; translation altered)
58
2. The God of the Poets
Everything to be true must become a religion.1
The God of metaphysics is not the ﬁ nal, nor the most tenacious, of the 
gods Badiou seeks to despatch in his assault on the latent theology of 
ﬁ nite thinking. Haunting the thought even of those who claim to have 
deconstructed the God of metaphysics is the third of Badiou’s three 
‘chief deities’: the God of the poets. For a ﬁ nite thinking the God of 
the poets remains perfectly intact after the God of metaphysics is ‘ﬁ n-
ished’ (CT 18–19/BOE 28), for the motif of ﬁ nitude is ‘comme la trace 
d’une survivance, dans le mouvement qui conﬁ e la relève du Dieu de la 
 religion et du Dieu métaphysique au Dieu du poème’ (CT 20).2
The God of the poets is neither the God-principle of Western meta-
physics nor the ‘living God’ of religions. It is the God(s) – or divine 
principle(s) – of Romanticism, whose most acute expression is found, 
Badiou argues, in the poetry of Friedrich Hölderlin (CT 18/BOE 28). 
This God is the poetic principle of the enchanted world, and it is neither 
dead nor alive but rather withdrawn. It follows that the God of the 
poets cannot be mourned, like the God of religions, nor critiqued, like 
the God of metaphysics; its persistence is felt in terms of a nostalgia, a 
melancholic and endlessly disenchanted anticipation of its improbable 
return that leaves thinking in a state of paralysed suspense (CT 19/
BOE 29) that Badiou gives the name ‘Romanticism’. This nostalgia 
for a lost presence is a symptom of an ascetic atheism that suffers in 
the absence of the God it denies, and it is an asceticism that renders 
Nietzsche’s anti-Christianity for Badiou merely a reversal of romanti-
cism (un romantisme retourné, 19R 262). Romanticism is still the site 
of our thinking today, Badiou insists, and this fact renders the theme of 
the death of God ineffectual (C 162/Con 97).
In Badiou’s genealogy, Hegel prepares the way for the romantic 
 
The God of the Poets 
59
gesture in philosophy (C 166/Con 100) through the decisive cutting 
adrift of mathematics from philosophy (see C 159–62/Con 94–7). 
Whereas Plato sought to expel from his academy all who were not 
geometers, now the poem ﬁ nds itself at the heart of ‘philosophy’, and the 
matheme is expelled (C 163/Con 98). Hölderlin’s singular contribution 
to the Romantic schema is his powerful poetic evocation of the ﬂ ight 
of the gods ‘when the Father had turned his face from the sight of us 
mortals’,3 the ﬂ ight that issues in the attitude of an endlessly anticipated 
return that Badiou identiﬁ es as the characteristic disposition towards 
the God of the poets. It is through poetic mediation, through the ‘new 
religion’ of poetic Dichtung,4 that the gods can return to earth (EE 285/
BE 257). Notwithstanding the inaugural contribution made by Hegel, 
and the distinctly Hölderlinian motif of the withdrawal of the gods, 
the greatest Romantic with whom Badiou takes issue is Heidegger. For 
Heidegger, even though advances in technology have brought to com-
pletion Nietzsche’s death of God, there is yet a new advent of the ‘holy’, 
a ‘truly divine God’ that remains after the death of the causa sui, a God 
before whom one can kneel, sing and dance.5 For Badiou, to recognise 
the death of the God of religions and the end of onto-theology and yet 
to await this divine salvation is only to have advanced two thirds of the 
way to a truly contemporary post-theological thought.
Badiou does not set himself up in utter opposition to Heidegger and 
the ﬂ ight of the philosophers to poetry, literature and art, and indeed his 
own mathematical interruption of the mytheme relies on Heidegger’s 
distinction between truth and knowledge.6 Rather, he sees Heidegger’s 
way of understanding the relation of philosophy to poetry as a great 
opportunity almost taken. Badiou’s assessment of Heidegger has 
three aspects, two positive and one negative (C 97/Con 39–40). First, 
Heidegger quite legitimately re-establishes the autonomous function of 
poetic thinking in the face of philosophical imperialism. Secondly, he 
shows the limits of an approach which would simply separate poetry 
and philosophical argument; but thirdly he fails to recognise the origi-
nality of the Greek interruption of the poem by the matheme, and so 
he cannot but restore the sacred authority of poetic speech that locates 
authenticity in the ﬂ esh of language. So Heidegger falls back into a 
 discourse of the sacred.
Badiou’s reconstruction of Romanticism has two main facets: the 
open inﬁ nite and incarnation. What Badiou calls the Romantic inﬁ nite 
is the correlate of the Romantic notion of ﬁ nitude (C 162/Con 97). At 
its limit, ﬁ nitude opens onto an inﬁ nite as an endlessly receding horizon 
beyond which the gods have withdrawn, in a structure that in our 
present analysis we are identifying as residual and ascetic. This inﬁ nite 
60 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
does not escape historicity, but simply marks the horizon of ﬁ nitude’s 
own historicity (C 162/Con 97). Furthermore, Romantic ﬁ nitude’s 
opening onto the inﬁ nite is unable to have done with the sacred or the 
divine, for it cedes the territory of the inﬁ nite to a mystical and inac-
cessible alterity: ‘[t]ant que la ﬁ nitude reste la détermination ultime de 
l’être-là, Dieu demeure’ (C 163).7 God remains precisely in absentia, 
God’s withdrawal leaving an ascetic state of abandonment and derelic-
tion before an inappropriable or unnameable horizon (C 164/Con 99). 
The openness of ﬁ nitude to the inﬁ nite is inextricable from openness to 
the promise and the poetico-political disposition towards the return of 
the gods, and the re-enchantment of the world:
Que notre exposition à l’être soit essentiellement ﬁ nie, qu’il faille toujo-
urs revenir à notre être-mortel, est ce à partir de quoi nous n’endurons la 
mort du Dieu vivant qu’à soutenir, sous de multiples formes, l’indistincte 
promesse d’un sens retiré, mais dont la « venue en retour » n’est pas forclose. 
(CT 20)8
The failure to foreclose this return leaves us powerlessly waiting for 
the divine and vulnerable to the promise of such an inﬁ nite God to ﬁ ll 
the lack that ﬁ nitude suffers with regard to the inaccessible inﬁ nite to 
which it is open (C 175/Con 176). In other words, ﬁ nitude and the open 
inﬁ nite are ineradicably complicit with an asceticism that can never be 
rid of God.
This paradigm of ﬁ nitude and its open inﬁ nite issues in the Romantic 
conception of art as incarnation, the descent of the inﬁ nite-true into 
ﬁ nitude (PMI 23/HOI 11), the appearing of the absolute in the world. 
In this thoroughly Christian schema, the artist, possessed of genius, 
becomes the sacriﬁ cial mediator of spirit and matter, his works attest-
ing the incarnation of the inﬁ nite in a way that leaves Romanticism 
unable to escape the sacred (S 217/Cen 154). Incarnation, however, 
simply drowns and quashes the Idea in a ﬂ ood of materiality. After the 
pattern of the tortured body of Christ, the pattern of incarnation in 
the twentieth century is the tortured body of the Idea (S 166/Cen 116). 
More than this, incarnation for Badiou is evil. The terrorist states of 
the twentieth century laboured under the falsehood that justice can be 
captured ‘in the solidity of a body’ (PP 132).
Badiou’s overcoming of the God of the poets articulates itself around 
these two themes of a ﬁ nitude open to the inﬁ nite and incarnation, and 
they are also the themes that will guide us through this chapter. Both 
Badiou and Nancy argue that incarnation and the open inﬁ nite are to 
be overcome by their post-theological thinking, but each seeks to avoid 
them in different ways. Seeking most keenly to avoid an ascetic atheism, 
 
The God of the Poets 
61
Badiou afﬁ rms a conception of poetry in terms of the Idea, whereas 
Nancy, more wary of the danger of parasitic atheism, rewrites the open 
and incarnation in terms of singular plural sharing and the double 
gesture of the deconstruction of Christianity.
2 . 1  THE DEATH OF  THE GOD O F PR E S E N C E
2.1.1 The Open, the Inﬁ nite and the Art of the Idea
Badiou’s response to ﬁ nitude’s open inﬁ nite is the inﬁ nity of the 
matheme. The limit of the Open is a denial of the regime of counting 
(NN 104–5/NuN 81) because ﬁ nitude and the limit are foreign to the 
inﬁ nite multiplicities of mathematical ontology which know no limit. 
Openness is the possibility of the return of the gods, as opposed to the 
‘ﬁ rmness of the multiple’ (CT 28/BOE 35), and so if philosophy is to 
be rigorously atheist and if we are to establish ourselves serenely in the 
irreversibility of the death of God (CT 20/BOE 29), we must deliver 
inﬁ nity from the metaphorics of the Open (C 165/Con 100). Finitude’s 
openness to salviﬁ c return (C 58/Con 4) can only be disciplined by 
passing it through the sieve of mathematics (LM 583/LW 558; see also 
C 166–7/Con 111).
As a concomitant to the rejection of the Romantic open inﬁ nite, it is 
necessary, Badiou maintains, in following through the implications of 
the death of God, to envision a new type of poetry (see CT 19–20/BOE 
28–9). Badiou by no means rejects poetry tout court; the rupture of 
mathematics, let us remember, is not with the poem itself but with the 
mytheme (19R 263–4). Envisioning a new type of poetry comes down 
for Badiou to developing a new paradigm for the relation between 
philosophy and poetry, or between philosophy and art more broadly.9
For the Badiou of Petit Manuel d’inesthétique there are three extant 
schemata for understanding the relationship between art and phi-
losophy. The didactic schema either condemns or instrumentalises art, 
putting it under philosophical surveillance and leaving it with a role 
illustrating and elucidating philosophical positions. In the didactic 
schema the truth of art comes from outside art, and art itself becomes 
a sensory didacticism, the ‘goodness’ of which is seen only in its con-
sequences for the polis. The second schema is Romantic, according to 
which art, truth’s real body, is alone capable of truth (PMI 12/HOI 
3). Evoking Lacoue-Labarthe and Nancy’s L’Absolu littéraire, Badiou 
characterises the Romantic body of art as a glorious body, and art 
itself in this schema, as we have seen, as incarnation (PMI 12/HOI 
3). Seeking to position itself between both the didactic and romantic 
62 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 schemata, the third schema is classical, stressing the ethical purposes of 
art: to please and to produce catharsis. Art is itself incapable of truth, 
and should not be thought of in terms of truth but in terms of verisimili-
tude, this demarcation of its territory from that of philosophy bringing 
about a truce between them. In the classical schema, philosophy only 
trespasses onto artistic territory in the guise of the aesthetic, offering 
its opinions on the rules of pleasing. Our age, according to Badiou, is 
characterised by its failure to produce any new schema.
In moving towards his own fourth schema of the relation between 
philosophy and art, Badiou shuns the dichotomy between philoso-
phies that place themselves under the auspices of the poem (in the 
wake of Heidegger) or the matheme (the various branches of analytic 
philosophy), afﬁ rming that ‘[o]ne of the peculiar characteristics of my 
own project is that it requires both the reference to poetry and a basis 
in mathematics’ (APTW xvi), or elsewhere ‘I use mathematics and 
accord to it a fundamental role’, but ‘I also use, to the same extent, the 
resources of the poem’ (APBE xiv).
While he rejects poetry that is nothing more than the melancholic 
guardian of ﬁ nitude or a gesture towards a mystical silence that inhabits 
the limit of language (CT 21/BOE 29), in the Court Traité Badiou sets 
down two conditions for a poetry that would break with ﬁ nitude for 
the actual, mathematical inﬁ nite: ‘Qu’il se dévoue à l’enchantement de 
ce dont le monde, tel quel, est capable; qu’il discerne au point même de 
l’impossible la surrection inﬁ nie des possibilités invisibles’ (CT 21).10
Transposed into the discourse of mathematics, this means that 
poetry is to serve as an indication of as yet uncounted multiples in a 
situation (or of the indiscernible in a world, to use the language of 
Logiques des mondes), and it is to serve as a reminder of the inﬁ nity 
of possible countings-as-one of the pure multiplicity that is counted in 
any situation.
In a characteristically dichotomising gesture, Badiou identiﬁ es just 
two types of poetry. The ﬁ rst is poetry as an appearance of the coming 
presence of being. The second, which seeks as its support not the Greek 
concept of nature as phusis but the Platonic Idea, decouples being from 
appearance and essence from existence through the matheme sub-
tracted from all presence (EE 143/BE 125). Poetry for Badiou does not 
speak being, but connotes the void of a situation. It is, we might say, 
not the guardian of being but the guardian of a truth, in Badiou’s sense 
of a truth as (in EE) a hole in knowledge, ‘cette consistance minimale 
(une partie, une immanence sans concept) qui avère dans la situation 
l’inconsistance qui en fait l’être’ (M 90).11 Indeed, in Le Nombre et 
les nombres Badiou states categorically that ‘Tout poème cherche à 
 
The God of the Poets 
63
déceler et à porter aux lisières formelles de la langue le vide latent des 
référents sensibles’ (NN 200; author’s emphasis).12 The way in which 
poetry accomplishes this can be understood by considering its relation 
to philosophy.
Inaesthetics, Badiou’s proposed fourth schema for relating philoso-
phy to art, refuses to consider art merely as an object for philosophy. 
Instead,
Par « inesthétique », j’entends un rapport de la philosophie à l’art qui, 
posant que l’art est par lui-même producteur de vérités, ne prétend d’aucune 
façon en faire, pour la philosophie, un objet. Contre la spéculation esthé-
tique, l’inesthétique décrit les effets strictement intraphilosophiques produits 
par l’existence indépendante de quelques œuvres d’art. (PMI 7)13
For inaesthetics philosophy does not do art’s thinking for it; art itself 
thinks, and its thinking is atheistic. The manifesto which Badiou lays 
down for contemporary poetry is a post-theological manifesto:
L’impératif du poème est aujourd’hui de conquérir son propre athéisme, et 
donc de détruire de l’intérieur des puissances de la langue, la phraséologie 
nostalgique, la posture de la promesse, ou la destination prophétique à 
l’Ouvert. [. . .] c’est la poésie elle-même qui procédera, qui procède, depuis 
au moins le début du siècle, à la mise à mort de son propre Dieu. (CT 
19–20)14
An indication of what this means for poetry in particular and 
art more generally can be gleaned from the three brief examples of 
Lucretius, Valéry and ﬁ lm. Given Badiou’s post-theological agenda 
for poetry, it is perhaps little surprise that among the poems he praises 
most highly is De Rerum Natura, the work of ‘the magniﬁ cent ﬁ gure 
of Lucretius’ (CT 28/BOE 35). Badiou’s Lucretius is a ﬁ gure in whom 
‘la puissance du poème, loin de garder dans la détresse le recours à 
l’Ouvert, tente plutôt de soustraire la pensée à tout retour des dieux, 
et à l’établir dans la fermeté du multiple’ (CT 28).15 Notice here that it 
is the poem itself that tries to establish thinking within the ﬁ rmness of 
the multiple. Lucretius’ poetry is not merely illustrative or exemplary, it 
itself seeks to establish the thinking of the multiple.
Badiou insists that Lucretius – the only thinker who was also an 
immense poet – and his poem – this singular fusion of poetry and 
philosophy that gives the lie to the whole Heideggerian reconstruction 
of metaphysics after Plato (C 105/Con 46) – elaborate a materialist 
thinking which positively demands its poetic exposition. But what is it 
about poetry that forces this demand? To explain, Badiou turns to the 
beginning of book IV of De Rerum Natura, where Lucretius undertakes 
to argue, in the teeth of Plato, for the legitimacy of the poem as the 
64 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
means of exposition for his philosophy (C 105/Con 46). Badiou singles 
out three functions of poetry for Lucretius. First, to illumine: Lucretius 
points out that his poem treats an obscure theme, and the presenta-
tion of this obscurity of being requires the luminous verses of poetry. 
Secondly, to persuade: Lucretius is wrenching the mind of his readers 
from the tight reins of religion, and in order to secure this rupture a 
certain force of speech is necessary, a force that can be readily granted 
by the poetic muse. And ﬁ nally, to sweeten: the naked truth, Lucretius 
admits, appears somewhat sad. There are no gods to enchant the world 
or to reward virtue and punish evil. The place of philosophy, the place 
where truth is spoken, can, if viewed from a distance, seem a melan-
choly sort of place, and this deﬁ cit of pleasure must be supplemented by 
a lateral pleasure, procured by ‘sweet poetic honey’ (C 105–6/Con 47).
So the poem does not merely illustrate the void, it draws the reader 
towards the void, and that in three ways: 1) by sugaring materialism’s 
bitter pill, 2) by wresting sense from the talons of religion, and 3) by 
what Lucretius calls the glorious linguistic body of the poetry shining 
its oblique light in such a way that it shows forth the unpresentable void 
of Lucretian thought. The poetry itself is advocating for Lucretius’s 
Epicureanism. Nevertheless, Badiou insists, there is still a distance 
between philosophy and poetry. The language and the charm of the 
verses are only in the position of a supplement. Lucretius excuses his 
poetry as a sop to the reader who, looking at Epicureanism from afar, 
needs to be coaxed to come close before she can appreciate it properly. 
It is striking that, whereas poetry needs such an apology in Lucretius’s 
eyes, philosophy needs no such justiﬁ cation: Epicurus is simply praised 
in De Rerum, not defended. What is driving the Lucretian poetry is the 
truth of an atomistic universe, a truth that is forced poetically, through 
illumination, persuasion and sweetening.
The role that Badiou gives to poetry in the case of Lucretius is as a 
servant of the Idea, in two senses. First of all, and more generally, the 
poetry of De Rerum Natura serves Epicurean atomism in the three 
ways detailed above. In addition, however, the universe of atoms and 
void set forth within the poem is amenable to a reading in terms of 
Badiou’s own pure multiplicity (the difference being that Badiou’s 
own thought does not recognise two principles, atoms and void, but 
only one, multiples), and it is within a frame of such multiplicity that 
a Badiouian truth, or Idea, can appear.16 It is in this predisposition to 
multiplicity and to the Idea that poetry can ‘conquer its own atheism’.
We can further see how Baidou reads poetry as a means of conquer-
ing its own atheism if we turn to a discussion of Valéry in which he 
glosses the following lines from ‘Au Platane’:
 
The God of the Poets 
65
– Non! dit l’arbre. Il dit Non! par l’étincellement
De sa tête superbe,
Que la tempête traite universellement
Comme elle fait une herbe.17
Badiou develops his reading of these lines in terms of the connection 
between the chance inherent in a situation and the eternity of an event 
in his own philosophy, arguing ‘N’est-ce pas à cette connexion que 
pense Valéry quand le platane répond furieusement à qui veut le réduire 
à son apparence particulière?’ (2M 96).18 He continues, ‘Entendons, 
dans “tempête”, l’action événementielle, et dans la “tête superbe”, 
l’incorporation du platane aux conséquences universelles de la tempête, 
à la venue au monde d’une vérité’ (2M 96).19 All the weight of the 
reading here is in the ‘Entendons . . .’. Badiou is seeking to understand 
‘Au Platane’ in terms of his notion of truth in a way that performs the 
same sort of simpliﬁ cation that we saw in the previous chapter in rela-
tion to the birth of philosophy as the interruption of the mytheme by 
the matheme. It is important to recognise what Badiou is seeking to 
achieve here. He is not proposing a general theory of art or an engage-
ment with historical approaches to Valéry, but a selective approach 
concerned only with ‘some works of art’ (PMI 7/HOI xiv) and con-
cerned to read those selected works in terms of the post-theological 
agenda he sets for poetry:
je pense que les événements littéraires opèrent pour la philosophie, mais que 
quand la philosophie les met en condition de son propre développement, elle 
opère des opérations malgré tout de sélection, de changement ou de trans-
formation qui à mon avis ne sont pas des falsiﬁ cations mais ce sont quand 
même des déplacements. (PLN 88–9)20
Inaesthetics ‘simpliﬁ es’ the reading of poetry in the same way that 
Badiou’s account of the history of philosophy simpliﬁ es the Platonic 
moment to what in Logiques des mondes he calls a ‘point’ of a 
world’s transcendental. A little clariﬁ cation: a ‘world’ can be an epoch, 
moment in artistic or cultural development, battle or culture.21 The 
transcendental of a world is its capacity to attribute different intensi-
ties of existence to what is within the world. The ‘point’ of a world’s 
transcendental is the appearing of the inﬁ nite totality of the world 
before the instance of a decision (LM 614–15/LW 591). A point ﬁ lters 
the nuances of a world’s transcendental, producing a binary choice. 
In a similar way, an inaesthetic reading of poetry does not try to give 
a global account of a poem or an œuvre but to discern, isolate and 
if necessary force an interpretation of those moments which ﬁ gure 
the Badiouian truth, or Idea. It is an ‘engaged’ approach to art, an 
66 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
approach that asks always after its effects for thought and whether it 
‘conquers its own atheism’.
This is what Jean-Jacques Lecercle calls a ‘strong reading’, an ‘asser-
tive and critical’ mode of engaging with a text22 deﬁ ned as ‘a construc-
tion whereby a philosopher constructs himself by constructing his 
Other’,23 and a reading he recognises entails a certain violence24 in 
reading for the content of the text while showing no interest in signiﬁ -
ers25 and resulting in a provocative intervention, not an interpretation.26 
That in addition Badiou’s way of reading includes ‘translation (of the 
text into the language of the theory) and modeling (of the theory by 
the text) which is a form of intervention (the text reads the theory that 
reads it)’27 does little to redress the balance of power between Badiou’s 
thought and the texts which it subjects to its strong reading, not least as 
a result of the very carefully chosen corpus of works with which Badiou 
engages, what Lecercle calls his ‘happy few’.28 Similarly unconvincing is 
the notion that the texts Badiou reads, texts that of course antedate his 
readings, have plagiarised him ‘in anticipation’.29 In a telling metaphor, 
Badiou frames philosophy as the procuress of the true:
La philosophie a dès lors comme rapport à l’art, comme à toute procédure de 
vérité, de le montrer comme tel. La philosophie est en effet l’entremetteuse 
des rencontres avec les vérités, elle est la maquerelle du vrai. Et de même que 
la beauté doit être dans la femme rencontrée, mais n’est nullement requise de 
la maquerelle, de même les vérités sont artistiques, scientiﬁ ques, amoureuses 
ou politiques, et non pas philosophiques. (PMI 21)30
Philosophy, then, is the procuress of the true because it draws atten-
tion to artistic (or scientiﬁ c, or amorous or political) truths and does 
not bring forth any truths of its own. Furthermore, if philosophy is 
truth’s pimp, then art, as a truth condition, must be one of philosophy’s 
whores.
As Badiou’s ontology in the ﬁ rst Manifeste was dubbed a ‘Platonism 
of the multiple’, so in the Second Manifeste his logic is called a ‘materi-
alism of the Idea’ (2M 67), where an Idea is the mediation between the 
individual and the subject of a truth, that in terms of which a faithful 
subject incorporated into a truth process represents the world to itself, 
or that which orients the life of a human animal/individual according 
to the Truth (2M 119). A similar premium on the Idea, or on ‘truth’ as 
Badiou uses the term, is prominent in his approach to ﬁ lm. He recom-
mends passing through normative judgment (which says ‘this is good’) 
and through diacritic judgment (‘this is better’) to what he calls an 
axiomatic attitude, asking ‘what are the effects of this or that ﬁ lm for 
thought?’ (PMI 131/HOI 85). The axiomatic approach understands a 
ﬁ lm as that which exposes the passage of the Idea according to shot and 
 
The God of the Poets 
67
editing (PMI 133/HOI 86). Cut, framing, movement, colour, actors, 
sound and so on are to be considered only to the extent that they con-
tribute to the apprehension of an Idea in its impure presentation in the 
ﬁ lm (PMI 131/HOI 85). Given this rigorous focus on the ﬁ lm as vehicle 
of an Idea, it is perhaps not then surprising that Badiou identiﬁ es the 
main difﬁ culty of speaking axiomatically about ﬁ lm to speak of it as 
ﬁ lm (PMI 132/HOI 86), rather than as the impure presentation of an 
Idea. The focus on the Idea does ensure, however, that Badiou’s secu-
larising manifesto for art is prosecuted. Rather than a ﬁ nite, sacred art 
whose limit is open to an inﬁ nite horizon, Badiou’s inaesthetics strives 
in its selective and ‘displacing’ approach to art to think an art that 
ﬁ gures the Idea on the ground of multiplicity. What we have in the case 
of inaesthetics is a focus on art as a secularised rejection of the romantic 
paradigm and an evaluation of art as a function of the extent to which, 
and efﬁ ciency with which, it prosecutes this agenda.
2.1.2 Presence, Incarnation and Idea
The second front that Badiou opens in his attack on the irreducible 
religiosity of romanticism and post-Heideggerian poetic ontology is the 
collusion between a philosophy of ﬁ nitude and the theology of incarna-
tion. Just as Badiou identiﬁ es two types of poetry, the Romantic poetry 
of openness to the inﬁ nite to-come and the poetry of the Idea that con-
notes the void and produces truth, so also he discerns two opposed 
notions of incarnation, two ways of constructing the relation between 
the ﬁ nite and the inﬁ nite in relation to art and the body, one Romantic 
and one subtractive. The paradigmatically Romantic conception of 
art is as the descent of the inﬁ nite, the ideal, into the ﬁ nite body of the 
work (S 218/Cen 159), through the mediation of the sacriﬁ cial artist 
who, working by the ‘spirit’, imparts to the canvas forms that attest to 
the incarnation of the inﬁ nite (S 216/Cen 153–4). The price that must 
be paid for this incarnational paradigm, however, is a sort of gener-
alised Christianity (S 218/Cen 155). Badiou rejects this incarnational 
paradigm complicit with the sacred and the Romantic inﬁ nite; the great 
question of contemporary art is how not to be Romantic (15T).
Not being Romantic brings problems of its own, however, for in 
rejecting the romantic notion of incarnation a post-theological art also 
rejects the essence of artistic activity – namely the relation between the 
ﬁ nite and the inﬁ nite – and embarks on the destruction of art in its 
complete ‘disinﬁ nitisation’. To renounce the inﬁ nite altogether would 
be an ascetic approach, ﬁ guring the only possible inﬁ nity as a religious 
inﬁ nity and subsequently denying all inﬁ nity, and with it all art, to 
68 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 post-theological thought. Badiou’s approach is rather to move beyond 
the oscillation between a Romantic subjectivity that possesses the inﬁ nite 
within itself and the nihilistic sacriﬁ ce of the inﬁ nite that would liquidate 
the notion of art as thinking (S 218/Cen 155); this can only be done by 
seeking a non-Romantic way of relating the ﬁ nite to the inﬁ nite in art.
It is Hegel who is Badiou’s guide along the way, in his discussion 
of the ‘good’ and ‘bad’ inﬁ nite in the discussion on ‘Quantity’ in the 
Logic.31 The way in which Badiou appropriates Hegel’s thought on 
the inﬁ nite is predicated on a re-deﬁ nition of the essence of the ﬁ nite. 
In Hegelian terms, the ﬁ nite is what exceeds itself in itself, or what, in 
going beyond itself to the Other, remains in the element of the Same, 
where there is no alteration of itself, merely an iteration. The essence of 
the ﬁ nite, in other words, is not that it is limited or circumscribed, but 
that it is a repetition (S 222–3/Cen 157). With this understanding of the 
ﬁ nite in place, Badiou notes that Hegel’s ‘bad inﬁ nity’ (das schlechte 
Unendliche) is the interminable repetitive series, for example the unend-
ing succession of natural numbers, or in Schelling’s more colourful 
illustration, the English national debt, where one loan is repaid by an 
other ad inﬁ nitum.32 It is a sterile repetition that never escapes the ﬁ nite.
Hegel’s innovation is to discern an inﬁ nite within this ﬁ nite sterile 
repetition itself. Considered in terms of its result, this endless repeti-
tion of adding one can be nothing other than a ﬁ nite ‘bad inﬁ nite’, but 
the action of adding one, considered apart from the repetition of its 
result, is actually inﬁ nite, a Hegelian ‘good inﬁ nite’. The ﬁ nite (qua 
‘bad inﬁ nite’) and the ‘good inﬁ nite’ are not opposed, rather, the 
good inﬁ nite is to be found within the bad inﬁ nite; the good inﬁ nite is 
immanent to the movement of the repetitive bad inﬁ nite, and the actual 
inﬁ nite is the quality of ﬁ nite quantity (S 223/Cen 157): the act of self-
exceeding is taken up in itself, exceeding the quantitative sphere to 
become qualitative, a pure quality of the ﬁ nite itself (S 221/Cen 157). In 
L’Etre et l’événement Badiou expresses this relation in different terms: 
in the Hegelian concept of number, the inﬁ nite is the truth of the pure 
 presence of the ﬁ nite (see EE 181–90/BE 165).
Badiou uses this understanding of the ﬁ nite and the inﬁ nite to shape 
his account of contemporary art in a way that breaks both with the 
paradigm of incarnation and with its nihilistic sacriﬁ ce. A ‘good inﬁ -
nite’ can be drawn from the ﬁ nitude of the work of art if it is considered 
through the optic of the act of production, the very emphasis, notes 
Badiou, of many contemporary and ephemeral installations that cri-
tique the ﬁ nitude, immobility and commercial commodiﬁ cation of the 
space of the canvas (S 214/Cen 152). The ﬁ nite work of art itself, taken 
as an act and not a product, is the ‘good inﬁ nite’ of which art is capable.
 
The God of the Poets 
69
In contrast to the paradigm of incarnation (as spirit-infused materi-
ality), the inﬁ nite here is no longer housed in ﬁ nite materiality, rather 
it passes through the work. The work is numbed or paralysed (transi) 
by being, an immanent overﬂ owing of its own ﬁ nitude and not merely 
an abstract virtuality into which the Ideal can descend (S 219/Cen 
155). The way to be rid of romanticism then is through a ‘materialist 
formalisation’ of the work of art, where the inﬁ nite does not descend 
from heaven but proceeds directly from the ﬁ nite (S 221–2/Cen 156). 
The most radical instantiation of this vision are works as ‘happenings’ 
which exist only as long as they are being made, or improvisation, 
which frustrates the solidiﬁ cation of form (S 220/Cen 156). Given this 
new understanding, this new artistic articulation of the ﬁ nite and the 
inﬁ nite takes a path between the Romanticism of incarnation and the 
nihilism of an art which does not think (S 218–19/Cen 155).
So ideally, Badiou argues, the work of art in the twentieth century is 
in fact nothing other than the visibility of this inﬁ nity as an act, for this 
is the way in which it overcomes the Romantic pathos of the incarna-
tional descent of the inﬁ nite into the ﬁ nite body of the work (S 223/Cen 
155). The ‘work’ is no longer a work, much less a sacred object. A non-
religious art – a post-theological art after the death of God – is an art 
where the inﬁ nite comes from nothing other than an empty repetition.
There is one further way in which the relation of the ﬁ nite to the 
inﬁ nite in materialist art differs from the incarnational paradigm. The 
inﬁ nite is not itself contained within the ﬁ nite; the work of art is not a 
truth per se but the local operation of an eternal truth, a ﬁ nite fragment 
of a truth which does not exist outside its operations:
on doit pouvoir penser comment une vérité vient à l’existence en tant que 
corps dans un monde déterminé. Comment, en somme, une vérité apparaît. 
[. . .] Je suis un platonicien sophistiqué, et non un platonicien vulgaire. Je ne 
soutiens pas que les vérités préexistent à leur devenir mondain dans un « lieu 
intelligible » séparé, et que leur naissance n’est qu’une descente du Ciel vers 
la Terre. (2M 35)33
If truths do not come from an ‘intelligible place’, then where do 
they come from? The answer is: right here. In the Court Traité Badiou 
stresses the importance, after the death of the gods of religions, meta-
physics and the poets, of understanding that ‘tout est ici, toujours ici 
[. . .] Ici est le lieu du devenir des vérités. Ici nous sommes inﬁ nis’ (CT 
23),34 and the whole treatise is to be conceived ‘comme une méditation, 
dans l’éclaircie de la mort de Dieu, de ce qu’il faut penser sous ce mot: 
« ici »’ (CT 24).35
Badiou’s ‘sophisticated Platonism’ translates the problem of incarna-
tion into the language of appearing and compatibility, for the eternity 
70 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
of truths must be compatible with the singularity of their appearing as 
bodies (2M 36). Badiou’s thought demands nothing less than a rational 
account of the appearance of eternity within time, a post-theological 
integration that adopts Descartes’s theory of the creation of eternal 
truths, but without the equation of eternity with God (2M 144). It is 
in his determination to hold eternal truth together with uncompro-
mising materialism that Badiou is moving beyond both imitative and 
residual atheisms to a post-theological integration. However, there is 
an equivocation on ‘eternity’ between Descartes and Badiou: Badiou’s 
‘eternity’ might better be rendered ‘trans-temporality’, for a truth can 
operate at different moments in history without having to reside in an 
otherworldly world of Ideas. Badiou is using the term to refer to that 
quality of truths by which they can be reactivated in different worlds 
very (geographically, temporally, culturally) removed from the world 
in which they were ﬁ rst instantiated (2M 144). So the emancipatory 
truth of Spartacus’ slave revolt is resurrected in Haïti with Toussaint-
Louverture as the ‘black Spartacus’ (LM 73/LW 64). For Descartes, 
however, eternal truths have been established by God, cannot exist 
without him, and are just as dependent on him as any of his creatures 
are.36 The difference between the ‘eternity’ of truths operating trans-
temporally and the ‘eternity’ of truths dependent on an eternal God 
is fundamental; Badiou cannot remove God and maintain the same 
understanding of eternity.
Turning now to incarnation in relation to the subject, once more 
we ﬁ nd that Badiou seeks to retain a notion of the inﬁ nite within the 
context of a rigorous materialism. A romantic, ﬁ nite subject is a ‘dis-
guised form of the preservation of God, whatever name we use for 
him’,37 and once more, as in the case of art, a simple rejection of the 
paradigm of incarnation and its preservation of God will lead only to 
the destruction of the subject in its reduction to the animal, an ascetic 
path that Badiou determines not to take. The paradigm of the subject 
which Badiou elaborates rejects humanity merely as ‘given’ in favour of 
embracing possible changes in human life, to the very level of its animal 
substructure, made possible by twenty-ﬁ rst century science. It is the pro-
gramme of man without God (S 238–9/Cen 169). Far from an ascetic 
acquiescence to a ﬁ nite human condition with death as its horizon, the 
death of God leads to an inﬁ nite afﬁ rmation of human possibility, and 
death itself is redeﬁ ned in Logiques des mondes as the passing of some-
thing that appears in a world from a positive value of existence to the 
minimal value, to inexistence (LM 612/LW 601), where inexistence is 
the ‘null’ value of being-there, the least possible intensity of existence in 
a world (LM 610/LW 587). Badiou’s is an anthropology of truths, not 
 
The God of the Poets 
71
of the physical body, and a body itself is deﬁ ned as a multiple-being that 
makes the event appear in a world (LM 606/LW 580–1), a deﬁ nition 
similar to Badiou’ s understanding of art as an impure presentation of 
the Idea. A body is ‘ce type très singulier d’objet apte à servir de support 
au formalisme subjectif, et donc à constituer, dans un monde, l’agent 
d’une vérité possible’ (LM 473),38 or in other words the human species 
of animal can serve as the material for truths (ASR 234).
The notion of the work of art as a fragment of an inﬁ nite truth, 
though not that truth itself, ﬁ nds an echo in Badiou’s understanding of 
the subject, in which the subject is subordinated to the production of 
truth. Indeed, Badiou afﬁ rms that the ‘real content of humanity’ is the 
creation of truths (OTP), and the subject, like the artwork, is the local 
operation of the inﬁ nity of a truth. Badiou’s anthropology of truths 
leads to an understanding of human life as having a dual potential: on 
the one hand mere biological life and on the other hand ‘true life’ (2M 
214) or ‘a life worthy of this name’ (2M 21), where true life is a life 
under the sign of the Idea (2M 137). Whereas the ‘imperative of the 
world’ says merely ‘live only for your satisfaction, and so live without 
an Idea’ (2M 21), philosophy declares that to live is to act such that 
there is no longer any distinction between life and Idea, an indiscern-
ability that Badiou calls ‘ideation’ (2M 20). So the ‘human animal’ lives 
without any idea, and is little different from any other animal, apart 
from in its ability to become the subject of a truth:
l’animal humain doit être logé à la même enseigne que ses compagnons 
biologiques. Ce massacreur systématique poursuit dans les fourmilières 
géantes qu’il a édiﬁ ées des intérêts de suivre et de satisfaction ni plus ni 
moins estimables que ceux des taupes eu des cicindèles. (E 80–1)39
It is only through incorporation into a truth that the human animal can 
escape this miserable existence.40
Badiou seeks to develop a post-theological integration by afﬁ rming 
that this body-subject is an immortal subject. To live ‘as an Immortal’ 
(vivre « en Immortel »), as the Ancients desired, is within everyone’s 
grasp (2M 20). This is an immortality that has no need of God or the 
divine, for it is here and now that we live as immortals (LM 536/LW 
513), or receive the grace to be immortal (LM 98/LW 105). Badiou 
explains his proposition thus: in so far as the subject is only a form, in 
the Platonic sense, so far is it immortal (LM 57/LW 49). In other words, 
the subject is incorporated into an eternal truth and partakes, qua 
subject, of the eternity of that truth. A truth is the means by which we – 
the human race – can become engaged in a trans-speciﬁ c procedure, and 
it is this trans-speciﬁ city that grants us the prospect of immortality (LM 
72 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
80/LW 71). To this extent, a truth is an experience of the inhuman, of 
the excess of the inhuman in human beings (LM 533/LW 511), and an 
experience analogous to escaping from the shadows of Plato’s cave (E 
81/Eth 59). Immortality is not a denial of biological death, but a prize 
won in its teeth: ‘Qu’à la ﬁ n nous mourrions tous et qu’il n’y ait que 
poussière ne change rien à l’identité de l’Homme comme immortel, 
dans l’instant où il afﬁ rme ce qu’il est au rebours du vouloir-être-un-
animal auquel la circonstance l’expose’ (E 28)41
Though every human being is capable of being immortal in this way, 
it is also true that not all human beings are immortal, and one must 
wonder in passing whether, on Badiou’s understanding, some are more 
capable of it, for whatever reason, than others. Can those with a mental 
illness, for example, be immortal, or can they only be human animals? 
It is unclear from Badiou’s notion of immortality what the answer to 
this question would be, given that the capacity for truth is ‘the singu-
larly human’ and humanity is deﬁ ned in terms of an ‘ability’ (PoP 128). 
Furthermore, Badiou’s account of immortality as becoming engaged in 
a trans-speciﬁ c procedure once more redeﬁ nes the term, speaking about 
something radically different from the term’s theological or religious 
usage. Badiou’s approach to post-theological integration reveals itself 
as an asceticism: to ‘be an immortal’ means not not to live for ever 
but the rather more limited, residual horizon of being engaged in a 
 trans-speciﬁ c procedure.
In his thinking of both art and the body, Badiou stakes out the great 
antagonism between Romantic philosophies of ﬁ nitude and his own 
post-theological philosophy of the inﬁ nite. On the one hand there is an 
ethical pathos of ﬁ nitude that understands its most extreme gesture as 
death, introduces a temporalised (bad) inﬁ nite, leaves itself wide open 
to the religiosity of the ‘open’ and the ‘promise’, and thinks incarnation 
in terms of a hypostatic union. On the other hand there is an ontology 
of inconsistent multiplicity that wields an ahistorical, secularised, dis-
persed inﬁ nite and seeks to think the relation of the ﬁ nite and the inﬁ -
nite in terms of a body-subject of immanent difference (see C 176/Con 
110–11). In this way, Badiou seeks not only to have consummated the 
death of God but also to have recast the notions of truth, inﬁ nity and 
immortality in an post-theological mould, but it is a mould that cannot 
escape the charge of asceticism.
2 . 2  THE PR ESENC E OF  THE  DE A TH  O F GO D
The twin motifs that characterise the Romantic God of the poets for 
Badiou are the open inﬁ nite and incarnation. Nancean thought also 
 
The God of the Poets 
73
rejects these two motifs. In conversation with Jacques Derrida, Nancy 
confesses to ﬁ nding the ‘Open’ a rather troubling word (un mot vrai-
ment embêtant), insisting that he is not in the least at ease with the 
‘Heideggerian Hölderlinism’ of the Open and its inﬁ nity (RSAV 191). 
As for the notion of incarnation as the descent of the inﬁ nite into the 
ﬁ nite, Nancy argues, very much like Badiou, that it is a penetration of 
the principle into a materiality that obscures and offends it (Cor 59/
Corp 67), leaving the body as a shadowy sign pointing to the hidden 
light within (Cor 60/Corp 67).
It is crucial to Nancy to rewrite these two notions in the image of his 
own deconstruction of Christianity, but the way that he moves away 
from these Romantic notions is very different from Badiou’s recourse 
to the Idea. The Open and incarnation are reworked by Nancy in a way 
that seeks to appropriate theological ideas for post-theological integra-
tion, not with the Idea but with spacing. What is at stake in this differ-
ence is whether there are two different ways of seeking to move beyond 
the atheistic impasse of parasitism and asceticism, or whether either or 
both of Nancy and Badiou fall back into parasitism or asceticism. In 
addition, their divergent responses to the Romantic God of the poets 
raises the question of whether their two approaches to post-theological 
thought are commensurable.
2.2.1 The Open, the Finite and the Art of Spacing
Nancy insists that, if we have to maintain that opening is always an 
opening onto the inﬁ nite (à l’inﬁ ni), it is not itself inﬁ nite. The Open 
presents itself always in terms of a contour, the example given by 
Nancy being the contour of the open mouth (RSAV 191), the space 
opened by the parting of two lips. Nancy rewrites the inﬁ nite and reced-
ing ‘open’ horizon as a ﬁ nite spacing, the spacing of being-with: ‘être-
avec est la même chose qu’être-l’ouvert [. . .] un avec qui n’est autre que 
l’effet d’un ouvert, et un ouvert qui n’est autre que l’effet d’un avec’ 
(PD 7–8).42
For Badiou the Open is irreducibly religious and must be overcome 
by the regime of multiplicity for which nothing is inaccessible, but for 
Nancy the Open remains, though re-imagined post-theologically as a 
resistance to the idolatrous ﬁ xity of closure. In relation to his decon-
struction of Christianity, Nancy develops and qualiﬁ es the notion of 
openness in terms of an un-closing (déclosion), usually translated ‘dis-
enclosure’, ‘l’ouverture d’un enclos, la levée d’une clôture’ (DDC 16).43 
The Open is both the horizon of determinate sense and also the tearing 
(la déchirure) of that horizon (DDC 226/DisDC 156). Open-as-spacing 
74 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
and Open-as-disenclosure are related but not identical ideas. Open-as-
spacing is a ﬁ nite opening of singulars that rejects both self-enclosure 
and the Romantic open inﬁ nite; Open-as-disenclosure is the double 
movement of exhaustion discussed in the preceding chapter, that 
similarly frustrates both self-identicality and inﬁ nite dissipation alike. 
Both are gestures of the Nancean ‘yet without’:44 the Nancean Open 
breaks with determinate sense yet without descending into nonsense, 
it breaks with the inﬁ nite horizon yet without closing in on itself in 
 self-identicality.
Our civilisation with its scientiﬁ c, juridical and moral rationality 
has led to a closing, a completing of reason and of the world that cuts 
athwart our impulse (pulsion) for contact with the ‘open’ (ADC 58). 
Where asceticism would renounce the impulse, Nancy re-inscribes it in 
the context of spacing; where parasitism would retain the open with the 
placeholder of Man in the place of God, Nancy forecloses the possibil-
ity of a substantialised open, recasting it as the mutual returns (renvois) 
of spacing:
cet ouvert, nous le sommes nous-mêmes, le langage l’est, le monde lui-même 
l’est. (Dire « l’ouvert » est déjà un abus de langage. Il faudrait éviter ce sub-
stantif et ce qui pourrait le tirer soit vers le concept, soit vers le nom. Ça 
s’ouvre précisément à distance de l’un et de l’autre.) (ADC 58)45
As both the possibility and the ‘tearing’ (or disruption) of determi-
nate sense, the Nancean Open breaks the enclosure and self-sufﬁ ciency 
of the divine, the presence and value of God, the meaning of salvation 
as escape from the world, and every heavenly value, along with heaven 
(le ciel) itself (DDC 120/DisDC 78). The Open therefore also breaks 
the self-sufﬁ ciency of any parasitic atheism that apes the divine, seeks 
to erect secular idols or reinscribe religious or theological notions in an 
atheistic frame:
Un monde ouvert est un monde sans mythes et sans idoles, un monde 
sans religion s’il faut entendre par ce mot l’observance de conduites et de 
représentations qui répondent à une demande de sens comme demande 
d’assurance, de destination, d’accomplissement. (ADC 58)46
The danger of parasitism is the idolatrous closure or ﬁ xing of sense, 
but spacing opens an inﬁ nite returning (renvoi) of sense that alone 
can foreclose a relapse into parasitism. Furthermore, it is because of 
the Open that Nancy rejects Heidegger’s last God, who comes after 
the ‘calculating determinations’ of monotheism, pantheism, atheism 
and theism, and who signals another (postmetaphysical) ‘beginning 
of immeasurable possibilities for our history’.47 This God, even as the 
name of the unnameable or the unnamed, can only for Nancy throw 
 
The God of the Poets 
75
a veil over the opening of the sense of the world (SM 93 n.2/SW 184 
n.54), a naming which, once more, opening-as-disenclosure disrupts. In 
Nancy’s thinking, the open is in direct opposition to the sacred, for the 
open as spacing knows no qualitative distinctions between the singulars 
that are spaced, and so forecloses the possibility of sacred space with its 
enclosures, reserves and places set apart (see DLD 50/ODP 150).
Just as Nancy re-ﬁ gures the open in terms of spacing, he also secu-
larises the inﬁ nite according to his deconstruction of Christianity. Since 
the publication of Une Pensée ﬁ nie in 1990, Nancy has written more 
extensively on the inﬁ nite, and the reading of Hegel’s good and bad 
inﬁ nity that he elaborates in Hegel: L’Inquiétude du négatif and else-
where marks an important development in his thinking. It is a reading 
that bears many similarities to Badiou’s, but there are also important 
differences, both in the way in which Nancy understands the relation 
between the ﬁ nite and the inﬁ nite, and in its implications for thinking 
after the death of God.
To understand what is at stake in Nancy’s reading of the good and 
bad inﬁ nite, we need to begin by noting that he refuses to think ﬁ nitude 
as the negation of the inﬁ nite, as it is for Badiou (see Poids 13/GT 78; 
NN 25/NuN 14).48 He also disavows this ﬁ nitude that seeks to portray 
itself as ‘positive’, afﬁ rming our all-too-human condition, comfort-
ing itself with the thought of a totalitarian completion of sense (Poids 
16–17/GT 81). This is a negative ﬁ nitude, Nancy insists in a Badiouian 
tone, a thought of incompletion, lack, relativity and weakness, and it 
throws the whole lexicon of ﬁ nitude into doubt. This ﬁ nite remains the 
name of the non-inﬁ nite, ‘c’est-à-dire du mal-ﬁ ni et du pas-ﬁ ni au sens 
de l’inaccompli, de l’avorté, du raté, de la signiﬁ cation manquée ou 
tronquée’ (Poids 17),49 a ﬁ nitude that always annuls itself because it is 
impossible to think privation at all without also thinking what there is 
privation of (SM 51/SW 29). In other words, Nancy like Badiou rejects 
the negative ﬁ nitude of ascetic atheism, the limit beyond which all 
manner of gods may roam free.
So Nancy very much agrees with Badiou that there is a ‘bad ﬁ nite’. 
But a Hegelian ‘good inﬁ nite’ is not what is called for, because if 
the ﬁ nite is rejected for being a negation, then the good inﬁ nite, the 
negation of the ﬁ nite negation, compounds rather than alleviates the 
problem of negativity. Post-theological thinking requires a ﬁ nitude 
that is inﬁ nite and complete, not an inﬁ nite which negates the ﬁ nite in 
incorporating the ﬁ nite into itself, nor an ascetic ﬁ nitude of privation, 
unable to complete itself. The Hegelian good inﬁ nite – the negation of 
the negation – is closed, ‘l’assomption et la résorption sans reste du 
sens en tant que rapport à soi’ (Poids 13);50 it is the negation of alterity, 
76 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
of the open, of the limit and of spacing (l’écart). The reason Nancy is 
resisting the Hegelian good inﬁ nite (and by extension Badiou’s use of 
this Hegelian motif) is that it leaves no remainder of sense, no openness 
to disrupt parasitic atheism’s idols.
Nancy proposes an alternative deﬁ nition of ﬁ nitude: as the à-struc-
ture of being (where à means ‘towards’ or ‘at’), as absolute ﬁ nitude, a 
ﬁ nitude that is not negated by the dialectising movement of the good 
inﬁ nite. This is the concept of ﬁ nitude, he insists, which we must make 
our own. This absolute ﬁ nitude is no longer to be understood as the 
negation of the inﬁ nite, nor is it negated by the inﬁ nite. It is a complet-
ing that is never complete, ‘qui ne ﬁ nit pas, qui n’achève pas, qui ne 
totalise pas et qui, en ce sens précis, n’« inﬁ nitise » pas’ (Poids 13).51 It 
keeps itself in the availability (disponibilité) of the singular, the non-
totalisable, the Open. It is ﬁ nitude understood as dynamic, as move-
ment towards, an opening that never becomes the Open.
That is why Nancy, instead of inﬁ ni actuel, prefers to use the term 
inﬁ ni en acte (meaning ‘in actuality’ as opposed to ‘in potential’, but 
also ‘in action’). The inﬁ nite ‘in action’ is explicitly contrasted with the 
present, closed inﬁ nity of the Romantics (AL 69/LA 48). The inﬁ nite en 
acte is Romantic only in the sense of a ‘romantisme en acte’, as opposed 
to the presented inﬁ nite of Romantic rhetoric: ‘c’est bien en n’étant pas 
là, jamais encore là, que le romantisme et le fragment sont, absolument. 
Work in progress énonce désormais l’inﬁ nie vérité de l’œuvre’ (AL 69).52
Nancy is reading Hegel in the following way: the Hegelian actual 
inﬁ nite cannot be given; in other words it is unpresentable, because it 
is that by which the given is given (HIN 38/HRN 25). In this Nancy is 
identifying the inﬁ nite ‘in action’ with his own sens. Whereas signiﬁ ca-
tions are determinate meanings, sens (or occasionally signiﬁ ance) is 
the ﬁ eld in which such meanings appear and by which they are always 
exceeded: ‘le « sens » est bien loin d’être identique à la « signiﬁ cation ». 
Car la signiﬁ cation, c’est le sens repéré – tandis que le sens ne réside 
peut-être que dans la venue d’une signiﬁ cation possible’ (OP 14).53
Sense is the movement, the giving of signiﬁ cations, in the same way 
that, in Hegel: L’Inquiétude du négatif, the inﬁ nite ‘in action’ is the 
giving of the ﬁ nite:
Un procès inﬁ ni ne va pas « à l’inﬁ ni », comme au terme toujours reporté 
d’une progression (Hegel nomme cela « mauvais inﬁ ni »): il est l’instabilité 
de toute détermination ﬁ nie, l’emportement de la présence et du donné dans 
le mouvement de la présentation et du don (HIN 18–19)54
What is inﬁ nite in the inﬁ nite process is the movement of giving, 
the excess of giving ‘upstream’ of the gift (ADC 23), the gesture of 
 
The God of the Poets 
77
 presentation; the movement of presenting and giving disrupt the ﬁ ni-
tude of presentation and gift. It is this disruption of the gift by giving 
that allows Nancy to avoid the ascetic atheism according to which the 
ﬁ nite is understood negatively as a limit bordering onto, but deprived 
of, the inﬁ nite. Rather, for Nancy ﬁ nitude/signiﬁ cation is of the inﬁ nite/
sense:
Il n’y aurait pas ce que nous nommons « ﬁ nitude » – mortalité, natalité, 
fortuité – si, du fait même que nous le nommons, nous ne laissions pas 
transparaître que nous existons et que le monde existe ouvert sur l’inﬁ ni, par 
l’inﬁ ni. C’est-à-dire que le fait même de l’existence nie qu’elle soit « ﬁ nie » au 
sens où elle manquerait d’une extension au-delà d’elle-même. (ADC 11)55
It is ﬁ nitude itself that is inﬁ nite; there is an absolute, but it is reso-
lutely located between birth and death, for it is the ﬁ nite itself which is 
absolute. The inﬁ nite is in the ﬁ nite, and the ﬁ nite opens onto the inﬁ nite 
without opening onto the theological. These arguments are summarised 
powerfully in Nancy’s post-face to Martin Crowley’s L’Homme sans:
La ﬁ nitude [. . .] devrait ne désigner que le « ﬁ ni » en tant que dans sa ﬁ n il 
atteint l’inﬁ nité. La ﬁ n devient ici non pas la marque d’une incomplétude 
essentielle, mais au contraire l’index de ceci que, aucune complétude n’étant 
possible, c’est au-delà de toute totalité achevée que le ﬁ ni vient exposer 
l’inﬁ nité que proprement il est. (PHS 181)56
This reading of the in/ﬁ nite also gives Nancy an understanding of the 
death of God. The death of God as it has slowly played itself out in the 
Western tradition is a movement from act to object, from esse to essen-
tia, from the inﬁ nite en acte to the closure of the presented inﬁ nite (SM 
55/SW 32). The divine is the opening of signiﬁ cation onto sense, the 
opening of ﬁ nite existence to the inﬁ nite en acte, and the death of God 
is the collapse of the inﬁ nite en acte into an actual inﬁ nite closed within 
thought, presented as thought. Nancy is not a philosopher of the ﬁ nite 
over the inﬁ nite; he is a philosopher of the inﬁ nite in the ﬁ nite.
When it comes to a post-theological understanding of art, the accent 
for Nancy is once more on a resistance to substantialising the move-
ment of the Open ﬁ gured as spacing. Art is understood in terms of a 
dynamic to and fro of signiﬁ cations that resists reiﬁ cation:
L’art, aujourd’hui, a la tâche de répondre à ce monde, ou de répondre de lui. 
Il ne s’agit pas de faire image de cette absence d’idée, car dans ce cas l’art 
reste pris sous le schème ontothéologique de l’image de l’invisible, de ce dieu 
qu’il fallait « imaginer inimaginable » selon Montaigne. (Mu 151)57
Though art is frequently given legitimation today only in ethical or 
political terms, for Nancy there can only be one legitimation of art: 
‘l’attestation et l’inscription sensibles du débordement du sens’ (DDC 
78 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
14/DisDC 176 n.3).58 Art is a witness to the Open, to the dis-enclosure 
of signiﬁ cations, not in its content but in its movement-towards the 
excess of sense.
If for Badiou the arts are all about the Idea, then for Nancy they 
are all about the sharing of sense: whereas myth sought to give voice 
to the origin, literature captures the innumerable voices of our sharing 
(ADC 62). What we share is the withdrawal of the origin, and literature 
speaks as the interruption of myth. Literature is not the transcription 
of data but the opening and communication of possible, indeterminate 
and uncloseable (inachevable) sense (ADC 20). Language is signiﬁ ca-
tion, but it is also salutation and address, where salutation (le salut) is 
the term Nancy uses in L’Adoration to signify the address of language 
that exceeds any information the language conveys, or we might say the 
giving of the language in excess of the language as gift: ‘nous savons, 
dès lors que nous parlons, que le langage s’adresse et nous adresse à ce 
dehors de la communication et de la signiﬁ cation homogènes’ (ADC 
10).59
Language addresses and calls the unnameable, the reverse side of 
all nomination. Once more, Nancy refuses to allow this reverse to be 
an opening for theology. It is not a hidden side of the world, a thing 
in itself or a being, but it is rather that there are things, that there is a 
world.
As for the relation between art and philosophy, Nancy understands 
it neither in terms of the Romanticism Badiou rejects, nor in terms of 
Badiou’s own premium on the Idea in inaesthetics, but once more in 
terms of opening-as-disenclosing and opening-as-spacing. In ‘Un Jour, 
les dieux se retirent . . .’, the ﬂ ight of the gods coincides with the end of 
the regime of myth, in which what would later become literature and 
philosophy knew no separation. The creation of literature and philoso-
phy as opposing genres with the ﬂ ight of the gods creates an opening 
marked by their difference, like the opening or spacing of two lips:
L’absence des dieux est la condition des deux, littérature et philosophie, 
l’entre-deux qui légitime l’une et l’autre, irréversiblement athéologiques. 
Mais à elles deux elles ont ofﬁ ce de prendre soin de l’entre-deux : d’en garder 
le corps ouvert, de lui laisser la chance de cette ouverture. (UJ 12)60
Though the ‘sacred mingling’ of literature and philosophy, or of narra-
tion and truth, is no longer, nevertheless there is something inextricable 
(indémêlable) between them. After the ﬂ ight of the gods, truth can no 
longer simply be narrated, and narrative can no longer simply be true. 
The truth of narration will always from now on be suspect, and truth 
for its part will lack articulation, becoming a vanishing point that 
 
The God of the Poets 
79
anamorphoses into a question mark: afﬁ rmative truth becomes ‘what is 
truth?’ (UJ 9/BST). The resultant relation between philosophy and lit-
erature is that they are both simultaneously mourning for, and desiring, 
the other, and yet rivalling with the other in framing and accomplish-
ing this mourning and this desire. We see here once more the motif of 
spacing: there is a spacing between literature and philosophy, a mutual 
inextricability and a return (renvoi) from one to the other.
The opening between literature and philosophy is not an inﬁ nite 
absence but a division that joins, a spacing of inextricable incommensu-
rables and a division as relation and as responsibility, the responsibility 
to guard the opening itself. Philosophy and literature share the dynamic 
of mourning and desire that also divides them. This insistence on both 
incommensurability and inextricability is in contrast to Badiouian 
inaesthetics and its privileging of the Idea in art, for it is the irreducible 
spacing between literature and philosophy, the opening that they both 
mutually – but neither individually – shape that is productive not of 
signiﬁ cation but of sense as passage, as the opening, the spacing, itself.
The predication of this division between literature and philosophy on 
the withdrawal of the gods should not fool us into thinking that Nancy 
is parasitising a religious register. Once more, he is careful to rethink 
the withdrawal of the gods in a way that goes beyond an ascetic atheism 
and seeks to occupy the territory previously guarded by theological 
concepts. From his earliest work, Nancy reinscribes the withdrawal of 
the gods within his paradigm of spacing.
Not content to abandon terms such as the Open, alterity and the 
divine because of their complicity with theology, Nancy seeks rather to 
re-situate them in a new, post-theological context. Neither renouncing 
nor perpetuating the Romantic Open and inﬁ nite, Nancy rethinks them 
in terms of spacing and action. This means, however, that there are no 
terms available with which to articulate this new understanding of ‘else-
where’ (ailleurs) not now as theological transcendence but as spacing. 
All the existing terms – ‘gods’ or ‘God’, ‘mystery’, ‘beyond’, ‘tao’, 
nirvana’, ‘intoxication’ ‘ecstasy’ ‘clairvoyance’ – are unusable (ADC 
13–14). This is part of a larger crisis of sense that post-theological inte-
gration must address, in which whole chains of signiﬁ cation (including 
‘man’, ‘history’, ‘nature’, ‘law’, ‘science’, ‘love’ and ‘art’) are becoming 
unusable. However, this is only experienced as a breakdown because 
we have grown to believe in a permanence of sense undergirding the 
expansion of Western reason, Nancy argues, whereas in fact sense is 
never unproblematically given, it is always on the brink of being lost, 
always an excess or a lack (ADC 14).
Nancy’s own response to this crisis is to give the old words new 
80 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
meanings, to occupy the territory of theology and enjoy its fruit, yet 
without adopting its principles. Nancy’s post-theological integration 
is a post-theological ‘yet without’: a rejection of imitative atheism’s 
idolatry, yet without resolving to residual atheism’s destitution. In 
L’Adoration Nancy wrestles with the notion of transcendence, seeking 
to rethink it in terms of the constitutive irreducibility of singular plural-
ity to monadic identity, without returning to God or otherworldliness: 
‘il ne désigne pas l’état d’un « être » plus ou moins « suprême », mais le 
mouvement par lequel un existant sort de la simple égalité à soi-même’ 
(ADC 30).61 Once more, the theological term is de-substantialised 
and re-thought as a movement immanent to singular plural spacing: 
an existent is not closed upon itself in splendid isolation but always 
already with others. Nevertheless, in the end Nancy admits that ‘tran-
scendence’, a term too heavily weighed down by centuries of being used 
in a static sense, must be renounced (ADC 31). Whether or not the term 
is retained, however, the impetus of Nancy’s ‘yet without’ is the same: 
neither ascetically to renounce theological categories nor parasitically 
to adopt them wholesale, but rather to seek to occupy them with a 
 radically post-theological thinking.
The most striking and daring example of this strategy of occupation 
is Nancy’s re-working of ‘God’. Nancy does use the language of God 
in relation to the Open, but it is to secularise the language of God, not 
to divinise that of the Open: ‘Seule l’ouverture est divine, mais le divin 
n’est rien de plus que l’ouverture’ (CM 93; cf DDC 74/DisDC 118).62 
In L’Adoration Nancy ventures an interpretation of the Qur’anic 
ayah that ‘God created men to be adored by them’ (ADC 31–2) that 
seeks to understand the verse wholly otherwise (tout autrement) than 
as an expression of divine narcissism. As with the deconstruction of 
Christianity, Nancy argues that God is only the ‘front man’ (le prête-
nom) for the inﬁ nite relation to the inﬁ nite within the ﬁ nite, a pure 
excess of the world and of existence beyond themselves and within 
themselves (ADC 31–2). ‘God’ no longer designates a being but a 
movement towards the incommensurable, a ‘salutation’ that plays on 
the double sense of salut as salvation and greeting (ADC 113): God as 
the movement-towards of the address. As for adoration (from ad-ora-
tio, speak towards), it is the possibility of an unheard-of address that 
is no longer religious (ADC 31). Adoration for Nancy is a gesture of 
occupation that follows the pattern of the ‘yet without’. We renounce 
the sacred, yet without abandoning ourselves to bad inﬁ nity:
Notre souffrance: nous savoir démunis d’horizons et, avec eux, de justiﬁ ca-
tions des malheurs (maladies, injustices) et de fondements pour la punition 
des crimes (pour la désignation des « méchants »). C’est là ce que veut dire 
 
The God of the Poets 
81
l’autodissolution de l’Occident dans le déploiement de sa logique in-ﬁ nie 
(dépourvue de ﬁ ns), qui forme le revers de l’inﬁ ni logique (la ﬁ n en soi à 
chaque instant présente [. . .] ). Contre cette souffrance de l’in-ﬁ ni (le capital, 
l’équivalence, mauvais inﬁ ni), il faut une différenciation, une évaluation 
autre (Nietzsche), et donc une « adoration ». (ADC 108)63
The renunciation of theistic horizons and ends leads to the dissolu-
tion of the West, but adoration breaks with the regime of determinate 
signiﬁ cation, from the inﬁ nite circulation of equivalence, providing 
the ‘yet without’ of Nancy’s approach to post-theological integration. 
Nevertheless, as we saw in our discussion of Le Toucher in the previ-
ous chapter, this gesture of moving beyond the ‘front man’ God to the 
inﬁ nite movement of which he provides one contingent instance risks 
being recuperated as a Christian hyperbole, a repetition of the move of 
seeking the truth behind the appearance, the heart behind the surface.
A similar strategy of seeking to occupy religious terms is in evidence 
in the earlier ‘Calcul du poète’, a reading of Hölderlin in which Nancy 
rewrites the withdrawal of the gods in a way that makes the withdrawal 
itself the ‘divine’. For Nancy, the presence of the gods in Hölderlin is 
the tangential touch of passing contact; this is ‘true presence’: neither 
pleroma nor postponement, but passage. The presence of the gods is 
this passage: ‘Le divin est le passage, et n’est que cela’ (DLD 75).64 It is 
not the gods which have withdrawn; it is the withdrawal which is the 
divine, but a resolutely post-theological divine, a divine which is here 
and now, which is the place of the coming and going of gods: ‘Le dieu 
n’est que le lieu, le lieu est le lieu du départ et du retour’ (DLD 76).65 It 
is this withdrawal that ‘makes sense’, not as an inﬁ nite openness but as 
the tangent of passage touching the materiality of the poem. In short, 
Nancy understands poetry as ‘calcul matériel du passage athée’ (DLD 
76).66
If we seek to compare this account with Badiou’s way of dealing 
with the god of the poets, we are confronted with two radically dif-
ferent ways of seeking to avoid the theology latent in the Open and in 
the inﬁ nite. Nancy’s inﬁ nite as giving and presentation bears a striking 
similarity to Badiou’s understanding of the actual inﬁ nite as process, 
but we must not let this mask a deep division in their approaches. 
Nancy is foreclosing parasitism with movement towards (à), disrupting 
the closure of the inﬁ nite by making sure it remains ‘work in progress’, 
whereas Badiou is trying to overcome asceticism by denying the Open 
that allows for the withdrawal of the gods beyond its horizon. The dif-
ference is not in what Nancy and Badiou are trying to achieve but what 
they consider to be the constraints on any post-theological integration. 
Both want to move towards such an integration, but whereas for Nancy 
82 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
imitative atheism with its Christmas projection must be resisted with 
the ‘yet without’ that forecloses any gesture of completion, for Badiou 
residual atheism will always be a threat as long as Romantic inacces-
sibility is not done away with by axiomatics. In other words, Badiou 
sees residual atheism in Nancy’s attempt to foreclose imitative atheism, 
and Nancy sees imitative atheism in Badiou’s attempt to resist residual 
atheism. The problem is that there is no way to arbitrate between the 
two positions: each has a legitimate critique of the other within its own 
terms. What is at stake between Nancy’s post-theological ‘yet without’ 
and Badiou’s post-theological Idea is not just a difference but a differ-
end within post-theological integration, and one to which we shall have 
occasion to return.
2.2.2 Presence, Incarnation and Spacing
Just as Nancy thinks openness and the inﬁ nite otherwise than according 
to the Romantic ontology that Badiou sets himself against and other-
wise than Badiou’s own art of the Idea, so also the Nancean thinking 
of incarnation is neither congruent with Badiou’s understanding of 
Romanticism nor with his notion of the human animal becoming a 
body-subject through being incorporated into a truth. In ‘La décon-
struction du christianisme’ Nancy identiﬁ es two prominent motifs of 
Christianity. The ﬁ rst, an interrogation of the origins of Christianity, 
was discussed in the previous chapter. The second element is incar-
nation. Of all the major Christian doctrines – creation, atonement, 
resurrection, judgment . . . – it is the incarnation that Nancy puts at 
the heart of Christology (DDC 219/DisDC 151), and at the heart of 
Western culture as a whole (DDC 125/DisDC 81). Nancy’s reworking 
of the motif of incarnation follows the paradigm of spacing in terms of 
which he also reﬁ gures the open and the inﬁ nite. This section will see 
how Nancy re-thinks incarnation as 1) a dis-enclosed paralysis and 2) 
as a corporeal technicity.
In ‘Dei paralysis progressiva’ (PF 353–64/BTP 48–57) Nancy talks of 
the spacing of bodies, the presentation of presentation, as the ‘nothing’ 
(rien) that Romanticism strove to present but which is unpresentable. 
This ‘nothing’ of spacing, the condition of possibility of all bodies in 
the world, this giving of the gift of signiﬁ cation, cannot be presented 
in a Romantic incarnation, but it can be exposed in a movement of 
‘yet without’. In this essay Nancy rewrites the death of God in terms of 
the ‘yet without’ of dis-enclosure in a way that rewrites the Romantic 
attempt to present the ‘nothing’. Nancy argues that Nietzsche dies in 
persona dei, as the successor to the dead God (PF 358/BTP 52), with 
 
The God of the Poets 
83
the mask and in the pose of God (PF 353–4/BTP 48). The paralysis 
that gradually takes over Nietzsche’s body ﬁ gures the death of God not 
as a destruction, but as a presentation (PF 353/BTP 48), a laying open 
of the body here and now in a lepidoptery without death: hoc est enim 
corpus meum, this is my body. As the paralysis progresses it ﬁ nally offers 
a death mask of eternity (PF 353/BTP 48). God presents himself as 
dead in persona, and rather than being the sign of an absence (as in the 
traditional paradigm of incarnation), this corporeal death-as-paralysis 
presents God with an absolute presence (PF 356/BTP 50).67 But this is no 
Romantic theophany; the death of Nietzsche does not present the abso-
lute presence of God, nor the absolute presence of God’s absence, but the 
absolute presence of the incarnation of the dead God (PF 356/BTP 50). 
God presents himself dead, ‘il s’incarne mort’ (PF 356).68 The death of 
God spells the end of this sort of presentation of death, the end of death 
in the horizon of its representation: tragic death or salviﬁ c death (AFI 
88/GOI 44). God present(ed) as dead is God present as nothing (rien), 
not the reiﬁ ed Nothing of Romanticism but an immobile suspension in 
the ‘nothing’ ‘qui ne peut même pas, en toute rigueur, être appelée « la 
mort », car elle n’a pas d’identité – mais elle emporte toute identité’ (PF 
356).69 Incarnation is rewritten as a suspension, not a presentation, of 
the event, a rejection of the Romantic presentation of the nothing.
This ﬁ rst way in which Nancy re-thinks incarnation after the death 
of God follows the pattern of dis-enclosure. The second is in terms of 
spacing, what Derrida calls a deconstruction of Christian ﬂ esh70 in the 
motifs of techne and corpus, brought together in Nancy’s techne du 
corps. The techne of bodies provides Nancy with an alternative to the 
traditional (Platonic) notion of incarnation that resolves neither to a 
re-statement of a Christian position nor to Badiou’s ‘fragment of the 
inﬁ nite’. Nancy’s starting point is that the death of God requires a re-
thinking of the body. ‘God is dead’ means – according to the schema 
of the ﬂ ight of the gods with which we are now familiar from Un jour 
. . . – that God no longer has a body, and it might very well be that with 
this body, all bodies have been lost, for according to the ﬂ esh/spirit 
dualism of the incarnational paradigm, ‘en vérité, le corps de Dieu était 
le corps de l’homme même’ (Cor 54).71 The new thinking of the body 
which this demands is a rejection of all philosophies of the ﬂ esh, where 
ﬂ esh is always 1) ‘nourished by sense’, with meanings ‘encrusted in its 
joints’ in Merleau-Ponty’s vivid phrase,72 and 2) ‘egological’, in other 
words reliant upon an irreducible Cartesian self.
Crucially, the heart of incarnation itself for Nancy is not the 
 distinction between ﬂ esh (sarx) and spirit (psyche), but rather their 
consubstantiality (homoousia). It is this identity or community of being 
84 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
and substance between Father and Son that is Christianity’s true inno-
vation, he argues, not that spirit entered matter but rather that the word 
became ﬂ esh73 (logos sarx egeneto) (ADC 78), and it is this identity that 
he seeks to rework in his own notion of corpus.
Badiou replaces incarnation, it will be recalled, with two distinct cat-
egories: the human animal and the subject of a truth. There is no such 
distinction for Nancy; corpus is the universal human condition. Corpus 
disrupts the limit between spirit and ﬂ esh:
Les corps n’ont lieu, ni dans le discours, ni dans la matière. Ils n’habitent ni 
« l’esprit », ni « le corps ». Ils ont lieu à la limite, en tant que la limite: limite 
– bord externe, fracture et intersection de l’étranger dans le continu du sens, 
dans le continu de la matière. Ouverture, discrétion. (Cor 18)74
This is a gesture with which we are now familiar. The body is an 
opening and a limit, not in the sense that it abuts a nec plus ultra 
beyond which spectres and gods can roam freely, but that it is a spacing, 
a circumscribed opening, between two incommensurables: discourse 
and matter. The dichotomy of matter and mind, like that of story and 
truth, is shown to be a posteriori, a dichotomous abstraction from 
a corpus that inhabits the opening of the two terms. This is also the 
point at which Nancy’s thought questions Badiou’s characterisation of 
‘democratic materialism’ in Logiques des mondes, namely that there are 
only bodies and languages (LM 12/LW 1). For Nancy there are neither 
bodies nor languages in the way that Badiou means. For Nancy there 
is the opening of ‘spirit’ and ‘body’ of corpus, leaving discourse and 
matter only as a posteriori abstractions. So Ian James is right to say that 
Nancy rethinks Christian incarnation ‘not as consubstantiality or hou-
moousia, but as a touch in separation of spirit and matter’,75 but only 
if we also understand this touch in separation not as the touch of two 
primordially separated elements, but as the touch of spacing, the touch 
of singular plurality. Corpus is not an animal struck by the lightening 
of truth and that retains a fragment of that truth to lift it above animal-
ity; it is always already the opening of an interval. This is ﬁ gured most 
vividly in the mouth, the site of a quasi permixtio between soul and 
body, of the incommensurable common extension between them (ES 
161). It is not the incarnation of the ideality of ‘sense’ but the end, in the 
opening of body to sense and sense to body, of an ideality which refers 
only to itself (Cor 24/Corp 23). In addition, incarnation is also rewrit-
ten in terms of opening as the spacing of ﬁ nite beings: ‘Incarnation: que 
l’inﬁ nité divine ait son effectivité dans le rapport des étants ﬁ nis. Que le 
sens soit donc par essence ﬁ ni : interrompu, suspendu sur la vérité vide 
aﬁ n d’éviter le remplissement étouffant d’une conclusion’ (ADC 108).76
 
The God of the Poets 
85
So as opposed to a notion of incarnation, previously the only way 
of thinking the relation of ‘spirit’ and ‘ﬂ esh’ in the West (Cor 77/Corp 
87), Nancy proposes to re-think incarnation in terms of spacing and 
sharing:
Les corps résistent, dures partes extra partes. [. . .] Les corps exigent encore, 
à nouveau, leur création. Non pas l’incarnation qui insufﬂ e la vie spirituelle 
du signe, mais la mise au monde et le partage des corps. Non plus des corps 
employés à faire du sens, mais du sens qui donne et qui partage des corps. 
(Cor 73)77
Nancean techne is not to be confused with Heideggerian technics, a way 
of revealing the world in the age of instrumentalised industrial mecha-
nisation.78 Techne for Nancy is understood as ‘art’, ‘craft’ or ‘creation’ 
in the broad sense that blurs the distinction between the natural and 
the artiﬁ cial, so the techne of the body is the medicinal, prosthetic and 
technological extensions of, modiﬁ cations to and replacements for 
parts of the body that blur limits of the body (Cor 78/Corp 89). The 
techne of the neighbour is the sharing or ‘compearing’ of bodies that is 
neither purely natural nor wholly artiﬁ cial (Cor 80/Corp 91). With the 
techne of the neighbour, the meaning of incarnation is no longer the 
descent of the idea into the ﬂ esh but rather an invitation to the sharing 
of sense: ‘c’est à nous, humains, mortels, sans dieux et sans nature, tech-
niciens engagés dans la production indéﬁ nie d’un monde « notre », qu’il 
incombe de faire sens’ (ADC 77).79 However, this partage (sharing/
dividing) simultaneously exposes Nancy to a danger of parasitism, as 
Derrida once more discerns in Le Toucher:80
Voici donc encore une fois mon hypothèse, je l’avance timidement et non 
sans inquiétude: il y a partage, au sens de partition ou de séparation, de 
nouveau départ, dans cette prise en compte de la techné, là où, dans le même 
geste, elle se porte au-delà du corps chrétien.81
In other words, Nancy’s techne may indeed be a sharing (partage) 
of bodies but it is also a partition (partage) between itself and the 
Christian body of incarnation, and this partition risks reinscribing 
Nancean techne, after all, back within the logic of the Christmas projec-
tion. As we saw in the case of the ‘deconstruction of Christianity’ itself, 
Nancy’s approach to escaping parasitism, while successful in its explicit 
aim, cannot escape re-inscribing the parasitism it seeks to escape.
The explicit aim in this case is to have sharing as the rethinking 
of incarnation after the death of God in that the sharing of bodies 
produces no signiﬁ cation and yet opens up a bodily sens. In the para-
digm of incarnation, bodies were signs that signiﬁ ed the intelligible, 
sepulchres of the soul that signiﬁ ed the light inside. But with Nancean 
86 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
spacing bodies once more signify, not in the production of signiﬁ ca-
tions, but in the opening of sense. Sharing and spacing mean that the 
body for Nancy is open and inﬁ nite, the open of closure itself (as we 
have seen in the dis-enclosure of Christianity), and the inﬁ nite of the 
ﬁ nite itself (as we have seen in the inﬁ nite en acte) (Cor 107/Corp 122).
C ONC LU S I O N
As we draw to the end of this discussion of the Open, the inﬁ nite and 
incarnation in Nancy and Badiou, we ﬁ nd them both closer and further 
apart than ever. The closeness can be most clearly seen in the articula-
tion of the ﬁ nite and the inﬁ nite in their reading of Hegel, a point recog-
nised by Badiou in ‘L’Offrande réservée’: ‘Je sais ce que Jean-Luc Nancy 
pense, et qu’il m’a souvent dit: que ce que j’appelle l’inﬁ ni est en tout 
cas au point même de la pensée qu’il nomme « ﬁ nitude »’ (OR 20).82 
The way in which Nancy ﬁ nds an inﬁ nite en acte in the ﬁ nite itself and 
the way in which Badiou locates the inﬁ nite of art in its ﬁ nite process do 
indeed allow us to say that, in this sense, ﬁ nitude for Nancy stands ‘at 
the same point’ as the inﬁ nite for Badiou. We also, however, see Badiou 
and Nancy further apart than ever, inhabiting two sites of thought that 
can be brought into dialogue only with difﬁ culty, if at all. For Badiou 
there is a primary dichotomy (bodies and truths, material art and idea) 
that needs to be bridged (by incorporating a fragment of truth in a 
body). For Nancy the dichotomy (matter and spirit, story and truth) 
is secondary, and the spacing of the two terms is what is  important, in 
their inextricability and incommensurability.
Badiou’s post-theological integration has two moves, that we could 
summarise with the shorthand ‘being’ and ‘truth’. The existential 
axioms – of inﬁ nity and the empty set – do away with all ﬁ nite limits 
in the inﬁ nite multiples of the equation of mathematics and ontology. 
This in itself, however, would amount to a residual atheism denied any 
notion of truth as Badiou conceives it. The second move in Badiou’s 
atheism is the incorporation of the body-subject into the actual inﬁ nite 
of the Idea, a move that brings the notion of eternal (or at least trans-
temporal) truth back within atheism’s purview. Nancy’s post-theo-
logical integration also has two moves, but there the similarities end. 
Nancy’s two moves are the ‘yet without’ of dis-enclosure – the break 
with determinate sense yet without being delivered over to nonsense, 
the opening of given signiﬁ cations onto the giving of sense, irreduc-
ible to what is given – and spacing, the spacing that is not an opening 
onto the inﬁ nite but the sharing and division of what was previously 
 undivided (story and truth, body and soul).
 
The God of the Poets 
87
Badiou’s atheism must effect a deﬁ nite break with the ﬁ nite for the 
actual inﬁ nity of eternal truth, or else it is always possible that thinking 
will remain ﬁ nite and therefore Romantic, an analysis which identiﬁ es 
Nancy’s sens as unable to close the door on residual atheism. Nancy’s 
post-theological ‘yet without’ seeks to avoid the ‘Christmas projection’ 
of a deﬁ nite break, on pain of a gesture that imitates a quintessentially 
theological move; Badiou’s account of the necessity of such breaks both 
in the birth of philosophy and in his account of truths is identiﬁ ed as 
a gesture that cannot escape imitative atheism. Whereas for Nancy the 
danger of the Christmas projection is that it violently reduces the com-
plexity of becoming and ignores detail, Badiou makes a virtue of such 
simplifying ‘points’, and impugns in ‘L’Offrande réservée’ the sort of 
thinking that ascetically refuses to incorporate the Idea in the present:
« Une pensée tout entière à venir! » Comme est irritant le style post-
heideggérien de l’annonce perpétuelle, de l’à-venir interminable, cette sorte 
de prophétisme laïcisée ne cesse de déclarer que nous ne sommes pas encore 
en état de penser ce qu’il y a à penser, ce pathos de l’avoir-à-répondre de 
l’être, ce Dieu qui fait défaut, cette attente face à l’abîme, cette posture 
du regard qui porte loin dans la brume et dit qu’on voit venir l’indistinct! 
Comme on a envie de dire : « Écoutez, si cette pensée est encore tout entière 
a venir, revenez nous voir quand au moins un morceau en sera venu! » (OR 
15–16)83
In other words, Nancy’s thinking renounces the possibility of decisive 
action in the present. For Nancy in contrast, the danger of declaring 
that the Idea has arrived, for example that religion is ﬁ nished, is that it 
constitutes the victory of the dialectical theology of the death of God, a 
return to imitative atheism.
We have come as far as the analysis to this point will allow us. Both 
Nancy and Badiou have grave concerns about the account of post-
theological thought proposed by the other, and it is not clear how we 
might begin to arbitrate between their two accounts. In order to explore 
further to what extent these approaches to post-theological thinking 
seek to avoid parasitism and asceticism, we now need to sharpen our 
focus and examine more closely what we might call the characteristic 
moment of each one: the axiom for Badiou and the double movement 
of dis-enclosure for Nancy.
NOTES
 1. Oscar Wilde, ‘Epistola: In Carcere et Vinculis’, in The Complete Works 
of Oscar Wilde, general eds Russell Jackson and Ian Small, vol. 2, ed. Ian 
Small (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), p. 98.
88 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 2. ‘like the trace of an afterlife in the movement that entrusts the overcom-
ing of the religion-God and the metaphysics-God to the poem-God’ (BOE 
29).
 3. The line is taken from stanza 8 of Brot und Wein, quoted from Hölderlin, 
Selected Poems and Fragments, p. 157.
 4. This mediating role of poetry emerges in Hegel’s later work, most acutely 
perhaps in the Systemprogramm: ‘mythology must become philosophical, 
and the people reasonable, and philosophy must become mythological in 
order to make philosophers sensuous. . . . A higher spirit sent from heaven 
must found this new religion among us’, quoted from Jochen Schulte-Sasse 
and Haynes Horne (eds), Theory as Practice: A Critical Anthology of 
Early German Romantic Writings (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1997), p. 73.
 5. See Martin Heidegger, Identity and Difference, trans. Joan Stambaugh 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002), p. 72; Caputo, ‘Atheism, a/
theology, and the postmodern condition’, p. 272.
 6. See Marchant, Post-Foundational Political Thought, pp. 114–15.
 7. ‘So long as the ﬁ nite remains the ultimate determination of being-there, 
God remains’ (Con 99).
 8.
That our exposure to being is essentially ﬁ nite and that we must forever 
return to our mortal-being, is that fact from which we endure the 
living God’s death only to uphold, under multiple forms, the indistinct 
promise of a sense that has withdrawn, but whose ‘come-back’ has not 
been debarred. (BOE 29; translation altered)
 9. In the Petit Manuel Badiou moves through speaking of poetry and theatre, 
Beckettian prose, cinema, and dance. The thinking that he elaborates 
largely in the book’s early studies of poetry is selectively broadened, 
mutatis mutandis, to cover a number of other arts.
10. ‘The poem only has to be devoted to the enchantment of what the world 
is capable of – as it is. It has only to discern the inﬁ nite “surrection” of 
invisible possibilities up to the impossible itself’ (BOE 29).
11. ‘this minimal consistency (a part, a conceptless immanence), which certi-
ﬁ es in the situation the inconsistency from which its being is made’ (Man 
107).
12. ‘Every poem seeks to uncover and to carry to the formal limits of language 
the latent void of sensible referents’ (NuN 161).
13.
By ‘inaesthetics’ I understand a relation of philosophy to art that, 
maintaining that art itself is a producer of truths, makes no claim to 
turn art into an object for philosophy. Against aesthetic speculation, 
inaesthetics describes the strictly intraphilosophical effects produced by 
the independent existence of some works of art. (HOI xiv)
 
The God of the Poets 
89
14.
Today the poem’s imperative is to conquer its own atheism. From 
within, it destroys the powers of natural language, nostalgic phraseol-
ogy, posturing of the promise, or prophetic destination to the Open. 
[. . .] it is poetry itself that will conduct, and has been conducting at 
least since the beginning of the last century, the task of putting its own 
God to death. (BOE 29–30; translation altered) 
15. ‘far from maintaining the appeal to the Open in distress, the power 
of the poem attempts instead to subtract thought from any returning 
of the gods and ascertain it in the steadfastness of the multiple’ (BOE
35).
16. An ‘Idea’ for Badiou is that which proposes the horizon of a new  possibility 
in relation to a determinate question (see PE 24).
17. Paul Valéry, Œuvres, ed. Jean Hytier, 2 vols (Paris, Gallimard: 1957–60), 
vol. I, p. 91. ‘ – No, says the tree. It says: No! By the sparking of its 
proud head, which the storm universally treats as it does a blade of grass’ 
(Hartley, ed., The Penguin Book of French Verse: 4, p. 50).
18. ‘Is it not this connection that Valéry is thinking of when the plane tree 
responds furiously to the one who wishes to reduce it to its particular 
appearance?’ (author’s translation).
19. ‘Let us hear, in “storm” the evental action, and in the “magniﬁ cent 
head” the incorporation of the plane tree into the universal conse-
quences of the storm, into the coming to the world of a truth’ (author’s 
 translation).
20. ‘I think that literary events are indeed operative for philosophy, but when 
philosophy sets them as conditions for its own development, it none the 
less proceeds through operations of selection, change or transformation. 
These operations are not exactly falsiﬁ cations but they are, after all, 
 displacements’ (CCBT 257).
21. See Meillassoux’s lucid description of Badiouian worlds in HE.
22. Lecercle, Badiou and Deleuze Read Literature, p. 53.
23. Lecercle, Badiou and Deleuze Read Literature, p. 30.
24. Lecercle, Badiou and Deleuze Read Literature, p. 44.
25. Lecercle, Badiou and Deleuze Read Literature, p. 64.
26. Lecercle, Badiou and Deleuze Read Literature, pp. 69–70.
27. Lecercle, Badiou and Deleuze Read Literature, p. 103.
28. Lecercle, Badiou and Deleuze Read Literature, p. 198.
29. Lecercle, Badiou and Deleuze Read Literature, p. 200.
30.
Philosophy’s relation to art, like its relation to every other truth proce-
dure, comes down to showing it as it is. Philosophy is the go-between 
in our encounters with truths, the procuress of truth. And just as beauty 
is to be found in the woman encountered, but is in no way required 
90 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
of the procuress, so it is that truths are artistic, scientiﬁ c, amorous, or 
 political, and not philosophical. (HOI 9–10)
31. Hegel, Hegel’s Logic, pp. 145–57.
32. See F. W. J. Schelling, ‘Fernere Darstellungen aus dem System der 
Philosophie’, in Sämmtliche Werke (Stuttgart: J. G. Cotta, 1859), vol. 4, 
p. 344.
33.
we must be able to think how a truth comes to exist as a body in a par-
ticular world. How, in short, a truth appears. [. . .] I am a sophisticated 
Platonist, and not a vulgar Platonist. I do not hold that truths pre-exist 
their worldly becoming in an ‘intelligible place’ apart, and that their 
birth is only a descent from Heaven to the Earth. (Author’s translation)
34. ‘everything is here, always here [. . .] Here is the place where truths come 
to be. Here we are inﬁ nite’ (BOE 31).
35. ‘as in a meditation, in the clearing of God’s death, of what must be 
thought in the word: “here” ’ (BOE 32).
36. See Descartes, letter to Mersenne, 15 April 1630, in Œuvres de Descartes, 
vol. 1, p. 145; The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. 3, The 
Correspondence, p. 23.
37. Alain Badiou and N. Poirier, ‘Entretien avec Alain Badiou’, in Le 
Philosophoire vol. 9 (1999), p. 2, quoted in Peter Hallward, Badiou: A 
Subject to Truth, p. 6.
38. ‘this very singular type of object suited to serve as a support or a subjective 
formalism, and therefore to constitute, in a world, the agent of a possible 
truth’ (LW 451).
39. ‘the human animal must be lumped in the same category as its biologi-
cal companions. This systematic killer pursues, in the giant ant hills he 
 constructs, interests of survival and satisfaction neither more nor less 
 estimable than those of moles or tiger beetles’ (Eth 58–9).
40. The reader will note that we are not attempting to provide here an exhaus-
tive account of Badiouian truth and the subject, but our discussion is 
limited to dealing strictly only with those notions that have a direct bearing 
on our argument in relation to the God of the poets. Other crucial notions 
in the Badiouian account of truths – notably ﬁ delity, the  truth-event and 
the truth-process – are dealt with in subsequent chapters.
41.
The fact that in the end we all die, that only dust remains, in no way 
alters Man’s identity as immortal at the instant in which he afﬁ rms 
himself as someone who runs counter to the temptation of wanting-to-
be-an-animal to which circumstances may expose him. (Eth 12)
42. ‘being-with is the same thing as being-the-open [. . .] a with that is nothing 
other than the effect of an open, and an open that is nothing other than the 
effect of a with’ (author’s translation).
 
The God of the Poets 
91
43. ‘the opening of an enclosure, the raising of a barrier’ (DisDC 6).
44. For an explantion of the motif of the ‘yet without’ in Nancy’s thought, see 
Watkin, Phenomenology or Deconstruction?, p. 142.
45.
this open, we ourselves are it, language is it, the world itself is it. (To 
pronounce ‘the open’ is already to abuse language. We should avoid 
this substantive and whatever could drag it either in the direction of the 
concept or towards the noun. It opens, precisely, at a distance from one 
as from the other). (Author’s translation)
46.
An open world is a world without myths and without idols, a world 
without religion, if we must understand by this word the observance of 
behaviours and representations that respond to a demand of/for sense 
as a demand for assurance, for a destination, for fulﬁ lment. (Author’s 
translation)
47. Heidegger, Contributions to Philosophy, p. 289.
48. The analysis of Nancy and Badiou on actual inﬁ nity here builds on Ian 
James, ‘Incarnation and inﬁ nity’.
49. ‘that is, of the badly-ﬁ nished and the not-ﬁ nished in the sense of the 
incomplete, the aborted, the failed, the missed or truncated signiﬁ cation’ 
(GT 81).
50. ‘the appropriation and the total resorption of meaning as relation-to-itself’ 
(GT 78).
51. ‘that does not complete or totalize and, in this sense, does not “inﬁ nitize” ’ 
(GT 78).
52. ‘it is indeed in this not being there, this never yet being there, that roman-
ticism and the fragment are, absolutely. Work in progress henceforth 
becomes the inﬁ nite truth of the work’ (LA 48).
53. ‘ “sense” is far from being identical to “signiﬁ cation.” For signiﬁ cation 
is located meaning, while sense resides perhaps only in the coming of a 
 possible signiﬁ cation’ (GT 10; translation altered).
54.
An inﬁ nite process does not go on ‘to inﬁ nity,’ as if to the always post-
poned term of a progression (Hegel calls this ‘bad inﬁ nity’): it is the 
instability of every ﬁ nite determination, the bearing away of presence 
and of the given in the movement of presentation and the gift. (HRN 
12)
55.
There would not be what we call ‘ﬁ nitude’ – mortality, birth, 
 fortuitousness – if, by the very fact of naming it, we didn’t let it show 
through that we exist and that the world exists open onto the inﬁ nite, 
92 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
by the inﬁ nite. Which is to say that the very fact of existence denies that 
it is ‘ﬁ nite’ in the sense of lacking an extension beyond itself. (Author’s 
translation)
56.
Finitude [. . .] should indicate the ‘ﬁ nite’ only in so far as in its end 
it attains inﬁ nity. The end becomes here not the mark of an essential 
incompleteness, but on the contrary the index – no completion being 
possible – of this: that it is beyond every completed totality that the ﬁ nite 
comes to expose the inﬁ nity which it really is. (Author’s translation)
57.
Art, today, has the task of answering to this world or of answering for 
it. It is not a matter of making this absence of Idea into an image, for 
art then remains caught in the ontotheological schema of the image of 
the invisible, of the god that, as Montaigne said, one had to ‘imagine 
unimaginable’. (Mus 93)
58. ‘the sensuous attestation to and inscription of the overﬂ owing of sense’ 
(DisDC 176).
59. ‘we know, as soon as we speak, that language addresses itself and addresses 
us to this outside of homogeneous communication and  signiﬁ cation’ 
(author’s translation).
60.
The absence of gods is the condition for both literature and philosophy 
to be in. It is the in-between which legitimates the one and the other, 
both of which are irreversibly atheological. But they both have the 
responsibility of taking care of the in-between: of guarding the open 
body, and of allowing it the possibility of this opening. (BST)
61. ‘it does not designate the state of a “being” that is more or less “supreme”, 
but the movement by which an existent departs from simple equality to 
itself’ (author’s translation).
62. ‘Only the opening is divine, but the divine is nothing more than the 
opening’ (CWG 114).
63.
Our suffering is this: to know that we are bereft of horizons and, along 
with them, of justiﬁ cations for misfortune (illnesses, injustices) and of 
bases for the punishment of crimes (for singling out ‘evil people’). That 
is what the self-dissolution of the West means, in the unfolding of its 
in-ﬁ nite/un-ending logic (shorn of ends), which forms the reverse of the 
inﬁ nite logic (the end in itself, present at every instant [. . .]). Against 
this suffering of the in-ﬁ nite (capital, equivalence, the bad inﬁ nite), we 
need another differentiation, another evaluation (Nietzsche), and thus 
an ‘adoration’. (Author’s translation)
 
The God of the Poets 
93
64. ‘the divine is passing and only that’ (CalP 62).
65. ‘the god is only the place, the place is the place of departure and return’ 
(CalP 63).
66. ‘the material calculation of this atheist passing’ (CalP 63).
67. This paralysis is different from the Lacanian/Žižekian position that ‘God 
is unconscious’: ‘La véritable formule de l’athéisme n’est pas que Dieu est 
mort; même en fondant l’origine de la fonction du père sur son meurtre, 
Freud protège le père. La véritable formule de l’athéisme est que Dieu est 
inconscient’ (Jacques Lacan, Le Séminaire, livre IX, Les Quatre concepts 
fondamentaux de la psychanalyse, Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1973, p. 58); 
‘the true formula of atheism is not God is dead – even by basing the origin 
of the function of the father upon his murder, Freud protects the father 
– the true formula of atheism is God is unconscious’ (Lacan, The Four 
Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis, p. 59). By asserting that God is 
unconscious, Lacan and Žižek mean that although we may think ourselves 
free of the prohibitions traditionally imposed by God, these prohibitions 
persist in our unconscious (See Slavoj Žižek, ‘ “God is dead, but he doesn’t 
know it”: Lacan plays with Bobok’, at: http://www.lacan.com/zizbobok.
html#_ftn1, last accessed: February 2010). This is different from Nancy’s 
reading of Nietzsche’s paralysis, which is not an appeal to the unconscious 
but to the presentation of death-in-life.
68. ‘he is incarnated dead’ (BTP 51).
69. ‘that strictly speaking cannot even be called “death” since it has no iden-
tity. Rather, it takes away all identity. In the becoming-dead of God the 
identity of God is taken away’ (BTP 51).
70. Derrida, Le Toucher, p. 248; On Touching, p. 219.
71. ‘In truth, the body of God was the body of man himself’ (Corp 61).
72. Merleau-Ponty, Le Visible et l’invisible, p. 152; The Visible and the 
Invisible, p. 114.
73. John 1: 14.
74.
Bodies don’t take place in discourse or in matter. They don’t inhabit 
‘mind’ or ‘body.’ They take place at the limit, qua limit: – external 
border, the fracture and intersection of anything foreign in the con-
tinuum of sense, the continuum of matter. An opening, discreteness. 
(Corp 17)
75. James, The Fragmentary Demand, p. 141.
76. ‘Incarnation: that divine inﬁ nity has its effectiveness in the relation of ﬁ nite 
beings. That sense is therefore essentially ﬁ nite: interrupted, suspended on 
an empty truth in order to avoid the suffocating fulﬁ lment of a conclusion’ 
(author’s translation).
77.
Bodies resist, hard partes extra partes. The community of bodies resists. 
[. . .] Bodies demand, yet again, their creation. Not an incarnation 
94 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
inﬂ ating the spiritual life of the sign, but a birthing and a sharing of 
bodies. But also not bodies employed to make sense, but a sense that 
gives and divides bodies. (Corp 83)
78. See Martin Heidegger, ‘The question concerning technology’, in The 
Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays, p. 12.
79. ‘it falls to us, humans, mortals, without gods and without nature, techni-
cians engaged in the undeﬁ ned production of a world that is “ours”, to 
make sense’ (author’s translation).
80. I am grateful to Joeri Schrijvers for drawing my attention to this point.
81. Derrida, Le Toucher, p. 248.
Here, then, is my hypothesis once again, and I proffer it shyly and a little 
uneasily: there is some sharing out as parting, in the sense of partition 
or separation, or a new departure, in this taking into account of techne¯, 
there where (in the same gesture) it reaches beyond any Christian body. 
(On Touching, p. 219)
82. ‘I know what Jean-Luc Nancy thinks, and what he has often said to me: 
what I call the inﬁ nite is at any rate at the very point in thought that he 
calls “ﬁ nitude” ’ (author’s translation).
83.
‘A thinking that is entirely to come!’ How irritating is this post-
Heideggerian style of the perpetual announcement, of the interminable 
to-come; this sort of secularised prophecy never ceases to declare that 
we are not yet in a position to think what is to be thought, this pathos of 
having-to-respond to being, this God who is lacking, this waiting before 
the abyss, this posture of gazing far into the mist and saying that we see 
the indistinct approaching! How we long to say: ‘Listen, if this thinking 
is still entirely to come, come back and see us when at least a piece of it 
has arrived!’ (Author’s translation)
95
3. Difﬁ cult Atheism
The constructive philosopher must have a religious faith, or some 
substitute for a religious faith; and generally he is only able to construct, 
because of his ability to blind himself to other points of view, or to remain 
unconscious of the emotive causes which attach him to his particular 
system.1
THINK ING WI THOU T GO D?
So far we have charted and critiqued the very different ways in which 
Badiou and Nancy seek to respond to the death of God, Badiou in 
terms of the threefold afﬁ rmation that ‘God is dead’ and Nancy with 
a deconstruction of Christianity. They seek to avoid both the parasit-
ism of imitative atheism (seeking to be rid of God in ways that assume 
or require God) and the asceticism of residual atheism (renouncing or 
retrenching, along with God, the notions of truth, goodness and beauty 
and so on that he underwrites) by searching for an post-theological 
integration that is neither parasitic nor ascetic. Now we come to the 
apex of our study: the question of atheism itself. In this chapter we 
seek to penetrate to the heart of Badiou’s and Nancy’s approaches to 
post-theological integration and to scrutinise their respective dominant 
motifs, asking whether either position succeeds in thinking without 
God. For Badiou post-theological integration hangs on his deploy-
ment of axioms. Both being and truths are axiomatic for Badiou, but 
because truths require the context of a mathematised ontology, we 
shall examine in the main the primary ontological axioms of the void 
and of inﬁ nity, upon which the rest of Badiou’s thought rests. The 
dominant motif of Nancy’s post-theological thought is the double 
movement either of dis-enclosure or of spacing, and in this chapter we 
shall examine how he deploys this double movement to disrupt the limit 
96 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
between theism and atheism itself. The main questions we shall seek to 
answer are these: to what extent are Nancy’s and Badiou’s approaches 
to ﬁ nding a post-theological integration successful in avoiding the twin 
pitfalls of parasitism and asceticism? Is Nancy’s deconstructive atheol-
ogy commensurable with Badiou’s axiomatic atheism?
3. 1 BADIOU ’S A XIOM A TI C  A TH E I S M
3.1.1 Event and Miracle
Attempts to discern a latent parasitism in Badiou’s atheism have more 
often than not focused on his notion of the truth and its relation to 
the event. Daniel Bensaïd argues that ‘[d]étaché de ses conditions his-
toriques, pur diamant de vérité, l’événement, tout comme la rencontre 
absolument aléatoire du dernier Althusser, s’apparente au miracle’.2 
Slavoj Žižek argues in The Ticklish Subject that revelation must be 
the unnamed paradigm of what he calls Badiou’s ‘Truth-Event’;3 Peter 
Osborne talks about a ‘religious dimension’ in Badiou’s thought, 
arguing that his absolute separation of truth (the event) from knowl-
edge (being) ‘is the path to mysticism’.4 The charge is that a truth enters 
a situation from a transcendent beyond with the same instantaneous 
inexplicability as a religious miracle.
Badiou is not slow in replying to these critiques. Though he does 
use the language of miracle in his own discussion of Pascal in L’Être 
et l’événement (EE 235–45/BE 212–22), he refuses any implication of 
religiosity that it might harbour:
as far as its material is concerned, the event is not a miracle. What I mean 
is that what composes an event is always extracted from a situation, always 
related back to a singular multiplicity, to its state, to the language connected 
to it, etc.5
In other words, Badiou can account in his own set-theoretical terms for 
a truth as subtracted from a particular situation, the indiscernible of its 
elements, and there is no need for anything like a miracle to account 
for its appearing. Novelty for Badiou does not drop from the sky or 
come out of nowhere, it comes from the situation itself, from what is 
not counted as one in the situation. An event names an unpresented 
of the evental site, an unpresented that is not brought forth from the 
void but from a (speciﬁ c) void: the void of the situation (19R 258).6 So 
for example the counting as one of the universal human subject in the 
French Revolution requires nothing in addition to the multiples that 
were counted as one in the three estates.
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
97
In addition to neglecting the import of Badiou’s mathematisation 
for the origin of novelty, the miracle charge also misunderstands the 
nature of Badiouian truth, hastily reducing it to a truth-event, as Bruno 
Bosteels is at pains to point out.7 The Badiouian event is not utterly 
divorced from being or from a situation, indeed:
à mes yeux l’apport principal ce n’est pas d’opposer la situation à 
l’événement, ça en un certain sens tout le monde le fait aujourd’hui. L’apport 
principal c’est de poser la question: Qu’est-ce qui s’en déduit ou s’en infère 
du point de vue de la situation elle-même? (PLN 81)8
It is the and in ‘being and event’ that is crucial for Badiou’s project. 
The miracle charge reduces Badiouian truth to an event simpliciter, 
a conﬂ ation which, Badiou warns, leads to a Christic vision of truth, 
reducing a truth to self-revelation (PMI 24/HOI 11). This conﬂ ation 
must be resisted, for truth is both an event and a process:
je suis convaincu que le nouveau n’est pensable que comme processus. Il y 
a certainement une nouveauté du surgir mais cette nouveauté est toujours 
évanouissante, donc ce n’est pas elle qu’on peut ﬁ xer comme matérialité du 
nouveau. (PLN 82)9
Badiou’s truth is not a pure miraculous beginning, but an interminable 
process of beginning over and over again.10 For these reasons – namely 
that Badiou can adequately account for novelty in set-theoretical terms, 
and that truth does not conform to the paradigm of revelation – the 
miracle charge is misplaced.
Notwithstanding this rebuttal of the miracle charge, a further charge 
of parasitism is that, at the very point where Badiou afﬁ rms that he has 
no need of a ‘miracle’, he is but miming a common postmodern theo-
logical move, exempliﬁ ed here by John Caputo: ‘by the unconditional I 
do not mean some super-sensible being up above – that’s what I share 
with death of god theology – but the event that stirs within the relative 
and contingent things around us’.11 Badiou too speaks of the ‘uncon-
ditioned’ in relation to the event (C 221/Con 152), its truth (LM 12/
LW 4) and its subject (SP 19/SPe 19), and he too rejects any ‘up above’ 
account of the event. This is enough for Caputo to proceed to co-opt 
Badiou as a theologian, arguing that Badiou’s ‘exceptional moment’ 
of grace in the event contrasts with Badiou’s own characterisation of 
Deleuzian thought for which ‘grace is all’, leaving Badiou and Deleuze 
as ‘a couple of hoary theologians arguing about grace behind seminary 
walls.’12
The Badiouian subject’s ﬁ delity to a truth can, he continues, be 
reﬁ gured as covenant faithfulness in which ‘the event constitutes a kind 
of covenant that has been cut with us’, and it is a small step from this 
98 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
claim to the all-embracing conclusion that ‘religion is the covenant that 
has been made – by whom we cannot quite say – between the event and 
us.’13 Further to this, Caputo discerns a messianism in Badiou’s reading 
of desire, aligning Badiou’s ‘ne pas céder sur ce que de soi-même on 
ne sait pas’ (E 68)14 with his own position that ‘our desire is for the 
messiah who never shows up, which is what keeps desire going’.15
A similar charge has been laid that sees in Badiou’s ﬁ delity to an 
event an echo of religious faith. Rancière argues that the paradigm of 
the event proposed by Badiou suggests that there is only ever an event 
because of a prior decision about transcendence, a decision that, before 
being called ﬁ delity, must be (religious) faith, and that the paradigm 
for Badiou’s understanding of ﬁ delity is the event of the cross.16 Badiou 
for his part insists that the paradigm of his ﬁ delity is not religious faith 
but deduction: unending faithfulness to a prescriptive nomination (19R 
249).
Let us begin to respond with a point with which Caputo and Rancière 
would no doubt agree. Just because Badiou uses the term ‘grace’ or 
‘faith’, it does not mean that his writing is theological. Imitative atheism 
is not a name-checking exercise. Badiou takes Jean-François Lyotard 
to task for a similar assumption, when challenged about his use of 
Pascal:17
À propos de Pascal, il faudrait tout de même être raisonnable : peut-on, 
oui ou non, dégager, d’un texte et d’une conviction dont on ne partage 
aucun des paramètres explicites, la forme, ou la matrice, d’un philosophème 
qu’on a soi-même proposé et pensé, sans se voir retourner les paramètres en 
 question comme votre inconscient enﬁ n débusqué? (19R 291)18
There is to be sure a difference between drawing the matrix of a phi-
losopheme from a text with which one shares no explicit parameters, 
and relying on structures which one’s own thought disallows. Only 
the latter procedure is imitative in the sense that we are using the term 
in relation to atheism. In order to probe whether Badiou’s atheism is 
imitative in this sense therefore, we need to look to the mathematic 
condition of Badiou’s thought, and to ask whether it merely appropri-
ates theological motifs within its own post-theological framework (a 
move of post-theological integration), or whether it implicitly relies on 
theological notions that it explicitly denies. Caputo and Rancière seem 
not to take into account the impressive and decisive armature of math-
ematisation that Badiou brings to his theory of the event. Caputo moves 
between his own theology and Badiou’s event as if the laicisation of 
the inﬁ nite were no part of Badiou’s thought at all, let alone a linchpin 
of his atheism. Attempts to theologise other aspects of the Badiouian 
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
99
event, such as the counting-as-one, fall foul of a similar objection: they 
are alighting on moments of Badiou’s mathematised thought without 
paying any attention to its mathematised condition.
To take just one example, Badiou uses the term ‘grace’ in a post-
theological way wholly detached from its Christian context. An event 
is a moment of grace because it is incalculable, and it is incalculable 
not because it is divine but because, in strict set-theoretical terms, it is 
a new universal subset indiscernible (that is to say, not counted as one) 
in a given situation. Grace for Badiou is that which subtracts itself from 
law, so a subject incorporated into a truth is ‘no longer under the rule 
of law, but of grace’ (SP 74/SPe 75), to be sure, but in a way that has 
nothing to do with divine favour.
In the Second Manifeste pour la philosophie, Badiou offers a brief 
account of why he draws on theological and religious concepts in a 
resolutely post-theological register:
J’aime les grandes métaphores venues de la religion : Miracle, Grâce, Salut, 
Corps Glorieux, Conversion . . . On a évidemment conclu de ce goût que 
ma philosophie était un christianisme déguisé. Le livre sur saint Paul que j’ai 
publié en 1997 aux PUF n’a pas arrangé les choses. À tout prendre, j’aime 
mieux être un athée révolutionnaire caché sous une langue religieuse qu’un 
« démocrate » occidental persécuteur de musulman(e)s déguisé en féministe 
laïque. (2M 149)19
Badiou is happy to admit that he could be taken for a religious 
person in disguise,20 but this causes him little trouble because his aim 
is not ascetically to eschew every religious notion but to exploit the 
resources of religious thought in the service of his post-theological 
integration. It is the revolutionary stridency of the ‘grand metaphors’ 
of religion that appeals to Badiou, the desire to deploy their capitalised 
power in rejecting the West’s disingenuous veneer of tolerance. Badiou 
may be rewiring theism’s house with the current turned on, but thus 
far he has escaped unscathed. These religious terms do not in the least 
undermine Badiou’s atheism, but nor is this the end of the story, for our 
investigation must not stop with the event. We must dig beyond these 
religious terms clustering around the event to inquire after the status of 
mathematics and the choice of ZFC set theory itself in order properly 
to address the question of Badiou’s atheism.
The Badiouian account of being also relies on a number of axioms. 
Indeed, there are no less than three necessary decisions prior to the 
Badiouian event. They are, as Peter Hallward enumerates them: 1) 
the pre-ontological decision that opts for numbers over things, 2) the 
central decision that opts for the multiple over the one, and 3) the 
decision that the unending universe of mathematics is indeed actually 
100 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
inﬁ nite,21 to which we will eventually need to add the decision that 
the empty set, or void, exists. Once these decisions have been taken, 
precisely because they are axiomatic, Badiou’s system is robust in its 
own terms, as we saw with the test case of the miraculous. If we are to 
pursue the question of Badiou’s theoretical and methodological atheism 
further, we must not dally with the event but turn our attention to the 
place of axioms in his account of being.
3.1.2 Being and Axioms
First, let us understand what is at stake in Badiou’s axiomatisation 
of being. Badiou opposes axioms (which are decided) to deﬁ nitions 
(which are empirically induced) (CT 106). Axiomatic decisions are, 
furthermore, unconditioned, ‘un choix absolument pur, dégagé de toute 
autre présupposition que d’avoir à choisir, sans marque dans les termes 
proposés’ (C 190).22 Badiou’s axioms are decisions taken in a state of 
undecidability, in the absence of sufﬁ cient reason or immediate eviden-
tial certainty. Axioms are not deduced or induced, but asserted. We do 
not conclude that the One is not or that the empty set exists; we decide 
it. Our purposes in this chapter will be served by focusing on the axiom 
of inﬁ nity and the axiom of the empty set, the two of the nine ZFC 
axioms that assert an existence (see EE 176/BE 157).
The axiom of inﬁ nity states simply that there exists an actually inﬁ -
nite set, or there exists a limit ordinal (NN 119/NuN 93), where ‘limit’ 
is understood as that which succeeds nothing, rather than as that which 
nothing succeeds (which would be Anselm’s God). It is the axiom with 
which we are familiar from our discussion of the inﬁ nite in the ﬁ rst two 
chapters. The axiom of the empty set, or the axiom of the void, asserts 
that ‘there is an empty set, one which contains no elements’.23 Zero is 
not a construction of thought, but a fact of Being (NN 61/NuN 44), an 
axiomatic decision (see also NN 77/NuN 56). It is a ﬁ rst assertion, the 
very one that ﬁ xes an existence from which all others will proceed (NN 
35/NuN 22). The two axioms of inﬁ nity and the empty set shape the 
whole of modern thinking about number: the pure void is that by nature 
of which there is number, and the inﬁ nite is that by which it is afﬁ rmed 
that number can think any and every situation (NN 76/NuN 57).
We can see why axiomatisation is necessary for Badiou’s atheism 
by considering Jean-Luc Marion’s objection to atheism in his essay 
‘De la “mort de Dieu” aux noms divins’.24 Marion argues that simply 
pursuing the death of God from one divine name to the next – God of 
religions, God of metaphysics, God of the poets . . . – is a futile task, at 
least if one is seeking to argue a coherent case can be made for atheism:
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
101
l’athéisme d’un concept de Dieu [. . .] du fait de sa régionalité intrinsèque, 
loin de clore la question du Dieu, ouvre la question des autres concepts pos-
sibles pour Dieu. [. . .] La « mort de Dieu » implique directement la mort de 
la « mort de Dieu » puisqu’à chaque fois, en disqualiﬁ ant un concept déﬁ ni 
de Dieu, elle ouvre de nouveau le lexique indéﬁ ni d’autres concepts possibles 
pour nommer un Dieu toujours autrement pensable, autrement dit.25
In fact, Marion goes on to argue, there is an inﬁ nite number of pos-
sible names for God, and for that reason God is by deﬁ nition without 
ﬁ nite deﬁ nition:26 the philosophical problematic of the death of God 
always leads to the theological theme of divine names. Indeed, in the 
Court Traité Badiou himself might seem to give a nod in this direction 
when he claims that the gods of religion, metaphysics and the poets are 
only the principle gods (CT 22/BOE 30), not an exhaustive list of all 
 possible gods.
An atheism cannot claim to be both conceptual (or scientiﬁ c) and 
dogmatic (or universal) at the same time warns Marion. If atheism 
is conceptual it cannot be dogmatic, because every concept or set of 
concepts is deﬁ ned by its ﬁ nitude, and thus its incompleteness.27 Every 
concept has its limit and opens onto other concepts. Let us assume, 
Marion continues, that to every concept of God there corresponds 
an atheism. He refuses to allow that, from a ﬁ nite number of such 
theisms, we could conclude anything other than that there is a ﬁ nite 
number of regional atheisms, and that would certainly not yield a 
rigorous or conceptual atheism. By contrast, any atheism that is dog-
matic cannot be conceptual, for in seeking to be total it must renounce 
the scientiﬁ city of the (constitutively ﬁ nite) concept which will, as we 
have seen, always falls short of universality. Such a dogmatic atheism, 
without recourse to the concept, must for Marion rest on a moment 
of violence.28
The ﬁ rst of these arguments (that if atheism is conceptual it cannot 
be dogmatic) is easier to deal with from a Badiouian point of view, 
for rather than posing a challenge to Badiou’s secularised inﬁ nite, this 
argument delineates elegantly Badiou’s point that nothing short of an 
axiomatic rejection of ﬁ nitude will do for securing an atheism that it 
truly post-theological. The second argument (that any atheism that is 
dogmatic cannot be conceptual and must rest on violence) requires a 
more developed answer, particularly in relation to the place and status 
of ‘violence’, which it is clear that Marion dismisses as an obviously 
undesirable feature, but which occupies a more nuanced position in 
Badiou’s own thinking.
Badiou does not resile from acknowledging a certain violence in the 
axiomatic decision:
102 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Pour pratiquer dans la pensée la rupture décisive avec le romantisme 
[. . .] nous ne pouvons faire l’économie de ce recours, peut-être une fois 
encore aveugle, peut-être marqué d’une contrainte, ou d’une violence, aux 
 injonctions de la mathématique (C 166–7)29
Rather than refuting the violence which Marion implicitly sees as a 
reason to reject dogmatic atheism, Badiou sees it as a necessary con-
comitant of having done with ﬁ nitude and the shadow of the divine. 
In order to rupture with consensus and the status quo it is necessary to 
‘force’ knowledge:
On dira que la vérité force des savoirs. Le verbe forcer indique que la puis-
sance d’une vérité étant celle d’une rupture, c’est en violentant les savoirs 
établis et circulants qu’une vérité fait retour vers l’immédiat de la situation, 
ou remanie cette sorte d’encyclopédie portative dans laquelle puisent les 
opinions, les communications et la socialité (E 62)30
Both Badiou’s truths and the axioms of inﬁ nity and the empty set 
require such a violent forcing, and this violence is necessary because 
without axiomatisation there might remain an inaccessible region of 
being, a further divine name, that remains untouched by all existing 
regional atheisms. What Badiou achieves with the axiom of inﬁ nity is 
an ontology in which nothing is inaccessible.31 The Romantic inﬁ nity 
of inaccessibility32 will not do, Badiou insists (C 304/Con 227); inﬁ nity 
must be understood afﬁ rmatively, secured by an axiomatic decision. 
Badiou is most explicit on the importance of inaccessibility in a letter 
to Peter Hallward:
Every atheist philosophy posits that nothing, in principle, is inaccessible. 
Hegel is decisive on this point: the whole of the real is rational. My own 
thesis is not that the Inaccessible is accessible. It is that there is nothing 
inaccessible. Neither the event, which has vanished, but remains as named 
and active as truth procedure, nor the unnameable (which is accessible to 
knowledge, and inaccessible only to truth), is inaccessible. As Mao used to 
declare: ‘We will come to know everything that we did not know before.’ 
It is, in any case, one of the implications of the laicisation of the inﬁ nite.33
By contrast, and quoting from the same letter, ‘To pose the Inaccessible 
as Inaccessible, and so to open the way to an inﬁ nite hermeneutics, is 
the religious position par excellence’ (Eth xliii n.38). It is in his discus-
sion of inaccessibility that Badiou offers a convincing reply to Marion’s 
argument about divine names. Badiou’s mathematised axiomatisation 
of being, which also renders being inﬁ nite and univocal, does away 
with the regional deities and ‘concepts’ upon which Marion’s argument 
relies. There is no room inside Badiou’s system for Marion’s divine 
names.
There is no room inside the system, but what about the system itself? 
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
103
So far we have seen that, once Badiou’s axioms are established, nothing 
is inaccessible for atheism. But what about the axioms themselves? 
Are they themselves accessible to the conditions that they lay down for 
Badiou’s system? In other words, do the conditions of Badiou’s thought 
obey themselves, and what are the consequences of our answer to this 
question? That is what we must now go on to consider.
3.1.3 Axioms, Conditionality and the Good
Lyotard discerns in Badiou’s thinking what he calls a meta-axiom that 
equates ontology with mathematics: only mathematical meta-ontology 
can give an account of the multiple,34 and the ‘initial decision’ to frame 
Badiou’s philosophy in terms of mathematical ontology needs to be 
investigated further.35 John Milbank argues that for Badiou ‘the ulti-
mate primacy of the Many over the One is a mere decision’. It follows 
from this, Milbank insists, that ‘one might still decide, in divergence 
from Badiou’s fundamental decision, to accord to unity a retroactive 
primacy (as indeed in the case of Trinitarian theology)’.36 Both Badiou’s 
fundamental axioms (the void and the inﬁ nite) are arbitrary, insists 
Milbank, and Justin Clemens similarly argues that ‘Badiou understands 
the Platonist/constructivist debate as a polemic around a proposition 
that is undecidable in just this sense: the inﬁ nite exists. One must decide 
without criteria’.37 Peter Hallward asserts that Badiou’s axioms are 
‘expressions of a self-constituent authority’38 and that ‘Badiou assumes 
that there is no God’,39 while Bruno Bosteels argues that we must 
assume, upstream of the count, that being inconsists with no principle, 
no God and no origin.40
A variant of this argument is to identify Badiou’s axioms with the 
arbitrariness of the wager. Jacques Rancière argues that Badiou’s deci-
sion is an unfounded wager, the paradigm of which is Pascal’s belief in 
miracles (even though, as he problematically continues, Pascal himself 
understood belief in miracles not as a wager at all, but as a certainty),41 
and Justin Clemens echoes this charge when he argues that ‘given that 
there are no grounds for deciding one way or another, a decision must 
take place as a kind of gamble or, in the Pascalian terminology of which 
Badiou is fond, “a wager” ’.42
So is the axiomatised ontology through which alone Badiou can 
be rid of God a blind wager? Badiou’s own account of his axioms is 
substantially more subtle than these charges allow. Though axioms 
may be pure choices (in that they are not compelled or informed by 
any prior conditions), the axioms of inﬁ nity and the void nevertheless 
have for Badiou a certain historical necessity. In Badiou’s account, the 
104 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
world of modern thought is itself brought forth by what would come 
to be known in the twentieth century as the axioms of inﬁ nity and of 
the empty set, and these two axioms are themselves decided ‘sous la 
contrainte de l’injonction historiale de l’être’ (NN 74).43 The nature 
of that historical injunction is, according to Badiou, as follows: from 
the Renaissance onwards, with the rupture from the Greek (ﬁ nite) 
cosmos, these axioms proved necessary in order to think anything at all 
in accordance with our pre-comprehension of the ontological demand 
(NN 74/NuN 56). Nevertheless, these decisions themselves are rigor-
ously unveriﬁ able. The inﬁ nite universe could not be deduced from 
observations using the newly invented telescope, and ‘il y fallait un pur 
courage de la pensée, une incise volontaire dans le dispositif, éternelle-
ment défendable, du ﬁ nitisme ontologique’ (EE 167).44 Though we had 
to wait until the beginning of the twentieth century for these decisions 
to be recognised as the axioms of inﬁ nity and the empty set, by that 
time they had already been operating in modern thinking for three cen-
turies (NN 75/NuN 57). But this is also the source of their weakness, 
for ‘dès lors qu’il s’agit là de purs constats, décidés comme tels, ils ont 
la faiblesse de leur historicité. Aucun argument ne peut les soutenir’ 
(NN 75).45
Concluding his brief discussion of the two axioms in Le Nombre et 
les nombres, Badiou refers to them as ontological prescriptions: ‘Qu’il 
s’agisse d’axiomes et non de théorèmes signiﬁ e que l’existence du zéro 
et de l’inﬁ ni sont ce que l’être prescrit à la pensée pour qu’elle-même 
existe dans l’époque ontologique d’une telle existence’ (NN 76).46
In other words, the axioms of the void and inﬁ nity are thought’s 
way of catching up with, and responding to, the ontological realities 
of modernity. Far from arbitrary or unmotivated, they respond to the 
injunction of being. Indeed, unless the void and the inﬁ nite are entirely 
secularised, thinking could not (or could no longer) exist in the form, 
and with the force, that the age requires of it (NN 76/NuN 57).
This is not to say that Badiou’s axioms are inevitable. Quite to the 
contrary, they are undecidable. Badiou insists that ‘[t]oute pensée – 
donc, la mathématique – engage des décisions (des intuitions) du point 
de l’indécidable (du non-déductible)’ (CT 103),47 and that the existence 
of an undecidable is never overcome but by an axiomatic assumption.48 
The mistake made by some readers of Badiou is to equate this undecid-
ability too hastily with arbitrariness. The decision that the universe is 
actually inﬁ nite may not be the conclusion of a deductive argument; it 
may be rigorously undecidable from a ﬁ nite universe, but nevertheless 
the injunction of being in modernity prescribes that such a decision be 
taken. It is not arbitrary, but rather the response to a demand.
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
105
Axioms, then, are for Badiou conditioned, but not inevitable. The 
nature of Badiou’s axioms is captured in his agreement with Deleuze’s 
account of thinking in the Second Manifeste:
Deleuze soutient avec force – contre, à vrai dire, toutes les joyeuses inter-
prétations spontanéistes et « anarcho-désirantes » de sa philosophie – qu’on 
ne pense jamais ni par décision volontaire, ni par mouvement naturel. On 
est toujours, dit-il, forcé de penser. La pensée est comme une poussée qui 
s’exerce dans notre dos. Elle n’est pas aimable ni désirée, la pensée. Elle 
est une violence qui nous est faite. Je suis parfaitement d’accord avec cette 
vision. (2M 124)49
Axioms are forced by a historical demand, to which they are thinking’s 
response. This provides en passant sufﬁ cient refutation of the argument 
that Badiou’s axioms are merely retroactively legitimated by the fruit-
fulness of their consequences. Axioms do not eventuate ex nihilo; they 
respond to an injunction of being. In a further nuance to the ‘pure deci-
sion’ account of Badiou’s axioms, in conversation with Fabien Tarby 
he touches on the ‘ultimate real point’ that is discernible in many philo-
sophical dispositions: Spinoza’s intellectual intuition of God, or Plato’s 
Good that he glosses in the Republic merely with the brief comment 
that he can offer no image of it: ‘je suis d’accord avec Bergson sur le fait 
qu’il y a un point originaire de l’expérience, point que toute la didac-
tique philosophique s’efforce de rejoindre et de transmettre’ (PE 143).50
The third volume of L’Etre et l’événement, provisionally entitled 
L’Immanence des vérités, will in part attempt to circumscribe (encer-
cler) this point as much as possible, with the hope of reducing its inef-
fability ‘as much as possible’. Badiou admits ‘Je ne sais pas pour autant, 
à l’heure actuelle, jusqu’où je dois aller dans cette direction’ (PE 139),51 
though he does reveal that the equivalent point in his own philosophi-
cal disposition is incorporation, truth understood not in its objective 
logic but from the point of view of the subject, the intuition of which 
is accompanied by a ‘singular affect’ (PE 142). Asked what is the affect 
proper to philosophy, Badiou replies:
Je pense que la philosophie doit inclure, à la fois dans sa conception et dans 
sa proposition, la conviction que la vraie vie peut être expérimentée en 
immanence. Quelque chose doit la signaler de l’intérieur d’elle-même, pas 
seulement comme un impératif extérieur, comme un impératif kantien. Cela 
relève d’un affect, lequel signale, indique, en immanence, que la vie vaut la 
peine d’être vécue. (PE 149)52
What Lyotard calls Badiou’s meta-axiom is a response to the epoch – as 
the ‘injunction of modernity’ – and to an affect/conviction that true life 
is to be experienced in immanence. This is indeed, as he acknowledges, 
the point at which Badiou’s thought needs to push further, not least 
106 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
because it is the point upon which the project of a post-theological 
integration hangs. If the encounter with the truth that enjoins a philo-
sophical ‘disposition’ (such as idealism, empiricism, or indeed axioma-
tised mathematical ontology) is itself theological, then parasitism has 
re-entered and the project of post-theological integration is incomplete.
Plato is not much help here, Badiou conjectures, as he has said so 
little about the Good. A Galilean strand of interpretation has seen it 
as the very example of scientiﬁ c rationality, while by the Neoplatonists 
it is taken as the very example of transcendent theology (PE 140–1). 
When Plato says that the Good greatly surpasses the Idea in prestige and 
power,53 the negative theologians claim to have found the God about 
whom nothing can be said. The rationalist current of interpretation 
(within which Badiou places himself) seeks to understand the Good as 
‘un principe d’intelligibilité qui n’est pas réductible à l’Idée elle-même. 
Que l’Idée soit principe d’intelligibilité est naturellement au-delà de 
l’Idée’ (PE 141).54 Badiou does not provide reasons for his choice in this 
passage, and we shall return to this question of choosing a fundamental 
philosophical orientation in our conclusion to this volume.
Given that rationalism is what is at stake in Badiou’s discussion of 
philosophical ‘dispositions’, it is a misunderstanding of Badiou’s system 
to demand of him a rationalist proof or demonstration of his axioms. 
In ‘Nouveauté et événement’, Meillassoux takes Badiou to task for the 
circularity of his axioms. If there is a Cantor-event, as Badiou claims 
(LM 47/LW 38), then how can it be the condition of all events (NE 
40)? How can axioms be truths, when they are the condition of an 
ontology of truths? Perhaps, like Plato’s Good, they are an exception, 
not truths but conditions that do not conform to the ontological catego-
ries they themselves permit (NE 41), leading Meillassoux to dub them 
‘archi-vérités’ (NE 41). The modern injunction of being and the affect 
of immanence, we suggest, provide the missing link that Meillassoux 
seeks.
Meillassoux also argues that, if there is a ‘Cantor-event’, then there 
is nothing to guarantee the perenniality of the category of ‘event’, and 
the ontology upon which it relies. Either one privileges the event above 
the essential historicity of ontology, or one privileges the historicity 
of ontology and its radical unpredictability above the event (NE 50). 
Meillassoux ﬁ xes on the moment in L’Etre et l’événement when Badiou 
argues that there is every reason to believe (il y a tout lieu de croire) that 
the event will always from now on be compatible with historical ontol-
ogy (NE 52). This ‘decision about the decision’, Meillassoux argues, 
must remain for Badiou a hypothesis, a mathematically motivated 
belief: ‘il y a tout lieu de croire – mais il y a tout lieu de croire’ (NE 
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
107
53).55 This mathematical wager reveals the insufﬁ ciency of mathemat-
ics to connect us to the Eternal, for though we are accompanied the 
whole way by the impeccable machine of deductibility, we will always 
be left by ourselves to make the last step (NE 54). Meillassoux is right 
to identify this ‘last step’ as an exception from the axiomatic system it 
governs, and it returns us once more to Badiou’s discussion of Plato’s 
Good in Philosophie et événement: the ‘mathematical faith’ in the event 
is motivated by the injunction of being in modernity and by the affect 
of immanence. We see no reason in either of these motivations why 
Badiou’s thought, as it has evolved since L’Etre et l’événement, requires 
the non-historicity of the event in order to support its system, unless the 
affect of immanence is claimed to be itself ahistorical.
The circle that L’Immanence des vérités must square is this: either 
1) the affect of immanence and/or the injunction of modernity are 
necessary and unchanging, in which case Badiou’s atheism falls at 
the last hurdle into a imitative atheism that unaccountably inscribes 
the moment of the choice of axioms as a parasitic causa sui, a self-
grounding rationalism exempted from all rationality, or 2) the affect 
of immanence and the injunction of modernity are contingent and 
historically changeable, and just as the modern age and the move 
from the closed world to the inﬁ nite universe demanded the axioms of 
inﬁ nity and the void, so presumably another historical moment could 
equally demand other axioms that may contradict these two, and once 
again allow for a thinking of the divine. In which case any assertion of 
atheism along the lines that Badiou proposes is provisional, and irre-
ducibly haunted by the spectre of future theism. Such a dilemma raises 
theological questions that Badiou is not be able to address by recourse 
to  mathematisation and axiomatisation without begging the question.
Pending the third volume of L’Etre et l’événement, we shall argue 
that we can best make sense of Badiou’s axioms as an axiology of the 
Good. Badiou’s axioms are worthy (axios) because they promote the 
implicit Good in Badiou’s own philosophy. Badiou evokes a contem-
porary ‘ethics of thinking’ (OPI 182) according to which it is ‘better’ 
to think all situations inﬁ nite (an adjective he uses three times in 
‘Ontology and politics’), and that this is ‘more interesting’ than declar-
ing that we are ﬁ nite. This adds a third conditionality to Badiou’s 
choice of axioms. Axioms are not chosen simply under the injunction 
of being and the affect of immanence, but also because they are ‘better’ 
(or ‘more i nteresting’) than any alternative.
The question begged by this is: better for what? More interesting for 
whom? How do we decide that one axiom is better or more interesting 
than another? The Platonist will admit the axiom of choice,56 Badiou 
108 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
argues, ‘car l’univers avec axiome du choix est autrement plus large et 
dense en liaisons signiﬁ catives que l’univers qui ne l’admet pas’ (CT 
104),57 and his own explanation for choosing the axiom of inﬁ nity is 
that ‘[s]ans cette décision, il restera toujours possible que l’être soit 
essentiellement ﬁ ni’ (EE 167).58 This is a reverse engineering from 
desired effect (inﬁ nite being) to its condition (axiom of inﬁ nity).
In view of this, it is not legitimate to conclude that axioms can them-
selves serve as premises in an argument to an ontological conclusion 
without begging the question. So for instance, when Peter Hallward 
asserts that the axiom of inﬁ nity gives the ‘deﬁ nitive proof of God’s 
“nonexistence” ’,59 he seems to be wanting to have his Badiouian cake 
and eat it. Axioms do not ‘prove’ anything, least of all God’s non-
existence. The secularisation of the inﬁ nite is the decision that will 
achieve the ‘better’ conclusion that God does not exist, not the proof or 
 revelation of any such fact.
A number of attempts have been made to locate this hidden value 
supporting Badiou’s axioms. John Mullarkey points to a ‘transcen-
dental vector in Badiou’s thought’, asking the question ‘How can 
[Badiou] found a theory of error when any axiomatic approach can 
only claim more or less productivity for its set of axioms?’60 Mullarkey 
notes that for Badiou, events are always for the good, ‘because they 
concern emancipation and, as such, equality’;61 in other words, the 
argument is that universal equality is Badiou’s transcendental ‘Good’. 
John Milbank levels a similar critique when he evokes what he calls the 
‘paraontological primacy of the good’ in Badiou,62 not a good beyond 
being, but being as the supremely good and equally supremely true. 
Lyotard makes this same argument in his comment that ‘pour décider 
de nommer, il faut avoir une affection particulière pour le vide’.63 
For Marc de Kesel, Badiou’s mathematical ontology harbours ‘a kind 
of belief in the truth and goodness of Being as such’.64 If this is true, 
Badiou’s axioms are covertly religious because they suppose a value 
that is not immanent to, and contained within, the axiomatised system 
but rather conditions the choice of axioms in the ﬁ rst place:
While formally, the ‘event’ disrupts society’s settled organization, at the 
level of content, disruption itself is presumed to be inherently good. [. . .] 
Being qua Being might be anarchic, impossible even to experience, but this 
impossible anarchy is surreptitiously considered an ontological ‘archè’.65
This is what Badiou prizes in the French Revolution: a casting off of the 
plurality of the three estates and their replacement with the proclama-
tion of universal, generic human equality; it is also what he values in the 
universalism of Paul the apostle, the proclamation of a new universal 
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
109
humanity in which ‘there is not Greek and Jew, circumcised and uncir-
cumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave, free; but Christ is all, and in all.’66
But once more there is a clear reply in Badiou’s work to this argu-
ment. He insists that a commitment to universal equality can be 
 generated immanently, purely from the necessity of choice itself:
Cette situation est bien repérée par la philosophie, sous le nom de ‘liberté 
d’indifférence’. Liberté qui n’est normée par aucune différence qu’on puisse 
remarquer, liberté qui fait face à l’indiscernable. Si nulle valeur ne discrimine 
ce que vous avez à choisir, c’est votre liberté comme telle qui est norme, au 
point où en fait elle se confond avec le hasard. L’indiscernable est la sous-
traction qui fonde un point de coïncidence entre le hasard et la liberté. (C 
190–1)67
Nevertheless, to the extent that the principle of the ‘freedom of indif-
ference’ is not immanent to Badiou’s axioms, its introduction does 
not solve the problem. Furthermore, it is difﬁ cult to see how freedom 
alone can carry the weight Badiou wants and needs it to in this case. 
On the one hand, if we grant Badiou this immanent account of the 
motivation for the decision, and freedom becomes indistinguishable 
from chance, it would seem to issue in an ascetic atheism that betrays 
any political agenda as well as the injunction of being, and so to sub-
stantiate Jean-Jacques Lecercle’s conclusion that ‘Badiou’s atheism 
undercuts Marxism as well as religion’.68 On the other hand, if we say 
that freedom is the norm in so far as it is universalising, then we ﬁ nd 
ourselves right back at the question of the universal as the good which 
governs Badiou’s seemingly unconditioned decision.
We would like to bring our discussion of Badiou’s axioms to a close 
by arguing that the ‘Good’ for Badiou can be construed as atheism 
itself. In order to pursue further this question about what precisely is 
‘better’ about the axioms of inﬁ nity and the void for Badiou, we turn 
our attention once more now to his treatment of atomism.69 It is in his 
dialogues with Lucretius that the Good motivating Badiou’s axioms 
becomes clear. In a discussion of the choice for the multiple over the 
one, Badiou seeks to clarify his intentions:
Tout le point est de tenir aussi loin qu’il est possible, et sous les conditions 
les plus novatrices de la pensée, qu’en tout cas la vérité elle-même n’est 
qu’une multiplicité. [. . .] Ce qui exige un premier geste radical, à quoi se 
reconnaît la philosophie moderne: soustraire l’examen des vérités à la simple 
forme du jugement. Ce qui veut toujours dire: décider une ontologie des 
multiplicités. (CT 59)70
In this quotation Badiou makes it clear that the whole point of the deci-
sion for an ontology of multiplicities is to sustain as long as possible the 
equation of truth and multiplicity. It is this desire that demands (exige) 
110 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
the decision in favour of an ontology of multiplicities. The concern to 
secularise ontology positively demands the decision for the many over 
the one: ‘Lucrèce voit bien que se soustraire à la crainte des dieux exige 
qu’en deçà du multiple il n’y ait rien. Et qu’au-delà du multiple il n’y ait 
encore que le multiple’ (CT 30).71
The Epicurean’s desire to escape the fear of the gods precedes and 
demands the ontology of multiplicity that Lucretius furnishes in his 
atomism and that Badiou secures with his axiomatised ZFC set theory. 
In order correctly to capture the way in which Badiou uses axioms in 
these quotations we need to return to the root axios, (‘worthy’, or ‘ﬁ t’). 
Badiou’s axioms are chosen to be worthy of the secularised, generic, 
universal notion of being that propels his thought. This is more than 
responding to the demand of being, however, for we can discern a 
therapeutic moment in Badiou’s axiomatisation.
Lucretian atheism is not in fact the product of a deduction or a 
proof; its nature is therapeutic.72 Holding the position that the gods, 
whatever gods there may be, are not going to interfere in any way 
with human beings, is a means to the end of ataraxia, the tranquillity 
of mind free from the fear of the gods prescribed by Pyrrho. Shades 
of this attitude can be seen in Badiou’s articulations of his own post-
theological position when he argues that ‘[i]l est donc impératif, pour 
s’établir sereinement dans l’élément irréversible de la mort de Dieu, 
d’en ﬁ nir avec le motif de la ﬁ nitude’ (CT 19–20; author’s emphasis).73 
In this instance, it appears that the death of God precedes the end of 
ﬁ nitude, and it is necessary to have done with the ﬁ nite in order not 
to be troubled by the reappearance of that which has been declared 
dead. Having been pronounced dead, God must now be killed, for the 
sake of the atheist’s serenity. Further on, Badiou makes a similar move, 
arguing that:
En effet, il nous faut assumer, comme Lucrèce, que le déploiement-multiple 
n’est pas contraint par l’immanence d’une limite. Car il n’est que trop 
évident qu’une telle contrainte avère la puissance de l’un comme fondement 
du multiple lui-même. (CT 28; author’s emphasis)74
Once more, the necessity of the assumption that there are no limits to 
inﬁ nite multiplicities seems here to be the result of a desire to rest serene 
in the primacy of multiplicity over the one. Peter Hallward echoes this 
reasoning when he notes that ‘axiomatic set theory is the only theory 
we have that allows us coherently to think inconsistent multiplicity 
as such’.75 What is motivating Badiou’s axioms, in addition to the 
injunction of modernity and the affect of immanence, is an atheistic 
 ontological ataraxia.
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
111
We must not simply equate ataraxia with a reductive notion of hap-
piness, however. Freedom from the fear of the gods for Badiou is not 
to be equated with what he castigates in L’Ethique as the nihilism of 
Man deﬁ ned in terms of being-for-happiness, which amounts to just the 
same as being-for-death (E 54/Eth 35). Nor is it a renunciation; Badiou 
denies that there is any room in his philosophy for asceticism (E 75/Eth 
53). We must not understand Badiou’s desire for serenity as a shot of 
anaesthetic. Rather, it is a settled conviction, appropriate to the times, 
that in a manner never quite free from the charge of circularity and 
begging the question consummates the death of God.
So for both Badiou and Hallward here, axiomatic decisions are 
motivated decisions, decisions, indeed, that are demanded, and not 
simply demanded by the modern age. The desired end – that of a truly 
secularised philosophy – precedes and demands the means: the axioms 
of inﬁ nity and the empty set. The axiomatic decision is an instrument, 
indeed the only effective instrument, of secularisation. And this is the 
rub, because the agenda of secularisation itself comes at this point to 
occupy the place of the unspoken Good in Badiou’s decision.
3.2 NA NC Y ’S ATHE O L O GY
We have seen that, although Badiou can marshal robust responses to 
the charges that his event is a miracle and his truth is a quasi-religious 
revelation, his ontological atheism is begging the question when it 
comes to the status of his axioms. We now turn to Nancy, whose 
account of post-theological thought is very different to Badiou’s but 
similarly unable ﬁ nally to escape the shadow of the theological. The 
main target of Badiou’s recourse to the axiom is ﬁ nitude and ascetic 
atheism. Nancy’s post-theological thinking is intended primarily to 
avoid parasitic atheism.
3.2.1 A/théisme and Absenthéisme
To begin with, Nancy does not see atheism as a decision that ruptures 
from theistic thought, but contemporaneous with, and the consum-
mation of, monotheism: monotheism is an atheism (DDC 27/DisDC 
14). The trajectory of atheistic thought for Nancy begins as far back 
as Xenophanes and his tirades against the anthropomorphic gods, a 
movement accelerated by the singular theos of Plato, replacing the 
paradigm of gods and mortals inhabiting the same space with the onto-
logical distance that the name ‘God’ will henceforth measure (DDC 
29/DisDC 16). The invention of atheism and the invention of theism 
112 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
are contemporaneous and correlative, because they both rely on what 
Nancy calls ‘le paradigme principiel’ (DDC 29/DisDC 16), the prin-
cipial paradigm, which questions the principle or arche¯ of the world, 
the axiological reason for what is given. Theism and atheism are bound 
by a complicity in this principial paradigm in a way that the assertion of 
atheism in the face of theism simply reinforces. An atheism that asserts 
the principial paradigm can only ever be parasitic.
The birth of monotheism is the birth of the deus absconditus; whereas 
the divinities of polytheism are ‘presences of absence’, the atheism of 
monotheism is the ‘absencing’ (l’absentement) of presence (CM 91/
CWG 69). What happens with the arrival of Christianity, when Jewish 
monotheism meets Greek atheism, is that the unicity of God is absorbed 
into the unicity of the principle. Christianity is then understood in 
terms of growing secularisation, echoing Marcel Gauchet’s memora-
ble phrase that Christianity is ‘la religion de la sortie de la religion’.76 
Secularisation is not simply a by-product of Christianity for Nancy, but 
its essence as ‘onto-(a)-theology’ (DDC 34–5/DisDC 20).
To oppose the principle of monotheism with the principle of atheism 
does nothing to challenge the underlying a/theistic logic of onto-a-
theology. The principle must be deconstructed, a move already begun 
in the Trinitarian God of Christianity that represents divinity as being-
together, and so ‘deconstructs’ the logic of the principle, the divine 
‘One’ of monotheism. The Trinitarian God is no longer ‘God’, Nancy 
argues, but an onto-theological species of being-together (ESP 81/BSP 
200).
Nancy seems to be following a post-secular trajectory when he main-
tains that the Christian God is the God who ‘self-atheises’ (s’athéise), 
for Christ’s incarnation is a kenosis, a self-emptying, by which the body 
becomes the name of no-god (pas-de-dieu), not as an afﬁ rmation of 
human self-sufﬁ ciency but of the lack of a founding presence (DDC 
127/DisDC 82). But it would be a mistake to count Nancy among 
the postsecularists. The kenotic trajectory is one in which Christianity 
deconstructs itself, exposing a movement within itself deeper than itself, 
upon which its theistic trappings are merely contingent. Far from God 
being the truth of atheism, it is post-theological thought for Nancy that 
is the truth of Christianity.
To conclude this brief survey of Nancy’s understanding of atheism, 
we can say that he rolls monotheism and atheism together (as (a)
théisme or as onto-a-théologie), and argues that monotheism, in so 
far as it expels the principle of the world to an absent and inaccessible 
outside of the world, is atheism (DDC 51, 55/DisDC 32, 35). The 
history of ‘God’ in the West – Greek, Jew, Christian, humanist – is the 
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
113
history of atheism. Let us not miss this point: atheism for Nancy has 
a history; it is not the event of a rupture with the past, but a process 
(DDC 35/DisDC 20) as old as the West itself, and constitutive of the 
West itself, whether in its incorporation of the Jewish or Greek tradi-
tions. The Joycean conjunction greekjew/jewgreek conjoins nothing 
other than two formations of atheism (DDC 35/DisDC 20).
Conceived in this way, atheism is constituted as an ascetic lack of 
theism’s divinities. We might venture to call this ascetic construal of 
atheism ‘bad atheism’, in a way that mirrors the ‘bad inﬁ nity’ discussed 
in the previous chapter:
la pensée sans ﬁ n, la ﬁ nitude sans ﬁ n, en somme l’inﬁ ni – reste privative, 
soustractive et en somme défective – de même que l’est obstinément et sour-
dement, fût-ce à son corps défendant, la tonalité majeure de toute espèce 
d’athéisme. (DDC 31)77
Like Badiou, Nancy critiques this ascetic atheism that implicitly consid-
ers the world as incomplete without a creating deity (SM 236/SW 156). 
The problem with it is that it apes monotheism’s logic of the principle 
while thinking that, in denying the existence of the gods, it is opposing 
monotheism, not realising that the telos of Western monotheism is this 
very denial. In its attempts to negate or escape monotheism, all it can 
do is repeat and consummate it.
Nancy critiques the logic of the principle (which he also calls the 
principat) as being either inconsistent, or incomplete. The great weak-
ness of the logic of the principle is that the principle, whether it is 
afﬁ rmed or denied, can only ever collapse into its own afﬁ rmation or 
denial (DDC 37/DisDC 22). Either 1) a principle must make itself an 
exception to its own ‘principiality’ in an ever-repeated (bad inﬁ nite) 
gesture, or 2) it must conﬁ rm itself as an equally recurring bad inﬁ nite. 
It must except itself from its own ‘principiality’ in the sense that, while 
everything that follows it must be accounted for in its terms (in terms 
of ‘In the beginning was the Word . . .’ or ‘All is matter . . .’ or ‘All is 
history . . .’ etc.), no such constraint is demanded (or indeed possible) in 
the case of the principle itself. Or it must conﬁ rm itself inﬁ nitely in the 
sense of an inﬁ nite regress: it must account for its own principle, and 
the principle of that principle, and so on . . . If the principle is complete, 
it is not consistent, and if it is consistent, it is not complete. It is at this 
point that Nancy’s critique of the principle crosses Badiou’s atheistic 
recourse to axioms.
In order to name this asceticism, Nancy coins the term absenthéisme 
(see CM 54 n.1/CWG 120 n.23). In Nancy’s earlier work, absenthéisme 
is a positive, or at least neutral, term. In La Création du monde (2002), 
114 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
absenthéiste describes the world without God to which monotheism 
inexorably leads, neither theistic nor atheistic (CM 54/CWG 50). Here, 
the triumvirate of myth, signiﬁ cation and sense are paralleled by the 
move from polytheism to monotheism to absenthéisme (CM 94/CWG 
71). In his Chroniques philosophiques (broadcast between September 
2002 and July 2003), absenthéisme is described as the anarchic (that 
is: rejecting the notion of an arche¯) positing of the singular existent, 
and a rejection of both theism and atheism (CP 28/PC 20). Similarly, 
absenthéisme is situated beyond both theism and atheism in ‘Le nom de 
Dieu chez Blanchot’ (DDC 129–34/DisDC 85–8, published in French in 
October 2003), but by the time of ‘Athéisme et monothéisme’ (written 
for publication in 2005), it seems that Nancy now employs the term to 
indicate an ascetic atheism that continues to respect the limit of the ﬁ nite:
L’horizon d’une soustraction, d’un retrait, d’une absence, voire l’horizon 
de ce que j’ai moi-même parfois nommé « absenthéisme » pour l’opposer à 
l’athéisme, continue à faire horizon – c’est-à-dire limite, impasse et ﬁ n du 
monde. (DDC 33)78
In other words, though absenthéisme rejects the logic of the princi-
ple, it is still inscribed within a horizon that sets it in opposition to an 
absent plenitude, a logic that makes common cause with the principle; it 
cannot think the world other than as ﬁ nite and conﬁ ned. It quite rightly 
acknowledges that there can no longer be any question of escaping 
from the world (as both theism and atheism seek to do, according to the 
logic of principle described above), but this does not therefore mean, 
Nancy now clariﬁ es, that the world must be considered as a horizon. 
Finitude, as we saw in the previous chapter with Nancy’s discussion of 
Hegel, does not limit the inﬁ nite, but must give inﬁ nity its expansion 
and its truth (DDC 33/DisDC 18). What Nancy is arguing here is that 
the ﬁ nitude of the world does not, by virtue of imposing a horizon or 
a limit, provide the sort of inaccessible, sacred ‘beyond’ which Badiou 
is so eager to prevent. It is this ‘bad’ ﬁ nitude-as-horizon that Nancy is 
now, in his later texts, calling absenthéisme.
3.2.2 Athéologie
The task Nancy sets himself is clear: to develop a new thinking that 
avoids the parasitic logic of the principle and the ascetic horizon, that 
escapes the dichotomy of a/theism otherwise than with an ascetic 
absenthéisme that inscribes the inﬁ nite within ﬁ nite conﬁ nes. What is 
called for is not an escape from monotheism, for such an ‘escape’ would 
parasitically repeat the necessity of a redemptive gesture that merely 
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
115
underlines the implied dichotomy of transcendence and immanence 
(DDC 34/DisDC 20), and it would be a repetition of the bootstrapping 
gesture of praying God to rid us of God (DLD 36–7/ODP 139).
As to what is necessary for this new thinking beyond a/theism, there 
are two main emphases that emerge in Nancy’s writing. The ﬁ rst of 
these is faith, but not faith (croyance) as a weak, hypothetical or sub-
jective form of knowledge that is unveriﬁ able and requires an attitude 
of submission rather than the exercise of reason (ADC 128). The faith 
(foi) which Nancy’s thinking beyond a/theism demands is ‘l’acte de la 
raison se rapportant d’elle-même à ce qui d’elle se passe inﬁ niment’ 
(DDC 40).79 This picks up the ‘principle of intelligibility’ that Badiou 
identiﬁ es in his reading of Plato’s Good in Philosophie et événement: a 
principle that cannot be reduced to the Idea itself. In other words, for 
Nancy this faith (foi) is necessary in order to make post-theological 
thinking fully consistent, and a fully consistent thinking is one that has 
relinquished the belief (croyance) in the principle or the principat. Faith 
and belief are ‘radically incompatible’ (DDC 44 n.1/DDC 178 n.10), 
and the only complete, consistent post-theological thinking (as opposed 
to the inconsistency or incompleteness to which the logic of the princi-
ple always resolves) is to have done with belief in order to acknowledge 
and make room for faith. Indeed, it is in a Kantian idiom that Nancy 
argues for the necessity of such faith:
C’est le point déjà formellement reconnu par Kant lorsqu’il parle, par 
exemple, de « l’incapacité où se trouve la raison, au regard de ses besoins, de 
se donner satisfaction par elle-même ». La raison ne se sufﬁ t pas à soi-même : 
pour soi elle n’est pas raison sufﬁ sante. Mais c’est dans la reconnaissance de 
cette insufﬁ sance qu’elle se fait entièrement droit. (DDC 40)80
Foi is an embrace of insufﬁ ciency; croyance is a claim of sufﬁ ciency. 
This is not an evocation of faith intended to undermine reason or sub-
ordinate it to religious belief after all, but rather an appeal to faith to 
‘supplement’ reason, in a Derridean sense. Faith is that which reason 
rejects, without which it cannot be fully itself, and with which it is not 
more than itself. It is only when reason recognises its need thus to be 
supplemented that it is fully reasonable, fully consistent. Furthermore, 
it is this appeal to faith that prevents Nancy’s reason from being a 
violent rupture in thinking.
The stakes in this supplementing of reason by faith for Nancy could 
not be more important. Failure so to do leaves one with an irremediably 
parasitic atheism that fails to follow the death of God:
La mort de ce Dieu – et c’est seulement ce Dieu-là qui est mort, Nietzsche 
lui-même le dit – n’est pas autre chose que la mort de toute Raison ainsi 
116 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
dotée des attributs de la nécessité et de la complétude de la fondation-
production de l’étant en totalité. Cette raison ne voyait pas qu’elle se mettait 
elle-même à mort en érigeant cette idole d’elle-même qui n’était qu’un Dieu 
pour athées. (ADC 48)81
Atheism has essentially consisted in parasitically substituting a reason, 
cause, principle or ﬁ nality for a God who was himself conceived as 
a higher Reason. The idolatry of self-sufﬁ cient reason can only be 
avoided by un-closing reason’s self-sufﬁ cent closure: ‘Déconstruire le 
christianisme veut dire : ouvrir la raison à sa raison même, voire à sa 
déraison’ (ADC 39).82 The un-closure of reason is what remains of a 
deconstructed Christianity, a reason freed from the will to do justice or 
to give a reason (rendre raison). It is a reason that knows that ‘giving 
a reason’ goes beyond any reason given, that one never ceases giving 
reasons (ADC 65).
Nancy develops his account of this faith in terms of Gérard Granel’s 
‘faith that is nothing at all’ (foi de rien du tout) (DDC 89–116/DisDC 
61–74), a gesture that measures neither knowledge nor certainty, 
neither subjectivising nor objectivising, a faith that holds itself to a 
post-theological ‘full atheism’ (athéisme sans réserve) without ﬂ inching, 
a faith that is nothing other than the ‘courage’ called upon to speak the 
‘strange’:
cette foi de rien du tout: ﬁ délité pensante, au-delà du concept, au « rien de ce 
Tout primitif », pensée conﬁ ée à ce qui lui vient d’ailleurs car de nulle part, 
de la part nulle du rien, et ainsi foi qui n’est en somme rien – que cette inﬁ me 
extrême touche de pensée posée sur ce rien. (DDC 104)83
In this faith one holds oneself to not asserting reason’s self- sufﬁ ciency, 
and reason’s completeness comes from this acknowledgement of its 
incompleteness. In this sense, faith is the truth of post-theological 
thought in the sense of ‘true’ preserved in the German treu and the 
English troth: a holding-oneself faithful to something or someone. 
Post-theological thought, in order to be true to itself, to its constitu-
tive incompleteness, must have faith. A post-theological integration 
acknowledges it is supplemented by faith. In its refusal of all consola-
tory or redemptive assurance, post-theological thinkers have more faith 
(though not more belief) than the religious:
Il n’y est pas question de « religion », mais bien d’une « foi » en tant que signe 
de ﬁ délité de la raison à ce qui d’elle-même excède le fantasme de rendre 
raison de soi tout autant que du monde et de l’homme. (DDC 44)84
Reason cannot account for its own reason, and ‘faith’ is the faith-
fulness to that non-sufﬁ ciency, a resistance to pretending that it can 
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
117
perform such an accounting, and a ﬁ delity to reason none the less. 
Nancy’s reading of this making room for faith cannot therefore be co-
opted for a ‘post-secular’ agenda where there would be some place off 
limits to reason, some post-modern critique of modernism, to reinstate 
the divine as a critique of reason, for faith holds itself precisely to refus-
ing this move of supplementing reason. The point is this: there is some-
thing inaccessible to reason, but it is not reason’s other. It is nothing 
other than reason itself. Reason does make room for faith, but it is not 
thereby denatured. In making room for faith reason makes room for 
nothing, and thereby becomes fully itself.
This faithful post-theological thought also overcomes ascetic atheism 
and its construction of atheism as a lack, in a move that Nancy char-
acterises as the replacement of insufﬁ sance with non-sufﬁ sance. Kant’s 
‘moral faith’, Nancy notes, has its essence not in an inadequacy of 
reason but, quite to the contrary, in the ﬁ rmness with which reason 
confronts its own incompleteness. Moral faith does not see in reason 
an insufﬁ ciency, failing or lack that would condemn it to nihilism, but 
rather a non-sufﬁ ciency in the sense that it is no longer a question of 
‘sufﬁ cing’ or ‘satisfying’, for there is no principle to which satisfac-
tion or sufﬁ ciency would need to adequate. Faith is reason’s own ﬁ rm 
pledge to its own rejection of theological categories (DDC 41/DisDC 
25), a pledge not to ‘ﬁ ll’ reason’s ‘lack’. Nancy’s faith is different to 
Badiou’s ﬁ delity therefore in this sense: while Badiou’s subject holds 
itself axiomatically to the consequences of an event with a certain 
violence, Nancy’s reason holds itself not to its effects but to its refusal 
violently to supplement its non-sufﬁ ciency. Nancy’s faith is a refusal to 
force reason beyond itself; Badiou’s ﬁ delity is a predisposition to force 
the consequences of a truth.
Nancy is at pains to distinguish his own non-sufﬁ sance from Marion’s 
principle of insufﬁ cient reason.85 The latter, as Nancy presents it, names 
a necessary meeting of modernity and theology: modernity recognises 
insufﬁ ciency everywhere (in consciousness, in discourse . . .), and the-
ology proposes a thinking of ‘insufﬁ cient reason’ as a gift of Charity, 
preserving the ‘distinction’ and ‘distance’ between beings as opposed to 
the plenitude of metaphysics (DLD 4/ODP 112). But this only conﬁ rms 
the opposite of what it claims, for God disappears all the more irrevo-
cably as he splinters into all the names of generalised and multiplied 
difference. This sort of monotheism resolves to a ‘polyatheism’, and 
such a God inﬁ nitely removed from the supreme being of metaphysics 
can no longer be called ‘God’ or divine at all, and nothing can be said 
of this ‘God’ that cannot also immediately be said of the event, love, 
poetry and so on.
118 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
3.2.3 Athéologie and Athéisme
The second component of Nancy’s bulwark against parasitic atheism 
is ‘atheology’. Nancy takes the term from Georges Bataille’s two pub-
lished volumes of the Somme athéologique,86 although he employs it 
in ways that differ from Bataille’s. For Bataille, the atheological con-
stitutes an assiduous pursuit of the consequences of the death of God, 
‘la science de la mort ou de la destruction de dieu’,87 and to this extent 
it is an anti-science, a science of the breakdown of science. Bataille is 
open about the extent to which his atheology constitutes a ‘basically 
religious attitude’:
Si vous voulez, c’est une athéologie dont la considération fondamentale 
est donnée dans une proposition comme celle-ci: Dieu est un effet du non-
savoir. Mais toujours est-il que, comme effet du non-savoir, il est connaissa-
ble, comme le rire, comme le sacré. Cela me permet de représenter ceci, c’est 
que cette expérience en somme se situe dans la ligne générale des religions. 
En parlant comme je fais, j’ai conscience non seulement de prendre une 
attitude religieuse au fond, mais encore de représenter une sorte de religion 
constituée.88
Atheology for Bataille is also a refusal dialectically to recuperate mysti-
cal experience, a refusal of the Christian economy of the redemption 
of suffering and loss into a productive dialectic, a thought according 
to which salvation and God intrude into the impossible, reducing 
 spirituality to a platitudinous possible-without-loss.89
The aspect of Bataille’s atheology that Nancy privileges is the refusal 
of a ‘redemption’ of atheism in a dialectical move that sees atheism 
bringing salvation from theism. The an-archic rejection of the logic 
of the principle is central to Nancy’s understanding of atheology. A 
religious notion of creation is replaced not with an atheistic notion of 
rupture according to the ‘Christmas projection’, but with a spacing 
which, in La Création du monde, Nancy calls le mondial. Nancy’s 
mondial, like Bataille’s atheology, seeks to respond to the cosmic diso-
rientation evoked in Nietzsche’s account of the death of God, yet it does 
so not with an ascetic evocation of an inaccessible alterity but with an 
insistence on the becoming-world (mondialisation) of the world. This 
becoming-world has two components: 1) an acknowledgment that the 
world is thrown into the ‘void’ of a space-time whose ﬁ nite measure 
(ﬁ nite because there is no other measure) is the inﬁ nite, and 2) what 
Nancy calls a blurring within itself of territories and lands (SM 238–9/
SW 157–8), by which he means to evoke the dissolution of limits and 
borders that would themselves seek to ‘sacralise’ the world by setting 
apart – sanctifying – certain territories from others:
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
119
la mondialité de la terre – de l’homme – veut dire: remise en jeu de l’avoir-
lieu en général. Le y n’est ni le ciel, ni l’humus, mais qu’il y a, et qu’il y a lieu 
de ressaisir le sens à partir de là. (SM 238)90
The spacing of ‘the taking-place-there’ (l’y-avoir-lieu) rejects the sub/
superlunary dichotomy even in its mystical guise, refusing the notion 
of a radical alterity whose ‘elsewhere’ does duty for an absent deity. 
In this refusal, Nancy is seeking to achieve what Badiou claims for his 
assertion that ‘nothing is inaccessible’, and his claims for its necessity 
for post-theological thinking echo those of Badiou:
Aussi longtemps que nous ne prenons pas en compte, sans réserve, le 
mondial comme tel, nous ne sommes pas quittes des démiurges et des créa-
teurs. Autrement dit, nous ne sommes pas athées. Être athée ne signiﬁ e plus 
nier un divin qui s’est de lui-même résorbé (et cela ne peut donc peut-être 
plus s’appeler « athéisme »). Cela signiﬁ e : ouvrir le sens du monde. (SM 
238)91
Atheism, as Nancy is using the term here – in a way in which elsewhere 
he uses ‘atheology’ as opposed to traditional Western atheism and 
where for the sake of clarity we are using ‘post-theological thought’ – 
is an opening of the sense of the world according to spacing, without 
recourse to any notion of (divine) creation or the logic of the principle, 
whether that creation be theistic or atheistic. It is this nuance that 
Ben Hutchens ﬂ attens out when he calls this moment from Le Sens 
du monde ‘one of [Nancy’s] most explicitly atheistic claims’,92 for we 
must not miss the fact that Nancy is also re-deﬁ ning the atheism that he 
afﬁ rms in contradistinction to the traditional understanding of the term.
Nancy has recourse to Lucretian atomism in order to develop this 
theme of mondialisation. Lucretius is, according to Nancy, far from 
elaborating a materialism in opposition to idealism, and is far from 
elaborating a notion of the privation of worldly sense in opposition to 
the thesis of a transcendent sense:
Ce que l’« atomisme » (bien ou mal nommé) représente est bien plutôt 
ce qu’il faudrait désigner comme l’autre archi-thèse de la philosophie (la 
première étant l’agathon de Platon), à savoir, l’espacement originaire en tant 
que matérialité, et cet espacement lui-même comme existential du rapport à 
l’agathon (SM 95)93
Spacing, then, is atomism’s alternative to the Platonic Good that 
orders thinking and the world ‘from above’; it is an order that emerges 
in the world from within, and comprehends no transcendent/imma-
nent dichotomy, and therefore no mystically absolute alterity. What le 
mondial requires, Nancy argues, is a new thinking of sense. Our task is 
not to pave the way for a new divine kingdom, neither in this world nor 
120 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
in any other, nor is it to rediscover the immanent unity of the world of 
myth that was lost with the birth of Western monotheism, rather our task 
is to achieve a post-theological integration that avoids both the privation 
of asceticism and the latent theology parasitism; our task is ‘penser un 
« sens-de-monde » dans un monde divisé de son propre être-monde, dans 
un monde acosmique et athéologique’ (DDC 60),94 yet a world which 
nevertheless remains the totality of beings and of possible sense.
Nancy’s athéologie is therefore not to be confused with Mark C. 
Taylor’s reworking of Thomas Altizer’s ‘death of God theology’95 in 
terms of an ‘a/theology’ which seeks to position deconstruction as the 
‘hermeneutics of the death of God’.96 Rather than a rejection of the 
categories which impose the binary choice between theism and atheism, 
Taylor’s thought makes the less radical move of positioning itself on 
the slash between theism and atheism, where ‘[t]he / of a/theology [. . .] 
marks the linamen that signiﬁ es both proximity and distance, similar-
ity and difference, interiority and exteriority. This strangely permeable 
membrane forms a border where ﬁ xed boundaries disintegrate. [. . .] 
Since it is forever entre-deux, a/theology is undeniably ambiguous’.97 
For Nancy, atheology is not between or before the decision for atheism 
or theism; it is otherwise than that decision. Nancean faith, as we have 
seen, has nothing to do with undecidability, and his athéologie is not a 
hesitation between theism and atheism but a refusal of the choice which 
such a hesitation presupposes.
Nancy’s atheology is not without risk, however. As Badiou’s atheis-
tic axioms harbour a question-begging ontological ataraxia, so Nancy’s 
refusal of the a/theism dichotomy also fails to banish the shades of 
the divine. Nancy attracts the accusation of maintaining a theology 
under the cover of atheology, a point probed by Jacques Derrida and 
Francis Guibal in ‘Responsabilité, du sens à venir’.98 In this exchange 
with Derrida and Guibal, Nancy comments that, if he were to have a 
motto, it might well be the Eckhartian dictum ‘we beg God to rid us 
of God’.99 He is cut short by Guibal, who reminds Nancy of the para-
sitism of this dictum and of his own warning from Des Lieux divins, 
that ‘Si nous devons passer, un jour, par-delà notre athéisme, ce sera 
pour ne même plus prier Dieu de nous délivrer de Dieu’ (DLD 36).100 
After acknowledging the well-foundedness of the intervention, Nancy 
turns to Blanchot’s rejection of Feuerbach’s replacement of God by 
Man in L’Entretien inﬁ ni, noting that for Blanchot ‘il s’agit de « tout 
autre chose », il s’agit de faire ou de mettre tout autre chose . . . « à cet 
endroit-là », quand même’.101 ‘Something else altogether’ perhaps, but 
nevertheless ‘in that place’. It sounds as if Blanchot is unable, after all, 
fully to wrest himself free from the parasitic thinking he identiﬁ es in 
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
121
Feuerbach and others, and it looks as if Nancy joins him in that impasse 
too, for he continues
Au fond, j’essaie peut-être de ne pas dire autre chose que ça: il y a là un 
certain endroit, une certaine place et un certain temps en tant que place et 
temps de . . . disons donc du divin, de la révélation, de l’ouvert.102
This point identiﬁ ed by Nancy crosses Badiou’s truth as affect of imma-
nence; both are instances of a moment necessary for their accounts of 
post-theological thought that nevertheless in the ﬁ nal instance escape 
the parameters established for and by that thought.
The divine, revelation and the Open have their place in Nancy’s 
thought, not in terms of religious transcendence but in terms of spacing. 
Yet the ﬂ ight from all positive revelation, and then the ﬂ ight from 
that ﬂ ight, which leads Nancy to think the relation of revealability 
(Offenbarkeit) to revelation (Offenbarung) in the same way that he 
thinks the relation of sens to signiﬁ cation, does not provide a radical 
alternative to theological thinking but a new means of thinking atheo-
logically within and against the categories of theism and atheism. This 
does not mean that Nancy’s spacing, his mondialisation, is irrevocably 
theological, or that it occupies exactly the place of the Christian God 
or Feuerbach’s Man. This is clearly not the case, for with le mondial 
Nancy achieves a remarkable rethinking of transcendence and imma-
nence in a transimmanence that is very different to the ascetic nihilism 
of immanence-without-transcendence into which imitative atheism 
falls. What it does mean is that Nancy’s mondial does not free itself 
from the theism/atheism binary in one leap, or in one axiomatic deci-
sion. The status of the atheological is delicate; the double ﬂ ight from 
signiﬁ cation and from revelation does not reject theological categories 
out of hand, but thinks le mondial from within them, transforming and 
frustrating them from the inside, seeking, as Nancy says, a resource 
buried deep within them that allows us to go beyond them (but not 
to leave them behind completely). Yet as we have seen already, this 
gesture is itself not free from Christian hyperbole. The project of post-
theological thought, whether pursued in its ‘ﬁ nite’ or ‘inﬁ nite’ guise, 
whether primarily as an avoidance of asceticism or an avoidance of 
parasitism, proves itself to be a difﬁ cult and as yet incomplete, possibly 
incompletable, task.
C ONC LU SI ON
The fundamental difference between Badiou’s and Nancy’s approaches 
to post-theological thought can be seen in the difference between the 
122 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
necessity for Badiou of the ‘nothing is inaccessible’ and the tension in 
which this stands with Plato’s principle of intelligibility, and Nancy’s 
argument that reason is supplemented by a ‘faith that is nothing at all’. 
Badiou (in his axiomatic mathematisation of ontology) and Nancy (in 
his mondialisation of spacing) agree that there is no sacred, no inacces-
sible domain. But for Nancy there is something inaccessible to reason: 
reason itself. In this, Nancy joins Badiou in recognising the impor-
tance of the choice of a ‘philosophical disposition’ on the basis of an 
 ultimately unaccountable central term:
Il y a, au cœur de chaque grande philosophie (et cela pourrait être la mesure 
de leur grandeur . . .), un mystère au sujet de Dieu ou des dieux. Cela ne veut 
surtout pas dire que ce mystère serait le cœur de la philosophie qui le porte. 
Assurément, il ne l’est pas; mais il est placé dans ce cœur, alors même qu’il 
n’y a pas sa place. (DLD 24)103
We must not too hastily conclude that the ‘God of the philosophers’ 
is an inane notion, cautions Nancy. Each philosophy experiences the 
approach and the ﬂ ight of the divine. This claim from the early Des 
Lieux divins is echoed in L’Oubli de la philosophie, where Nancy both 
frames the argument in less religious language, and allows himself a 
longer elaboration. We quote the passage here in full:
Platon, Descartes ou Kant ne proposent jamais une « vision du monde » sans 
faire en même temps le geste de toucher à la limite de toute vision du monde. 
Leurs discours prennent toujours en charge, d’une manière ou d’une autre, 
une clôture de la signiﬁ cation, le paiement d’une dette inﬁ nie au Sens, et 
l’ouverture d’une brèche ou d’un excès, l’abandon de la dette et de son écon-
omie. C’est même à cela, et à cela seul, que se reconnaissent les « grandes » 
philosophies: elles ne sont jamais simplement des visions du monde, elles 
ne sont jamais simplement des messages signiﬁ ants. Et c’est à cela aussi que 
nous devons leurs apories ou leurs énigmes, et avec elles l’histoire réelle, 
effective de la philosophie – le Bien ou l’Amour de Platon, l’évidence de 
Descartes, la joie de Spinoza, le schématisme de Kant, la logique de Hegel, 
la praxis de Marx, etc. (OP 75)104
Nancy is echoing here Edmund Husserl’s contention in The Crisis of 
European Sciences that only ‘secondary thinkers’ remain ignorant of 
the regress ad inﬁ nitum, the assertion of an unjustiﬁ ed hypothesis, or 
the circularity of justiﬁ cation that must sooner or later assail every 
 systematic philosophy.105
This is a condition of Badiou’s philosophy as much as of Nancy’s. 
There is no divine promise in Badiou’s philosophy, no miracle, no 
revelation or smoking theistic gun, but his philosophy itself is non-
sufﬁ cient without the promise of ontological ataraxia and the vio-
lence of the axiomatic decision that animate it. It is true that Badiou’s 
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
123
 disenchanted, mathematised universe contains no promise of a return-
ing deity, but it is no less true that this same universe is itself chosen 
as ‘better’ according to the promise of ontological ataraxia. What is 
inaccessible to Badiou’s philosophy is its own promise of atheism, a 
promise that has been exiled, or perhaps ‘outsourced’, outside Badiou’s 
secularised mathematical ontology, as the faith by virtue of which his 
atheism consists. In short, the world is secularised for Badiou when and 
only when secularisation itself becomes the promise which decides the 
axioms of his mathematised universe in the ﬁ rst place. Does this mean 
that Badiou is thereby won for the post-secularists after all? That his 
thinking is, in the end, crypto-theological? Not a bit of it. It means only 
this: that Badiou’s thought is an atheism after all. Not an atheism in 
the way he claims, though, for which ‘nothing is inaccessible’, but an 
atheism that must inevitably fall either into parasitism or into asceti-
cism, an atheism that, like all great philosophies, is inaccessible to itself, 
and in that admission ﬁ nally becomes consistent, as it makes room 
for ﬁ delity to ontological ataraxia. Nancy’s atheology is the truth of 
Badiou’s atheism. Both Nancy and Badiou must ﬁ nally acknowledge 
the impossibility of atheism’s ‘last step’ to completion and consistency, 
and thereby come up short of a post-theological integration. It is the 
claim to have accomplished this ﬁ nal elusive step, and therefore to have 
consummated a post-theological integration, that draws us in the next 
chapter to the work of Quentin Meillassoux.
NOTES
 
1. Eliot, ‘Leçon de Valéry’, p. 77.
 
2. Daniel Bensaïd, ‘Alain Badiou et le miracle de l’événement’, p. 160; 
‘[d]etached from its historical conditions, pure diamond of truth, the 
event, just like the notion of the absolutely aleatory encounter in the late 
Althusser, is akin to a miracle’ (Bensaïd, ‘Alain Badiou and the miracle of 
the event’, p. 101).
 
3. Žižek The Ticklish Subject, p. 183.
 
4. Osborne, ‘Alain Badiou’s Being and Event’, p. 26.
 
5. Badiou, ‘The event as trans-being’, TW 98. This passage on the miracle 
is added by Badiou in this English version, adapted from ‘L’événement 
comme trans-être’ (CT 55–9).
 
6. This is also why Badiou’s atheism is not vulnerable at this point to the 
charge of negative theology: 1) the void is always the void of the situa-
tion and 2) in the language of Logiques des mondes, the inexistent is not 
an ineffable alterity but simply that in a world which exists to the least 
intensity possible.
 
7. Bosteels, Alain Badiou, p. 115.
124 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 
8.
in my eyes, the principal contribution of my work does not consist in 
opposing the situation to the event. In a certain sense, that is something 
that everybody does these days. The principal contribution consists in 
posing the following question: What can be deduced, or inferred, from 
there from the point of view of the situation itself? (CCBT 252)
 
9. ‘I am convinced that the new can only be thought as process. There cer-
tainly is novelty in the event’s upsurge, but this novelty is always evanes-
cent. That is not where we can pinpoint the new in its materiality’ (CCBT 
253).
 10. See Bosteels, Alain Badiou, p. 131.
 11. Caputo, ‘Spectral hermeneutics’, p. 157.
 12. Caputo, ‘Spectral hermeneutics’, p. 183 n.4. author’s emphasis.
 13. Caputo, ‘Spectral hermeneutics’, p. 52.
 14. ‘do not give up on that part of yourself that you do not know’ (Eth 47).
 15. Caputo, ‘Spectral hermeneutics’, p. 57.
 16. Rancière, Untitled discussion of Alain Badiou’s L’Être et l’événement, 
p. 220.
 17. Simon Critchley makes a similar argument when he considers Badiou’s 
moral theory to be structurally Christian, for the law (the encyclopaedia 
of a situation) is overcome by an act of love for the event, where ‘le proc-
essus subjectif d’une vérité est une seule et même chose que l’amour de 
cette vérité’ (SP 97); ‘The subjective process of a truth is one and the same 
thing as the love of that truth’ (SPe 92).
 18.
In relation to Pascal, we must show a little reason after all: is it pos-
sible, yes or no, to draw from a text and from a conviction whose 
explicit parameters you in no way share the form, or the matrix, of a 
philosopheme that you have proposed and thought out in your own 
right, without seeing the parameters in question turned back on you as 
your unconscious ﬁ nally unmasked? (Author’s translation)
 19.
I like the grand metaphors that come from religion: Miracle, Grace, 
Salvation, Glorious Body, Conversion . . . People have evidently con-
cluded from this taste of mine that my philosophy is a Christianity in 
disguise. The book on Saint Paul that I published in 1997 with PUF 
didn’t help things. All things considered, I prefer to be a revolutionary 
atheist veiled under a religious language than a western ‘democrat’ 
who persecutes Muslim men and women while disguised as a secular 
feminist. (Author’s translation)
 20. He admits as much in ‘L’Investigation transcendantale’: the relationship 
between multiplicity and generic procedure might appear somewhat 
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
125
miraculous, from which ‘[i]l en résulte que, passant par mon essai sur 
Saint Paul, il n’est pas assez impossible, à mes propres yeux, de voir 
en « moi », comme le fait Nietzsche pour tout philosophe, du religieux 
camouﬂ é’ (IT 8); ‘as a result, taking into account my essay on Saint Paul, 
it is not utterly impossible, in my own estimation, to see in “me”, as 
Nietzsche does in every philosopher, a religious person in camouﬂ age’ 
(author’s translation).
 21. Hallward, Badiou: A Subject to Truth, p. 75.
 22. ‘an absolutely pure choice, one free from any presupposition other than 
that of a having to choose, in the absence of any distinguishing mark in 
the presented terms’ (Con 124).
 23. Tiles, The Philosophy of Set Theory, p. 121.
 24. Marion, ‘De la “mort de Dieu” ’.
 25. Marion, ‘De la “mort de Dieu” ’, p. 27.
the atheism of a concept of God [. . .] by virtue of its intrinsic region-
ality, far from closing down the question of God opens the question 
of other possible concepts for God. [. . .] The ‘death of God’ directly 
implies the death of the ‘death of God’ because each time, as it dis-
qualiﬁ es one deﬁ nite concept of God, it opens up once more the indeﬁ -
nite lexicon of other possible concepts to name a God that is always 
 thinkable or speakable otherwise. (Author’s translation)
 26. Marion, ‘De la “mort de Dieu” ’, p. 28.
 27. Marion, ‘De la “mort de Dieu” ’, p. 27.
 28. Marion, ‘De la “mort de Dieu” ’, p. 27.
 29. ‘To practice in thought the decisive rupture with romanticism [. . .] we 
cannot do without any recourse – which is perhaps once again blind, or 
stamped with constraint, or violence – to the injunctions of mathematics’ 
(Con 111).
 30.
We shall say that truth forces knowledges. The verb to force indicates 
that since the power of a truth is that of a break, it is by violating 
established and circulating knowledges that a truth returns to the 
immediacy of the situation, or reworks that sort of portable encyclo-
pedia from which opinions, communications and sociality draw their 
meaning. (Eth 70)
 31. The introduction of ‘inaccessible cardinals’ in Logiques des mondes 
should not confuse us here. Badiou is not reverting to a ﬁ nite thought 
of the limit. When Badiou insists that the cardinal of a world is an inac-
cessible cardinal (LM 316/LW 300), or that every world is measured by 
an inﬁ nite and inaccessible cardinal (LM 350/LW 332), what he means 
is that such a cardinal cannot be expressed as the sum of a number 
of smaller cardinals, and not by any means that it is inaccessible to 
thought.
126 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 32. Badiou groups under Romantic inaccessibility the Lacanian horror 
at the unsymbolisable Real, the Lyotardian phrase, and the end of 
Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, according to which ‘Whereof one cannot 
speak, thereof one must be silent’ (M 76/Man 95).
 33. Letter to Peter Hallward, 19 June 1996, quoted in Hallward, Badiou: A 
Subject to Truth, p. 320.
 34. Lyotard, Untitled discussion of Alain Badiou’s L’Être et l’événement’, 
p. 236.
 35. Lyotard, Untitled discussion of Alain Badiou’s L’Être et l’événement, 
p. 228.
 36. Milbank, ‘The shares of being’, p. 22.
 37. Clemens, The Romanticism of Contemporary Theory, p. 209.
 38. Hallward, ‘Generic sovereignty’, p. 99.
 39. Hallward, ‘Translator’s introduction’, in Alain Badiou, Ethics, p. xxxvii. 
Author’s emphasis.
 40. Bosteels, Alain Badiou, p. 108.
 41. Rancière, Untitled discussion, p. 221.
 42. Clemens, The Romanticism of Contemporary Theory, p. 208.
 43. ‘under the constraints of the historical injunction of being’ (NuN 56).
 44. ‘What it took was a pure courage of thought, a voluntary incision into 
the – eternally defendable – mechanism of ontological ﬁ nitism’ (BE 148).
 45. ‘when we are dealing with pure declarations, decided as such, these 
declarations exhibit the fragility of their historicity. No argument can 
support them’ (NuN 57; translation altered).
 46.
The fact that this is a matter of axioms and not of theorems means 
that the existence of zero and of the inﬁ nite are prescribed to thought 
by being, in order that thought might exist in the ontological epoch of 
such an existence. (NuN 57; translation altered)
 47. ‘Every thought – and, therefore, mathematics – sets off decisions 
 (intuitions) from the standpoint of the undecidable (of nondeducible 
inference)’ (BOE 95).
 48. Hallward, ‘Generic sovereignty’, p. 97.
 49.
Deleuze forcefully maintains – actually against all the joyous sponta-
neist and ‘anarcho-desiring’ interpretations of his philosophy – that 
we never think either by voluntary decision or by natural movement. 
We are always forced to think, he says. Thinking is like a shove in our 
back. Thought is neither pleasant nor desired. It is a violence done to 
us. I completely agree with this vision. (Author’s translation)
 50. ‘I agree with Bergson on the fact that there is an originary point that 
organises experience, a point that the whole of philosophical dialectics 
strains to catch up with and transmit’ (author’s translation).
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
127
 51. ‘For all that, I don’t know at the present time how far I need to go in this 
direction’ (author’s translation).
 52.
I think that philosophy must include, both in its conception and in 
its proposition, the conviction that true life can be experienced in 
immanence. Something must signal it from inside itself, not simply as 
an exterior imperative, like a Kantian imperative. That comes as an 
affect which signals, indicates, in immanence that life is worth living. 
(Author’s translation)
 53.
For the things which are known, say not that their being known comes 
from the good, but also that they get their existence and their being 
from it as well – though the good is not being, but something far sur-
passing being in rank and power. (Plato, The Republic, p. 216)
 54. ‘a principle of intelligibility that is not reducible to the Idea itself. It is 
naturally beyond the Idea that the Idea is a principle of intelligibility’ 
(author’s translation).
 55. ‘there is good reason to believe – but there is good reason to believe’ 
(author’s translation).
 56. The axiom of choice states that ‘If a is a set, all of whose elements are 
non-empty sets no two of which have any elements in common, then 
there is a set c which has precisely one element in common with each 
element of a’ (Tiles, The Philosophy of Set Theory, p. 123), or in other 
words the axiom of choice assumes a function that allows one to ‘choose’ 
one element from each of an inﬁ nite number of sets, when those sets have 
no elements in common.
 57. ‘for the universe with Axiom of Choice is otherwise broader and denser 
in signiﬁ cant links than is one without the axiom’ (BOE 96).
 58. ‘[w]ithout such a decision it will remain for ever possible for being to be 
essentially ﬁ nite’ (BE 148)
 59. Hallward, Badiou: A Subject to Truth, p. 149.
 60. Mullarkey, Post-Continental Philosophy, p. 113.
 61. Mullarkey, Post-Continental Philosophy, p. 104.
 62. Milbank, ‘The shares of being’, p. 49.
 63. Lyotard, Untitled discussion, p. 238; ‘in order to decide to name, one 
must hold a particular affection for the void’ (author’s translation).
 64. de Kesel, ‘Truth as formal Catholicism’, p. 13.
 65. de Kesel, ‘Truth as formal Catholicism’, p. 14.
 66. Colossians 3: 11.
 67.
In philosophy it is clearly identiﬁ ed under the name of ‘freedom 
of indifference’. This freedom is a freedom that, confronting the 
128 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 indiscernible, is not governed by any identiﬁ able norm of difference. 
If there is no value that discriminates things that you have to choose 
between, then your freedom as such constitutes the norm and merges 
with chance. The indiscernible is the subtraction that establishes a 
point of  coincidence between chance and freedom. (Con 124)
 68. Lecercle, ‘Cantor, Lacan, Mao, Beckett, même combat’, p. 12.
 69. It is not our intention here to provide a detailed description of atomism, 
nor an exhaustive account of Badiou’s relationship with it. The reader is 
referred to Bandres, ‘Badiou et l’atomisme ancien’, pp. 41–52.
 70.
The whole point is to contend, for as long as possible and under the 
most innovative conditions for philosophy, the notion that truth itself 
is but a multiplicity: [. . .] A radical gesture is precisely required here. 
Besides, this is how modern philosophy is recognized: by subtracting 
the examination of truths from the simple form of judgment. What this 
always means is to decide upon a single ontology of manifolds. (BOE 
62; translation altered)
 71. ‘Lucretius clearly sees that subtraction from the fear of the gods requires 
that, short of the multiple, there is nothing. Beyond the multiple there is 
still only the multiple’ (BOE 37).
 72. Without referring explicitly to ataraxia, Martin Hägglund classes 
Lucretian atomism as therapeutic in his taxonomy of atheism in ‘The 
challenge of radical atheism’ (p. 229). See also Clay, Lucretius and 
Epicurus, and Nussbaum, The Therapy of Desire.
 73. ‘[i]t is thus imperative, so as to be serenely established in the irreversibil-
ity of God’s death, to ﬁ nish up with the motif of ﬁ nitude’ (BOE 29).
 74. ‘In fact, we have to assume, as did Lucretius, that manifold-unfolding is 
not constrained by the immanence of a limit. For it is only too obvious 
that such a constraint proves the power of the One as grounding the 
multiple itself’ (BOE 35).
 75. Hallward, Badiou: A Subject to Truth, p. 90; author’s emphasis.
 76. Gauchet, Le Désenchantement du monde, p. ii; ‘a religion for departing 
from religion’ (Gauchet, The Disenchantment of the World, p. 4).
 77.
thinking without end, ﬁ nitude without end, in sum, the inﬁ nite – 
remains privative, subtractive, and, in sum, defective – in much the 
way that the main tone of every species of atheism also remains 
obstinately and deaﬂ y defective, even against its own will. (DisDC 
17–18)
 78.
The horizon of a subtraction, of a retreat, an absence, or even the 
horizon of what I once called ‘absentheism,’ to oppose it to atheism, 
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
129
continues to form a horizon. That is to say, it forms a limit, a dead end, 
and an end of the world. (DisDC 18)
 79. ‘the act of reason that relates, itself, to that which, in it, exceeds it inﬁ -
nitely’ (DisDC 25; translation altered).
 80.
Kant already recognized formally when he spoke, for example, of 
‘the incapacity in which reason ﬁ nds itself, to satisfy by itself its own 
needs.’ Reason does not sufﬁ ce unto itself: for itself it is not a sufﬁ cient 
reason. But it is in the acknowledgment of this insufﬁ ciency that it fully 
justiﬁ es itself. (DisDC 25)
 81.
The death of God – and it is only this God that is dead, Nietzsche 
himself says so – is nothing other than the death of all Reason thus 
endowed with the attributes of the necessity and completeness of 
the foundation-production of beings as a whole. This reason did not 
realise that it put itself to death in erecting this idol of itself which is 
nothing but a God for atheists. (Author’s translation)
 82. ‘To deconstruct Christianity means: to open reason to its own reason, 
indeed to its unreason’ (author’s translation).
 83.
this faith that is nothing at all: a ﬁ delity thinking beyond the concept 
of the ‘nothing of that primitive All’, a thinking given over to that 
which comes to it from elsewhere because from nowhere, from nulla 
partes, from the null part of the nothing, and thus a faith that, in sum, 
is nothing – nothing but this tiny extreme touch of thought laid upon 
that nothing. (DisDC 73)
 84. ‘It is not a question of “religion,” here, but rather of a “faith” as a sign 
of the ﬁ delity of reason to that which in and of itself exceeds reason’s 
phantasm of justifying itself as much as the world and man’ (DisDC 28).
 85. See Marion, Étant donné; Being Given.
 86. Five volumes in all were projected, but only two were completed at 
Bataille’s death, forming volumes V and VI of the Œuvres complètes.
 87. Bataille, ‘L’angoisse du temps présent et les devoirs de l’esprit’, in Œuvres 
complètes, vol. VIII, p. 573; ‘the science of the death or destruction 
of God’ (Georges Bataille, The Unﬁ nished System of Nonknowledge, 
ed. Stuart Kendall, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2001, 
p. 166).
 88. Bataille, Œuvres complètes, vol. VIII, p. 229.
It is an atheology whose fundamental consideration, let us say, is 
present in the following proposition: God is an effect of un-knowing. 
He can nevertheless be known as an effect of un-knowing-like  laughter, 
130 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
like the sacred. I can then say the following: that this experience is, on 
the whole, part of the general line of religions. In speaking as I do, I am 
aware not only of adopting a basically religious attitude, but further, 
of representing a kind of constituted religion. (‘Un-knowing: laughter 
and tears’, p. 99)
 89. Bataille, Œuvres complètes, vol. VI, p. 310.
 90.
the worldliness of the earth – of the human being – means: the renewed 
putting into play of taking-place in general. The there is neither the 
heavens nor the humus, but that there is, and that there is a place for 
reconceiving sense on the basis of this point of departure. (SW 158)
 91.
As long as we do not take into account, without reserve, the worldly 
as such, we have not gotten rid of demiurges and creators. In other 
words, we are not yet atheists. Being an atheist is no longer a matter of 
denying a divine instance that has reabsorbed into itself (and this can 
perhaps no longer be called ‘atheism’). It means: opening the sense of 
the world. (SW 158)
 92. Hutchens, Jean-Luc Nancy, p. 87.
 93. ‘ “atomism” (whether well or poorly named) represents what one would 
have to call the other archi-thesis of philosophy (the ﬁ rst being Plato’s 
agathon): originary spacing qua materiality, and this spacing itself as 
existentiale of the relation to the agathon’ (SW 57).
 94. ‘to think a “sense-of-the-world” or a “world-sense” in a world divided in 
its own being-world, in an acosmic and atheological world’ (DisDC 39).
 95. See Altizer and Hamilton, Radical Theology.
 96. Taylor, Erring, p. 6.
 97. Taylor, Erring, pp. 12–13.
 98. Derrida et al., ‘Responsabilité – du sens à venir’, pp. 165–200.
 99. Schürmann, Meister Eckhart, p. 212.
 100. ‘If we are to pass beyond our atheism one day, it will be because we no 
longer pray to God to deliver us from God’ (ODP 139).
 101. Derrida et al., ‘Responsabilité – du sens à venir’, p. 94; ‘it is a question of 
“something completely different”, it is a question of making or putting 
something completely different “in that place”, nevertheless’ (author’s 
translation).
 102. Derrida et al., ‘Responsabilité – du sens à venir’, p. 94; ‘Basically, perhaps 
I am trying to say nothing but that: there is a certain spot, a certain place 
and a certain time that are the place and time of . . . let us say, of the 
divine, of revelation, of the open’ (author’s translation).
 103.
There is at the heart of every great philosophy (and this could be the 
measure of its greatness), a mystery concerning God or the gods. This 
 
Difﬁ cult Atheism 
131
is in no way to say that this mystery is the heart of the philosophy that 
bears it. It certainly is not; but it is placed in that heart, even though it 
has no place there. (ODP 129; translation altered)
 104.
Neither Plato, nor Descartes, nor Kant ever proposed a ‘worldview’ 
without at the same time making the gesture of touching the limit of 
all worldviews. Their discourses in one way or another always take 
the responsibility for a closure of signiﬁ cation, for the payment of an 
inﬁ nite debt to Sense, and for the opening of a breach or an excess, the 
abandonment of the debt and its economy. For that matter, it is in this, 
and in this alone, that one recognizes ‘great’ philosophies: they are 
never simply worldviews, they are never simply signifying messages. 
And it is also to this that we owe their aporias and enigmas, and along 
with them, the real, effective history of philosophy: Plato’s Good or 
Love, Descartes’s evidence, Spinoza’s joy, Kant’s schematism, Hegel’s 
logic, Marx’s praxis, and so on. (GT 51–2; translation altered)
 105. Husserl, The Crisis of European Sciences, p. 394.
132
4. Beyond A/theism? Quentin 
Meillassoux
De l’inexistence de Dieu s’infère un monde sufﬁ samment insensé pour que 
Dieu même puisse s’y produire. (ID 3)1
Dieu est pour l’athée une affaire de prêtre ; Dieu est pour le philosophe une 
affaire trop sérieuse pour être conﬁ ée aux prêtres. (ID 379)2
In the previous chapter we saw that, while Badiou maintains the 
dichotomy of theism and atheism in his axiomatic approach, Nancy 
moves beyond the dichotomy, exploring how the two positions share a 
common structure and how, to be ‘without God’, it is this structure that 
must be rejected, though we concluded that neither Nancy nor Badiou 
succeed in rejecting it. In this chapter we explore what such an atheo-
logical move might look like in an idiom closer to, but by no means 
identical with, Badiou’s own, by turning to the thought of Quentin 
Meillassoux. Meillassoux’s Après la ﬁ nitude (2006) is an expanded 
treatment of part of his thèse de doctorat ‘L’Inexistence divine: Essai 
sur le dieu virtuel’, covering only the ﬁ rst 150 pages of a proposed 600 
or 700 pages of work developing the whole of ‘L’Inexistence divine’.3 
This latter work is broader in its scope though less developed than 
Après la ﬁ nitude, and we shall be moving between the two works in our 
discussion of Meillassoux in this chapter.
The ‘ﬁ nitude’ to which Meillassoux is referring in Après la ﬁ nitude 
is both the temporal boundedness of a human reason for which ‘what 
is’ correlates to ‘what is thought’, and the Pascalian wretchedness of 
a humanity incessantly humbled by the boundedness of its will and 
capacities. While Meillassoux’s thought may seem to bear closer afﬁ ni-
ties to Badiou’s than to Nancy’s, we shall resist classing Meillassoux 
at the outset in terms of any particular philosophical clan.4 Badiou’s 
preface to Meillassoux’s Après la ﬁ nitude indicates his own admiration 
for Meillassoux’s thought:
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
133
Il n’est pas exagéré de dire que Quentin Meillassoux ouvre dans l’histoire 
de la philosophie, conçue à ce stade comme histoire de ce que c’est que con-
naître, une nouvelle voie, étrangère à la distribution canonique de Kant entre 
« dogmatisme », « scepticisme » et « critique ». (PAF 11)5
Badiou sees strong parallels between Meillassoux’s work and his 
own on the question of religion, commenting in the same preface that 
Meillassoux’s critique of Kant’s critique of reason ‘autorise à nouveau 
que le destin de la pensée soit l’absolu, et non les fragments et rela-
tions partielles dans lesquelles nous nous complaisons, cependant que 
le « retour du religieux » sert de ﬁ ctif supplément d’âme’ (PAF 11).6 
Meillassoux, as we shall see, is indebted to Badiou’s ontological reading 
of set theory (AF 141/AfF 103), and he deploys this Badiouian bor-
rowing in a central place in his own thinking. It would be very easy to 
over-stress the afﬁ nities between Badiou and Meillassoux, however, 
and Meillassoux himself is at pains to stress that he is not Badiou’s 
disciple (HE). He critiques the place of the axiom in Badiou’s thought, 
and in particular considers Badiou’s employment of the empty set to be 
Heideggerian in so far as the void is ‘enigmatic’ (ID 125 n.41, quoting 
EE 72/BE 59).
As well as seeking a new position in relation to a Kantian understand-
ing of dogmatism, scepticism and critique, Meillassoux also strikes out 
in a new way to accomplish what we are calling a post-theological 
integration. In this chapter we shall unfold and evaluate this approach, 
considering it alongside Badiou’s atheism and Nancy’s atheology 
and offering a critique of our own that casts doubt on Meillassoux’s 
 post-theological integration.
4 . 1  THEISM, ATHEISM A ND PH I L O S O PH Y
Like Nancy, Meillassoux sees the dichotomy of theism and atheism as 
two routes to the same destination, though his reasons for rejecting 
the binary are for the most part divergent from Nancy’s. Like Badiou, 
however, Meillassoux trains his sights primarily on the dangers of 
ascetic atheism. He argues that atheism as traditionally conceived 
accepts and works within the terms of reference of theistic thought, 
which in Meillassoux’s case is the dichotomy between an immanence 
which can be known but which is fundamentally unsatisfying, and an 
unknowable, inaccessible yet ultimately satisfying transcendence (ID 
369), where transcendence has been deﬁ ned as exteriority in general, 
and exteriority to the concept in particular (ID 8). Religion posits a 
transcendence that alone can satisfy human desire, and the runt of 
immanence that remains once transcendence has taken this lion’s share 
134 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
is limited, ﬁ nite and incapable of sustaining happiness. Condemned to 
asceticism, atheism simply accepts the scraps of immanence that fall 
from religion’s table (ID 379).
This sort of atheism must, for Meillassoux, lead to one of two pos-
sible outcomes, both of which are undesirable. The ﬁ rst is an ascetic 
renunciation of transcendence, stressing the courage and humility that 
will prove necessary to face up to our miserable state, and the second 
is revolt, an attitude of deﬁ ance that amounts to much the same as the 
negative making-do of renunciation. In both cases, the atheist regrets 
that she is right (ID 379). ‘Atheology’ is not spared Meillassoux’s 
condemnation either, inasmuch as it still rests, along with theism and 
atheism, on a belief exterior to philosophy, making it the servant of 
theology (AF 63/AfF 47). This external belief is the faith or conviction 
that Nancy, for his part, seeks to distinguish from religious faith. For 
Meillassoux there is no such distinction and, as we shall see, his posi-
tion relies on a claim to have done away with the need for faith of any 
sort.
As an altogether more satisfying alternative to inadmissible theism 
and miserable atheism, Meillassoux proposes a third term, ‘philoso-
phy’, which distinguishes itself from both theism and atheism by refus-
ing to accept religion’s terms of engagement. What atheism fails to see 
is that its own limits, the frontiers of its own domain of immanence, are 
religious, and in order not to fall into the same trap, philosophy must 
speak of God and not remain silent; god(s) must not be construed as 
inaccessible to philosophy or beyond its limits, for the very good reason 
that, according to Meillassoux, philosophy has no limits. The philoso-
pher refuses the atheist’s limits because he does not sanction religion’s 
division of immanence and transcendence, to which both the ascetic 
and parasitic atheist bow the knee (ID 377).
‘Philosophy’ does not reject God: that is atheism’s great mistake. 
Philosophy devours him, taking away from religion all that religion 
holds as desirable (ID 377). The lexeme ‘God’ does not name one of 
the sides in the battle between theism and atheism, Meillassoux argues, 
but rather the territory on which the two camps ﬁ ght. In reserving this 
name for the object of faith, atheism shows that it has ascetically sealed 
its own defeat. ‘God’ is what is at stake in the ﬁ ght between immanence 
and transcendence, the revealed God of religion or the reviled God 
of the philosophers. The atheist, thinking himself outside the ﬁ eld of 
battle, confuses the priest and the philosopher from afar : ‘Dieu est pour 
l’athée une affaire de prêtre ; Dieu est pour le philosophe une affaire 
trop sérieuse pour être conﬁ ée aux prêtres’ (ID 379).7 Meillassoux’s 
philosophy is not a Ricœurean second naïveté, a post-religious faith 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
135
chastened by passing through atheism’s sieve or a ‘returning to God 
after God’,8 but a pursuit of the battle against faith deep into theology’s 
own territory.
From this initial rejection of a/theism, Meillassoux will make what 
may seem two rather unexpected moves: he will argue that philosophy 
is very close to religion, and that philosophy does in fact believe in God, 
though in an as yet unheard-of manner: philosophy believes in God 
because God does not exist. Together, these two positions comprise 
Meillassoux’s approach to post-theological integration. To understand 
how he arrives at these arresting conclusions and what he means by 
them, we need to consider two important motifs in his thinking: 1) 
the treatment of metaphysics in relation to the motif of the ‘nothing is 
inaccessible’ that we encountered in relation to Badiou, and 2) what he 
calls ‘the factial’ (le factual) and the importance of a new conception 
of necessity for his move beyond a/theism. We begin with the question: 
how does philosophy speak of God without being theistic?
4.1.1 Metaphysics, Necessity and Inaccessibility
Like Badiou, Meillassoux diagnoses the current return of the religious 
as a symptom of the end of metaphysics, an end which has emptied 
reason of its pretensions to the absolute (AF 61–2/AfF 45). From this 
state of affairs, he is also clear on the direction that any philosophi-
cal challenge to religion must take. The challenge must come from 
metaphysics and not from relativism, because religious ontology is 
itself relativist. In fact, religion and relativism are, from an immanent 
standpoint, one and the same ontology (ID 242), because they both rely 
on a fundamental contingency. For relativism everything is contingent 
because there are no absolute laws to guarantee any intramundane 
necessity; for religion everything is contingent upon the sovereign will 
of an unconstrained God. Whereas relativism sees in logico-mathemat-
ical thought only a linguistic convention, religion sees only the divine 
will: ‘eternal’ truths are such only because, and only for so long as, God 
wills them as such.9 This being the case, relativism represents no danger 
whatsoever for the religious thinking of transcendence; such thinking 
conﬁ nes relativism within the ﬁ nitude of ignorance left for it by reli-
gion, and leaves transcendence to the priests. For a serious challenge to 
religion therefore, we must look to metaphysics. In choosing this path, 
Meillassoux’s construal of metaphysics elaborates in much greater 
detail on the throwaway comment of Badiou’s in the Court Traité that 
the god of metaphysics is the enemy of the god of religion (CT 14/BOE 
24), the personal God of relationship.
136 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Meillassoux understands ‘metaphysics’ in terms of its project, 
namely to attain by reason alone the fundamental and eternal principle 
of everything that is (ID 265), and the way in which he constructs meta-
physics’ challenge to religion (in ID 268ff) parallels Badiou’s insistence 
that, for a truly post-theological philosophy, there must be nothing 
inaccessible. His argument can be summarised in eleven points: 1) It is 
not metaphysics itself that is at bottom a discourse of transcendence, 
but anti-metaphysics, because this latter seeks to forbid any under-
standing of the eternal foundation (fondement) of being. In leaving 
this transcendent foundation inaccessible to reason, it allows religious 
transcendence to continue unchallenged. Furthermore, it is inevitable 
that anti-metaphysics should be transcendent in this way, because 2) 
any limit to reason always also legitimates a religious discourse which 
claims for itself those realms beyond reason (our notion of an ascetic 
‘residual atheism’). It is therefore inevitable that 3) any notion of a 
limit or boundary to reason will end up sacriﬁ cing reason to revelation 
(where reason and revelation are considered as dichotomised and irrec-
oncilable), for in such a case it is only the irrational discourse of revela-
tion that can grant access to the principle of or foundation of existence. 
If there can be no rational discourse of sense that deals with the eternal 
foundation of the world (which is precisely what there cannot be, in 
anti-metaphysics), then the door is left wide open for irrational revela-
tion. This is for Meillassoux the deﬁ nition of theology: the discourse 
which rests on the notion that revelation is essential for access to the 
divine, given that it is impossible for man to accede to the divine by 
the use of his reason alone (ID 278). As for the atheism that seeks to 
remain resolutely within the limits of ﬁ nitude, it provides nothing but a 
legitimation of the religious in its most glorious irrationality (ID 274).
We now turn our attention away from anti-metaphysics to meta-
physics itself. Metaphysics is the only thought that is not at bottom a 
thought of transcendence for Meillassoux, because it disallows in prin-
ciple that there is anything inaccessible to reason. Therefore 4) meta-
physics renders any religious discourse illegitimate because the terrain 
of revelation has always already been occupied by reason. Furthermore, 
5) metaphysics alone can banish transcendence in this way, because 
metaphysics alone can occupy this ‘enemy territory’ otherwise left to 
revelation. According to Meillassoux, this is the fundamental trait of 
metaphysics: ‘On ne comprend rien à la métaphysique si l’on ne saisit 
pas que sa particularité réside tout entière dans cette agressivité origi-
naire envers toute forme de transcendance, qu’aucune autre discursivité 
n’a possédée’ (ID 268–9; QM’s emphasis).10 In other words, meta-
physics is the only discourse for which there is nothing inaccessible. 6) 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
137
Metaphysics therefore abolishes God precisely by speaking of God, by 
occupying with the discourse of reason the territory otherwise conceded 
to revelation. Meillassoux goes on to underline the necessity of meta-
physics by insisting that 7) any discourse other than metaphysics – or, 
in other words, any limitation of reason – must produce a necessarily 
(as opposed to historically) ﬁ deistic argument, justifying religious belief 
in general as the only possible access to the absolute (AF 62–3/AfF 46).
Meillassoux is now able to argue that 8) ﬁ deism is identical to 
scepticism and radical relativism, for ﬁ deism, in demonstrating the 
inconsistency of all reasoning (inconsistent because reason must give 
way sooner or later to faith and revelation) and the inability of unaided 
reason to reach any eternal truth whatsoever, demolishes all certainty 
in just the same way as do scepticism and the most radical relativism 
(ID 269). Metaphysics itself, however, is not exempt from complicity 
in this humiliation of philosophy, for 9) contemporary metaphysics 
plays into ﬁ deism’s hands, by showing religion to be irrational. This 
undertaking is profoundly misguided, however, for it simply secures 
the domain of revelation against any possible philosophical invasion. 
In contrast to this capitulation, philosophy must look to rationalise the 
domain of revelation, and therefore 10) the God of the philosophers is 
the great weapon of atheism, because it makes God rational. The God 
of the philosophers is no longer a God (‘un Dieu qui n’en est plus un’), 
and yet it takes the place of the former God of revelation (ID 269). It 
is therefore in the God of Spinoza or of Hegel that true Western irre-
ligion is to be found, not in Heidegger’s anti-metaphysical declaration 
of atheism (ID 270). Meillassoux comes tantalisingly close here to 
implying that the only way to be rid of God is rationally to prove his 
existence, but we shall have to wait a little while longer for his conclu-
sion on the existence of God. He completes his argument by asserting 
that 11) experimental science can never be the weapon of the atheist, 
because it relies on its own ﬁ nitude in the order of knowledge (ID 281). 
The enlightenment project of science had an internal structure that was 
quintessentially religious, and there persists today an alliance between 
experimental science and theology, to the exclusion of the eternal truths 
of mathematics. To identify reason with science alone is to say that the 
most fundamental questions about the world cannot receive a rational 
answer, because they cannot be approached speculatively.
For all its pretension to enter and occupy religion’s territory, 
Meillassoux nevertheless identiﬁ es a problem with metaphysics: though 
it rejects any limit to reason, it relies on a religious postulate, namely 
the possibility of a necessary existence (ID 380; PV 61). The dogma of 
revealed (and therefore rationally incomprehensible) truth requires a 
138 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
necessary being, but forbids intramundane necessity, for the principles 
and values of reason are temporary, liable to change according to the 
will of a sovereign God at any moment (ID 276). The fundamental 
thesis of metaphysics, by contrast, is that ‘necessity is’ (ID 277), in 
other words there are necessary laws governing nature and/or logic. 
This fundamental thesis of metaphysics is religious because only a God 
can guarantee or constitute such a necessity. It is in its reliance on the 
principle of sufﬁ cient reason (namely that for every entity, event, prop-
osition, state of affairs and so on there must be a sufﬁ cient reason why 
it is as it is, and not otherwise, or more succinctly, ‘nothing is without 
a reason’ or, in Meillassoux’s own terms, ‘things are necessary’) that 
metaphysics ﬁ nds itself in the embarrassing position of being unable 
to demonstrate the necessity it nevertheless upholds and upon which it 
relies (SR 441). Relying as it does on such a self-undermining notion 
of necessity, metaphysics has been all but vanquished by relativism 
and religion. This is by virtue of the force of their critique of necessity: 
whereas relativism and religion maintain that there is no real necessity, 
metaphysics persists in the doomed enterprise of defending the notion 
of a real necessity (ID 242).
Necessity, Meillassoux argues, is also a hidden assumption in the 
binary oppositions that construct metaphysics. Both systems of meta-
physics which privilege the one over the multiple, or identity over dif-
ference, as well as the contemporary critiques of metaphysics that 
privilege the multiple over the one or difference over identity, share 
the postulate according to which the primary and fundamental oppo-
sitions in terms of which thought takes place are precisely these (ID 
136). But such afﬁ rmations or critiques of metaphysics are alike and 
equally incomprehensible, Meillassoux argues, because they suppose 
the necessity of these primary oppositions, a necessity which cannot be 
accounted for by the dichotomy itself. The antimetaphysician dethrones 
the One with a difference she cannot explain; the metaphysician says 
that the One is necessary because indivisible, but cannot account for 
the necessity of the indivisible One. To advance the primacy of the 
One over the many, or of the many over the One – or indeed to afﬁ rm 
that neither term is pre-eminent with relation to the other – is always 
already to have required the necessity of that pre-eminence, or lack of 
pre-eminence. This mirrors our own questioning of ‘inconsistent multi-
plicity’ in the ﬁ rst chapter: the weakness of Badiou’s position is not in 
the ﬁ rst instance his privileging of the many over the one in inconsist-
ency, but his adoption of the dichotomy of many and one as necessary. 
For Meillassoux these putatively originary oppositions – one/many, 
identity/difference – presuppose and require, therefore, a more funda-
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
139
mental opposition, that of necessity and contingency, and it is this latter 
dichotomy that Meillassoux advances as the primary opposition in all 
thought (ID 137).
Nevertheless, Meillassoux’s own thought is not immune from similar 
questioning. The problem is that Meillassoux himself persists in occu-
pying the space bequeathed to him by a certain contested religious 
tradition (we are thinking primarily of the ﬁ deistic reading of the ﬁ rst 
chapter of Paul’s ﬁ rst letter to the Corinthians,11 through Tertullian’s 
division of sacred and secular learning in his oft-quoted and equally 
contested ‘What indeed has Athens to do with Jerusalem?’,12 and 
Kierkegaard’s ‘qualitative leap’ of faith13) in that he maintains a strict 
dichotomy of his own, this time not between the one and the mul-
tiple, but between faith and reason. The hidden premise at work in 
Meillassoux’s reasoning here is that reason and revelation, like oil and 
water, can never mix, can never supplement each other or occupy the 
same space, and that the exercise of reason in a given area will in and 
of itself leave no room for a faith that, once again, Meillassoux assumes 
must be irrational. Why, simply because metaphysics can talk of some-
thing, must religion necessarily stop talking of that same thing? Can 
reason itself account for that mutual exclusivity? Can revelation? Or 
must we look outside reason for its justiﬁ cation? Meillassoux’s dichot-
omising of faith and reason is not yet a refutation of the position taken 
by Nancy in his account of the ‘faith that is nothing at all’, where faith 
and reason are not dichotomised but faith is the ‘nothing’ that makes 
reason what it is. Nancy’s faith is to Meillassoux’s dichotomy of faith 
and reason as Meillassoux’s necessity is to Badiou’s dichotomy of the 
one and the multiple: it cuts across the binary and disrupts its terms.
In addition to faith and reason, we need to question Meillassoux’s 
reliance on the dichotomy of necessity and contingency. After all, his 
critique of the dichotomies of identity and difference, of the one and the 
multiple, is not a critique of dichotomous thinking as such, merely a cri-
tique of the particular dichotomies which, he thinks, have been falsely 
considered to be primary. Nancy offers a critique of the dichotomy of 
necessity and contingency similar to his disruption of the dichotomy of 
the one and the many by singular plurality. ‘Contingency’ for Nancy 
is a philosophical term that dances to necessity’s tune, measuring itself 
still by the contrast it draws with the religious notion of necessity. It is 
engaged in a dialectic where the totality of ‘contingent things’ (contin-
gents) can form a general order of the world (ADC 20). In other words, 
contingency can easily become a placeholder or a ‘front man’ inhabiting 
the religious understanding of the world as cosmos (in Meillassoux’s 
case we might evoke, in the spirit of the necessity of contingency, a 
140 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
‘cosmos of chaos’). Instead of this contingency parasitic on necessity’s 
religiosity, Nancy proposes ‘the fortuitous’ (le fortuit). The fortuitous is 
less a nature or a state than a circumstance or movement, and it is not 
opposed in dichotomous relation to stasis or constancy:
le fortuit, avec le fugace, le fuyant, l’inconsistant, l’éphémère, compose la 
rhapsodie mineure de notre système de références, dont le mode majeur veut 
le stable, le constant, le durable. [. . .] Rien à quoi se ﬁ xer, se tenir, rien où 
inscrire une profession de foi ni une assurance fondée. (ADC 21)14
As such, the fortuitous is an way to think, after the death of God, what 
in a parasitically religious frame would be called ‘contingency’ as the 
opposite of religious necessity. The fortuitous refuses to occupy the 
reason-giving place of religion.
The logic of assumed dichotomy is also at work in the way that 
Meillassoux talks about the relation between the God of religion and 
the God of the philosophers. The tenth step in Meillassoux’s account 
of metaphysics relies on the God of the philosophers ‘taking the place 
of’ the God of religion (ID 269), but it is far from clear that this is 
what the God of the philosophers does, either for religious believers 
or for atheists. A principle does not necessarily dislodge or threaten a 
person, any more than reason need necessarily drive out (as opposed 
to sitting alongside) revelation, and the lack of any compelling reason 
from Badiou or Meillassoux why this should be the case is indicative of 
a confusion of categories.15
In order to overcome metaphysics’ deﬁ ciency and elaborate a philos-
ophy beyond a/theism that supposes no necessary existence (of a divine 
being, a set of natural or logical laws or anything else), Meillassoux 
rejects metaphysics in favour of speculation (SR 441), and introduces 
what he calls the factial (le factual),16 according to which necessity is 
thought neither as the necessary indivisibility of the one, nor as the nec-
essary dissemination of the multiple. In the same way that Badiou elabo-
rates a notion of ‘pure’ difference in L’Etre et l’événement, Meillassoux 
seeks to unfold a pure thinking of necessity and contingency.
4.1.2 Contingency and the Principle of Factiality
The two errors that Meillassoux’s factial must avoid in its thinking 
of necessity are exempliﬁ ed by the ‘correlationist’ phenomenology of 
Husserl and Kant (ID 207–8). Correlationism, which Meillassoux elab-
orates at length in Après la ﬁ nitude, is the position according to which 
there is no being, event or law that is not always-already correlated to 
a consciousness, as an action, perception, conception or affection (SR 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
141
409). For the correlationist, ‘X is’ means ‘X is the correlate of think-
ing’: to be is to be a correlate, which is why it is impossible to conceive 
anything in the absolute, separate from the thinking subject. With cor-
relationism, philosophy has lost the geat outdoors (le grand dehors, AF 
21/AfF 7), the pre-critical absolute Outside of thought. Kant’s ‘weak 
correlationism’ holds the position that the in-itself, while not knowa-
ble, is nevertheless thinkable (as non-contradictory and existing, AF 48/
AfF 35), whereas the ‘strong correlationism’ of Heidegger or Foucault 
argues that we cannot think the in-itself even to the extent of asserting 
that it is non-contradictory; strong correlationism denies that limits of 
the thinkable should be the limits of the possible? (AF 48/AfF 35).
So the challenge set for Meillassoux’s factial is that necessity must 
be thinkable, but the necessity that is thinkable must not be a real 
necessity. In other words, the factial must 1) maintain some notion 
of eternal necessity, while 2) excluding any necessary being (ID 283); 
Meillassoux must refuse every metaphysical absolute, yet retain ‘a little 
absolute’ (un peu d’absolu, AF 68/AfF 49). This is why the factial, in 
carrying forward the project of metaphysics, can be neither metaphysi-
cal nor anti-metaphysical (ID 284). In order to establish the factial, 
Meillassoux disambiguates two notions of necessity which are con-
fused, he claims, in Aristotle (ID 155): the eternal truths of logic and 
the constraining forces of nature. We shall deal ﬁ rst with Meillassoux’s 
dismissal of the ‘real necessity’ of natural laws, before turning to the 
question of the eternal truths of logic.
The reason that a belief in perennial laws is religious is that it makes 
some transcendent action necessary to maintain the laws over time: 
‘Nous avons ôté les dieux, mais nous avons conservé la croyance en la 
divine solidité des lois’ (ID 4).17 For his part, Meillassoux insists that 
these constants can be abolished, for the simple reason that nothing 
sustains them from the outside (ID 4).18 In other words, Meillassoux is 
identifying as parasitic that atheism which shares religion’s assumption 
of the perennity of natural laws, namely (major premise) only the gods 
can break the natural laws. From this shared assumption, a belief in the 
perennity of natural laws proceeds to reason that (minor premise) there 
are no gods, so (conclusion) nothing can break the natural laws.
So in order to be truly free of God, the factial must think necessity 
otherwise than through the necessity of natural laws; natural laws 
must be contingent. There are three conceptions of contingency that 
have dominated in the Western tradition: 1) ‘legal contingency’ held 
by modern scientism, according to which the contingent is that which 
does not contravene the constants of experience, 2) ‘representative 
contingency’, exempliﬁ ed by Hume’s dissociation of logical and causal 
142 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
necessity according to which the contingent is all that I can imagine 
not existing, and 3) ‘rational contingency’, according to which the con-
tingent is that for which a reason for its existing cannot be given, that 
for which one cannot say why it exists, rather than nothing (ID 223). 
The third, rationalist articulation of contingency comes from Judaeo-
Christianity and is, according to Meillassoux, the only way to escape 
correlationism:
Seule la religion monothéiste fonde l’idée d’une contingence de toute chose : 
le monde n’est pas éternel. Il est créé, sa contingence est admise, quoique sa 
non-existence (le pur néant) ne soit pas présentable. La thèse de l’existence 
d’un Dieu tout-puissant produit en retour, par un apparent paradoxe, une 
conception radicale de la contingence de tout étant ﬁ ni, créé, – étant qui 
est le seul accessible à la pensée humaine. Le judéo-christianisme en posant 
que la nécessité de Dieu est inaccessible à la pensée humaine est entièrement 
contingent. (ID 236)19
It is this religious territory that Meillassoux’s philosophy seeks to 
occupy, but whereas in a religious frame this rational conception of 
contingency leads to the necessity of transcendence, from an imma-
nent point of view (that is to say a point of view accessible to human 
thought) it leads to the impossibility of thinking that any thing is nec-
essary. Whereas Badiou puts all his effort into thinking change and 
novelty, Meillassoux’s task is to account for relative stability.
There is now only one small – but important – step from this imma-
nent side of rational contingency to Meillassoux’s ‘factial’: whereas in 
the religious conception of rational contingency, necessity is incom-
prehensible, and whereas for the immanent side of rational contin-
gency it is unthinkable, in the factial, necessity is accessible to reason. 
Meillassoux’s argument is as follows. First, there can be no real neces-
sity, on pain of ﬁ deism. Secondly it follows that the facticity of a thing 
is not itself a fact (AF 107/AfF 79), because if facticity were itself a fact 
(that is to say, contingent and not necessary) there could be a neces-
sary being, and we would be back with religious ﬁ deism. So, the only 
 necessity is contingency itself:
ce qui est, est factuel, mais que ce qui est soit factuel, voilà qui ne peut être 
un fait. Seule la facticité de ce qui est ne peut pas être factuelle. Ou encore, 
dit autrement : ce ne peut être un fait que ce qui est soit un fait. . . . La 
contingence de l’étant, et elle seule, n’est pas une propriété contingente de 
l’étant. (ID 44; QM’s italics)20
Factiality, in other words, is the non-facticity of facticity (AF 107/
AfF 79). Contingency is itself necessary in order to avoid a necessary 
being which, after the death of God, we have no grounds to admit into 
our thinking. We may say that an object is de facto red, but not that it 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
143
is de facto de facto (ID 46). And what is necessity? Necessity consists 
in the impossibility of qualifying contingency as contingent (ID 47). In 
order to avoid falling back into metaphysics, Meillassoux stresses that 
the principle of factiality does not maintain that contingency is neces-
sary, but that only contingency is necessary (AF 108/AfF 80), as a direct 
correlate of the absence of any necessary being, event or law.
Meillassoux is at great pains to stress that the necessity of contin-
gency does not replace the ‘laws of nature’ with a meta-law of contin-
gency itself: ‘il n’y a pas de loi du devenir, parce qu’il y a devenir des 
lois’ (ID 5).21 So although the necessity to which Meillassoux appeals is 
eternal, this eternity does not signify the eternity of the laws of becom-
ing, but the eternity of the becoming of laws (ID 158). In ‘Temps et 
surgissement ex nihilo’ Meillassoux describes this state of affairs as an 
inverted Platonism: there is an illusory ﬁ xity of objects but a real con-
tingency ‘behind’ that ﬁ xity; the intelligible is on the side of the most 
radical becoming, the sensible on the side of ﬁ xity.
Peter Hallward fails to take account of the difference between a law 
of becoming and the becoming of laws in his review of Après la ﬁ ni-
tude,22 He argues that ‘Meillassoux’s rationalist critique of causality 
and necessity seems to depend on an equivocation between metaphysi-
cal and physical or natural necessity’,23 where metaphysical necessity is 
the principle of sufﬁ cient reason and natural necessity is a natural law 
giving a reason ‘for anything to be the way it is’. But Meillassoux is 
not arguing that the physical world is perceptibly chaotic or impenetra-
ble to reason, rather that the physical world is subject to an absolute 
contingency that itself can be discerned not through observation but 
through reason. Hallward himself seems to be confusing chaos and 
contingency when he insists that it is
perfectly possible, of course, to reconstruct the locally effective reasons and 
causes that have shaped, for instance, the evolution of aerobic vertebrate 
organisms. There was nothing necessary or predictable about this evolution, 
but why should we doubt that it conformed to familiar ‘laws’ of cause and 
effect?24
This argument, which culminates in the conclusion that ‘the only event 
that might qualify as contingent and without reason in [Meillassoux’s] 
absolute sense of the term is the emergence of the universe itself’,25 
misunderstands that for Meillassoux contingency does not mean that 
there must be no conceivable reason for such and such an event, but 
that there can be no necessary reason for it: whatever reason there may 
be is necessarily contingent. Apples can still fall to the ground in obedi-
ence to the law of gravity, and we can still explain their falling in terms 
144 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
of gravity;26 Meillassoux’s point is simply that we are not at liberty to 
take this gravity to be an eternal necessity. As Nathan Brown has it, 
‘he [Hallward] again addresses a speculative question concerning the 
possible contingency of the laws from within an empirical framework 
pertaining only to the laws as they currently are or have been’.27
Graham Harman makes the same mistake in his response to an oral 
presentation by Meillassoux when he suggests that ‘for Meillassoux 
causation disappears’ and ‘in my view, since he is saying that every-
thing is absolutely contingent, what he’s really doubting is that there’s 
any relationality at all’.28 Harman classes Meillassoux as a hyper-
occasionalist, where occasionalism is ‘the idea that entities in the world 
exist only side by side, without any connection with one another’.29 
Meillassoux is not saying, however, that there is no causality or rela-
tionality, but that what causality there is, is contingent. Contingency is 
neither chaos nor non-existence, and for Meillassoux there are plenty 
of connections between things in the world (gravity being one); it is just 
that none of them are necessary.
This mistake of hypostatising Meillassoux’s factiality and attribut-
ing to him some form of parasitic atheism is repeated when Hallward 
argues that
it may be, however, that an argument regarding the existence or inexistence 
of God is secondary in relation to arguments for or against belief in this 
quintessentially ‘divine’ power – a supernatural power to interrupt the laws 
of nature and abruptly reorient the pattern of worldly affairs.30
Meillassoux’s absolute contingency is not a power to interrupt the 
‘laws’ of nature, nor is it a law itself. For Meillassoux there is no law 
of becoming, but a becoming of laws, no power of interruption, but the 
interruption of all power.
This notion of necessity brought by Meillassoux’s principle of facti-
ality is very different from the religious necessity called upon to regulate 
rational contingency. Both religious contingency and Meillassoux’s 
contingency potentially issue in a radical hyperchaos, and have to try 
to make sense of the stability of the world. Whereas chaos is ‘disorder, 
randomness, the eternal becoming of everything’, hyperchaos (surcon-
tingence) is a contingency ‘so radical that even becoming, disorder, or 
randomness can be destroyed by it, and replaced by order, determinism, 
and ﬁ xity’, or ‘the equal contingency of order and disorder, of becom-
ing and sempiternity’ (TWB). The scholastic reconciliation with hyper-
chaos is to appeal to God’s will, giving contingency an extrinsic norm. 
By contrast, the factial holds that it is contingency which, unlimited 
and absolute, becomes its own norm (‘se norme elle-même’, ID 239; 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
145
cf. AF 90/AfF 66). Metaphysics announces ‘necessity is’, and relativism 
counters ‘there is no necessity’, but the principle of factiality stakes out 
a fresh position: there is necessity because necessity cannot be (‘il y a de 
la nécessité parce que la nécessité ne peut être’, ID 239; QM’s italics).
Elsewhere, Meillassoux articulates the principle of factiality as an 
identiﬁ cation of ignorance with knowledge. The ignorance in question 
is the conclusion that, if everything is contingent, then it is without suf-
ﬁ cient reason, and I therefore cannot know the sufﬁ cient reason of any 
thing. But this ignorance becomes itself the basis of a pure knowledge 
by a ‘transmutation’ of the concept of contingency: I do not know 
the necessity of any contingent thing, but I do know the necessity of 
contingency (ID 56), in what Meillassoux calls the ‘principle of insuf-
ﬁ cient reason’ (a term he later chooses to replace with the less negative-
sounding principle of factiality, AF 69/AfF 50). This is not a Socratic 
ignorance because the necessity of contingency has non-negligible 
 consequences for the understanding of being.
Meillassoux’s invocation of the principle of insufﬁ cient reason is not 
to be confused with Nancy’s non-sufﬁ sance, which is a break with the 
notion of contingency in so far as contingency (as opposed to fortuity) 
is still parasitic upon the regime of sufﬁ cient reason (ADC 33). Reason 
for Nancy is not insufﬁ cient but rather overﬂ ows all sufﬁ ciency, exceeds 
all satisfaction if sufﬁ ciency and satisfaction are considered as the signi-
ﬁ cations of which sense is the giving, the information of which adora-
tion is the address. Indeed, Meillassoux’s principle of factiality would, 
by the yardstick of Nancy’s non-sufﬁ sance, be parasitically theological, 
still a question of closure and accomplissement, of ‘sufﬁ cing’ or ‘satisfy-
ing’ the theological principle of (self-) sufﬁ ciency. In turn, Meillassoux 
would no doubt consider Nancy’s non-sufﬁ sance as both ascetic in its 
renunciation of completion and parasitic in its recourse to faith (foi).
The necessity of contingency has two important and immediate con-
sequences: it forecloses the possibilities both of self-contradiction and 
of the All, understood as a Hegelian Absolute, the being that negates its 
identity and becomes its own opposite (ID 48, 139–40). First, the All. If 
a thing is both itself and its opposite, then it cannot change, and by that 
token it is necessary and not contingent. And, given that contingency 
is necessary (because there is no necessary being or law to guarantee 
necessity), such a being cannot exist. Meillassoux records his debt to 
Badiou for breaking the link between the inﬁ nite and the All (ID 19, 22 
n.6). Set theory for Meillassoux is the science of becoming that eternally 
breaks every particular or empirical structure, and its object is becom-
ing as such (ID 41). This Badiouian borrowing allows Meillassoux to 
dismiss the divinity of Anselm’s Proslogion: ‘that than which nothing 
146 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
greater can be thought’31 (ID 149). Indeed, according to the principle 
of factiality the God of Anselm is the only being whose non-existence 
it is possible to ascertain a priori (ID 150). This relies, of course, on 
adhering to the version of set theory according to which ‘the transﬁ nite 
of Cantor in mathematics and set theory demonstrated that there is 
no quantity of all quantities’ (SR 442), in other words it depends on 
excluding the Cantorian absolute inﬁ nite, which we showed in Chapter 
1 to be a contingent and not a necessary exclusion. It also depends, 
we should note, on the set theoretical dichotomy of the multiple and 
the one which, Meillassoux maintains, is contingent (because only 
contingency is necessary). As well as being able to dismiss a priori the 
Anselmian All, Meillassoux also forecloses any parasitic usurpation of 
its place by another being: ‘Dieu, comme Tout ce qui est, ne pouvant 
exister, l’homme ne peut être Dieu’ (ID 154).32
The second consequence of factiality is that it grounds the principle 
of non-contradiction by similar reasoning. If a being were contradictory 
it would be its own negation and therefore it could not be otherwise 
than it is. It would be necessary, and no being is necessary (ID 49). The 
principle of non-contradiction for Meillassoux is therefore not merely 
required for a consistent discourse, but it has ontological reach (ID 
96): contradiction cannot exist, for it would violate the principle of 
factiality. These two ‘ﬁ gures’ – of the impossibility of the All and the 
necessity of non-contradiction – show according to Meillassoux that 
the necessity of contingency does not mean that anything whatsoever 
can happen. Quite to the contrary, the derivation of non-contradiction 
from factiality means that ‘the very expression “rational chaos” from 
that moment on becoming a pleonasm’ (PV 61). Meillassoux has not 
unleashed the anarchy of chaos but discovered a logos of contingency 
(AF 104/AfF 77).
When he then comes to apply this reasoning to the question of God, 
Meillassoux uses the principle of factiality to argue that our incapacity 
to know God is in fact a great achievement (ID 138–9). Man, unlike the 
animals, can reason his way to the invisible property of all that exists, 
namely the absence of sufﬁ cient reason. But this opens up a reasoning 
ad inﬁ nitum: one thing is explained in terms of another, which in turn 
is explained in terms of a third . . . There is no regress to a point of no 
contingency. Nevertheless, thought can produce universal statements 
because it provides access to this inﬁ nite, unarrestable regress. If the 
questioning could come to a halt, there would exist a being impossible 
to question, a necessary being, or God. That is why we cannot under-
stand God: as a necessary being we could not question him. At this 
point, Meillassoux turns this incapacity into an achievement: whereas 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
147
religions would paint ignorance of God as evidence of incapacity due 
to our ﬁ nitude, Meillassoux sees rather a capacity to understand that 
an end to the questioning is impossible, and this latter understanding is 
exactly what gives us access to the eternal truths of this world: ‘Point 
remarquable: c’est parce qu’il est capable de ne pas comprendre Dieu 
que l’homme accède à l’éternel’ (ID 139).33 The absence of ﬁ nal reason 
is not a limit to our thinking, but the ultimate property of being itself 
(AF 72–3/AfF 53). Our inability to understand an ultimate reason is not 
a subjective incapacity but a capacity to grasp the objective impossibil-
ity of such a reason. This is not an index of man’s wretchedness, but of 
his grasping grandeur (grandeur saisissante (ID 139)).
Meillassoux’s rejection of any limitation to reason may in his own 
terms secure the status of his philosophy as distinct from a/theism, but 
it is not without potential problems, at least from Nancy’s point of 
view. For Nancy, the desire exhaustively to give a reason for the world 
is already a religious move. Religious myth or a religious idol responds 
to the demand that reason should have no limits, or in other words it 
explains or comes to terms with existence (rend raison de l’existence) 
(ADC 58–9). This is the closure of religion on itself; ‘c’est dans un désir 
de « rendre raison » que la religion peut s’épuiser en mythologie et en 
idolâtrie’ (ADC 59).34
The desire to drive out all idols with the whip of reason, more speciﬁ -
cally to do so self-sufﬁ ciently and without remainder, leads to reason 
itself becoming an idol in the sense that it exempts itself from the neces-
sity of providing a reason. Myths and idols explain, or give a reason 
for, the sort of questions for the answer to which Meillassoux turns to 
his principle of factiality. For Nancy, such Reason is parasitic on reli-
gion’s principle of giving sufﬁ cient reason, a new move in religion’s old 
game, rather than a rupture with the logic that underlies religious myth 
or idolatry. In L’Adoration the argument runs as follows: Kant circum-
scribed ‘understanding’ in putting down (mettre à bas) any rational 
‘proof of God’ or determination of the ﬁ rst principle (Raison première) 
of the world:
Une place désormais était vide. Elle fut occupée par beaucoup d’instances 
suppléantes, par exemple la Raison hégélienne comme déploiement de 
l’Esprit. Mais dès Hegel lui-même, et plus encore de lui jusqu’à nous, ce qui 
devenait manifeste, c’est que la place vide ne devait pas être occupée. (ADC 
49; J-LN’s italics)35
‘The empty place was not to be occupied’. There, in a nutshell, is 
Nancy’s rejection of parasitic atheism. Nevertheless, there has been 
a series of attempts, all duly atheistic and more or less pitiful or 
148 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 frightening (ADC 49) to occupy this empty space while pretending 
not to do so: materialisms, positivisms, scientisms, irrationalisms, 
fascisms, collectivisms, utilitarianisms, individualisms, historicisms, 
democratisms and even juridicisms, relativisms, scepticisms and logi-
cisms. Viewed in these terms, Meillassoux’s principle of factiality shares 
this same parasitic drive. The difference is that Nancy sees a parasitism 
in this sharing, whereas Meillassoux sees an occupation of religion’s 
territory, and the question around which the difference turns is: is the 
attempt to provide an exhaustive ﬁ rst principle of the world itself a reli-
gious move? Furthermore, Meillassoux sees an asceticism in ceding the 
territory of providing reasons to religion alone, rather than occupying 
it with a post-theological integration.
So which is it? Is Meillassoux parasitic here, or is Nancy ascetic, or 
both? We shall search for the answer by exploring further Meillassoux’s 
appeal to reason to ﬁ nd out whether it is in fact self-grounding, 
as he requires it to be. What Meillassoux does with theism and 
atheism, namely shows that they share a set of common assumptions 
which means we must break with both, Nancy does with religion 
and reason considered as self-sufﬁ cient. For Nancy we must follow 
Christianity’s self-deconstruction in order to break equally with the 
spirit of Christianity and the spirit of the rational West (ADC 42). 
So is Nancy more consistently post-theological because he discerns 
and distances himself from more of the assumptions that religion and 
parasitic atheism share (including the dichotomy of reason and faith), 
or is Meillassoux more consistently post-theological because he goes 
further in breaking from religion’s compromise of reason with faith? In 
order to answer that question we need to press further into the status of 
reason in Meillassoux’s thought.
4 . 2  BELI EVING IN GOD B E C A U S E  H E  DO E S 
NOT EXI S T
Where then does the principle of factiality leave the question of God? 
In a position that can be adequately described neither as theistic nor 
as atheistic. There are four, and only four, possible ways that man 
can relate to God, Meillassoux argues, only three of which have hith-
erto been exploited (ID 388). In these four options, it is clear that 
Meillassoux is using ‘belief in’ not in the sense of ‘assent to the exist-
ence of’ but ‘hope in’. First option: one can not believe in God because 
he doesn’t exist. Meillassoux lets his attitude to this atheistic option 
be known by summing it up as a position that leads to sadness, luke-
warmness, cynicism and ressentiment. It is, he concludes, the  immanent 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
149
form of despair, a form of what we are calling ascetic atheism. 
Secondly, one can believe in God because he exists, but this accord-
ing to Meillassoux leads to the deadlocks of fanaticism, a ﬂ ight from 
this world, and the confusions of holiness with mysticism and of God 
as love with God as power. It is the religious form of hope. Thirdly, 
one can not believe in God because he exists. This is the Luciferian 
posture of revolt, maintaining a haughty indifference which in effect is a 
mixture of animosity towards God (in which the displayed indifference 
is only hatred expressed in the most hurtful way) and classical atheism, 
whose deadlocks (namely cynicism, sarcasm towards every aspira-
tion, and self-hatred) it exacerbates. It is the religious form of despair. 
The fourth way of relating man and God, and the option which has 
until now remained unexploited, is to believe in God because he does 
not exist: the immanent form of hope. This is the option with which 
Meillassoux identiﬁ es his philosophy: ‘Le divin philosophique n’est ni 
une religion – a-t-on déjà vu un croyant nier l’existence de Dieu ? – ni 
un athéisme – a-t-on déjà vu un athée croire en Dieu?’ (ID 384).36
But what does it mean to ‘believe in God because he does not exist’? 
The response is found in examining Meillassoux’s notion of divine inex-
istence, and the hope which he invests in it. If, as Meillassoux ﬁ ercely 
defends, there is no law of becoming, then becoming is capable even of 
God (ID 6), and every ‘miracle’ adds to the experimental proof of the 
inexistence of God (ID 5), because miracles demonstrate the contingency 
of the world, and show thereby that no divine will underwrites the ‘per-
ennial laws’ of nature. God ‘inexists’, which is to say that he happens 
not to exist, but – in accordance with the principle of factiality – his 
possible existence is necessary. Just as everything that exists, exists de 
facto, so also everything that does not exist does not exist de facto (ID 
75). Inexistence, Meillassoux insists, is not more negative than exist-
ence, because the essence of an thing’s existence is that it can not exist, 
and the essence of a thing’s inexistence is that it can exist (ID 87). Both 
contingencies (existence and inexistence) are designated by ‘being’.37
Meillassoux’s bold rejection of both theism and atheism in favour 
of a ‘philosophy’ for which nothing, not even God, is inaccessible, and 
for which everything, including God, can exist, has attracted a number 
of sceptical responses. Given Meillassoux’s incorporation of the puta-
tively ‘miraculous’ as evidence of his absolute contingency, Peter 
Hallward is off track in his review of Après la ﬁ nitude when he evokes 
the  miraculous as a critique of Meillassoux’s hyperchaos:
Rather than any sort of articulation of past, present and future, Meillassoux’s 
time is a matter of spontaneous and immediate irruption ex nihilo. Time is 
150 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
reduced here to a succession of ‘gratuitous sequences’. The paradigm for 
such gratuitous irruption, obviously, is the miracle.38
This critique would only be persuasive if we had already abandoned 
Meillassoux’s absolute contingency. Hyperchaos is not miraculous, for 
the notion of the miracle relies on a stable benchmark of predictable, 
non-miraculous normativity. For Meillassoux there is no such bench-
mark: contingency is the only absolute and it is not the least deviation 
from absolute contingency that a ‘miracle’ should occur.
Notwithstanding the failure of the critique that Meillassoux’s hyper-
chaos is miraculous, it will be our argument here that hyperchaos is the 
undoing of the principle of factiality, and the exposure of Meillassoux’s 
philosophy as parasitic after all. What Meillassoux is trying to prove 
is his principle of factiality and the law of non-contradiction that he 
derives from it. In Après la ﬁ nitude, Meillassoux makes it clear in a way 
that remained obscure in ‘L’Inexistence divine’ that the laws of logic 
are just as contingent as the laws of nature: ‘Tout peut très réellement 
s’effondrer – les arbres comme les astres, les astres comme les lois, les 
lois physiques comme les lois logiques’ (AF 73).39 Nevertheless, non-
contradiction is derived from the principle of factiality and so stands, or 
so Meillassoux claims, as absolute, because it must be assumed in any 
attempt to contradict it. There are ﬁ ve reasons why it is problematic to 
hold this position.
The ﬁ rst reason is what we shall call the ‘split rationality critique’ of 
Meillassoux’s proof, namely that he acknowledges that what is thought 
about (trees, stars, laws) is absolutely contingent, but he exempts from 
contingency the thinking itself. The problem for Meillassoux is that, 
in order to be consistent, his own thinking must be up for grabs in the 
contingency of logical laws. In other words, the processes by which he 
arrives at the notions of ‘necessity’, ‘contingency’ and ‘factiality’ must 
themselves be able to be replaced by other, currently unimaginable, 
ways of thinking.
In order to walk through this argument in more detail, let us con-
sider Meillassoux’s reconstruction of facticity. In this reconstruction, 
Meillassoux draws a necessity out of the strong correlationist model 
itself, where the strong model of correlationism is summarised as ‘it is 
unthinkable that the unthinkable is impossible’. In this correlationist 
model, the ‘logicity’ of the world does not conform to the structures 
of logical reason, and the givenness of the world in a representation 
does not conform to the structures of representative reason (AF 55/
AfF 40). We cannot be sure that things are not Wholly Other to how 
they are represented to us. This uncertainty, the canonical limit of the 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
151
rational, also legitimates faith in a God who transcends the limits of the 
 thinkable (ID 49).
This reasoning yields a ‘precise and remarkable’ consequence: ‘il 
devient rationnellement illégitime de disqualiﬁ er un discours non 
rationnel sur l’absolu sous prétexte de son irrationalité’ (AF 56; QM’s 
emphasis).40 Let us try to reconstruct in our turn what is at stake here. 
There are two instances of rationality in play in this quotation. First, 
the ‘non-rational discourse on the absolute’ which cannot be disquali-
ﬁ ed, and secondly the ‘rational illegitimacy’ of such a disqualiﬁ cation. 
It is the second of these two instances that shall detain us, because it is 
this second instance that Meillassoux fails to take into account in his 
argument for absolute contingency. In order to know whether or not 
it is rationally legitimate or illegitimate to suppose p, I must have some 
notion of rational legitimacy. But this notion of legitimacy, just as much 
as the ‘non rational discourse’ that is its object, must be contingent. 
Like gravity, it may be clear enough for the moment, but it is not neces-
sary that it remain for ever as necessary. So, to rephrase Meillassoux’s 
reconstruction of strong correlationism with this proviso inserted: it is 
rationally illegitimate, according to the contingent norms of rationality 
that prevail at the moment, to disqualify a non-rational discourse on 
the absolute on pretext of its irrationality. A modest proviso, perhaps, 
but one with the deepest consequences for Meillassoux’s principle of 
factiality. The very decision as to what may or may not be ‘rationally 
legitimate’ must not be unaccountably exempted from a possible future 
contingent rationality that in the present remains radically unforesee-
able, on pain once more of ﬁ deism in the enduring necessity of ration-
ality as it is currently understood and practised. We cannot bootstrap 
rationality out of contingency.
It might be objected here that we are just assuming Meillassoux’s 
contingency in order to argue against it. We readily concede that we 
are, but that is no objection to our argument because we are suggest-
ing something more radical: that even though contingency must be 
assumed now, it cannot be posited now as absolutely, or eternally, 
necessary, unless we also assume that the way in which we think about 
logic now (in terms of contingency and so on), is itself eternal, whereas 
all we can be sure about is that it is only eternal according to the way 
we think about it now (in terms of ‘necessity’, ‘contingency’, ‘factiality’ 
and so on). As soon as the laws of logic are part of the picture of contin-
gency, notions such as ‘necessity’ and ‘contingency’ themselves become 
unstable and prone to hyperchaotic change.
It would indeed be self-defeating to argue that contingency always 
triumphs over every law of logic, for then contingency would, as 
152 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Meillassoux quite rightly argues, remain as absolute. But that is not 
what we are arguing, and such a refutation of our position would only 
work if we were to assume that the dichotomy of necessity and contin-
gency is eternal. What we are suggesting here is not simply that the laws 
of logic are contingent, even less that contingency is contingent, but 
that contingency along with all the laws and principles of logic might 
well be unthinkably meaningless after any hyperchaotic change, along 
with the notions of ‘hyperchaos’ and ‘change’ themselves.
Building on this ﬁ rst argument about split rationality, our second 
reason for rejecting the claim that factiality and non-contradiction are 
absolute is the self-defeating nature of hyperchaos. Meillassoux tries to 
catch the objector with the following argument:
si vous afﬁ rmez que votre scepticisme envers toute connaissance de l’absolu 
repose sur un argument, et non sur une simple croyance ou opinion – alors 
vous devez admettre que le nerf d’un tel argument est pensable. Or le nerf de 
votre argumentation c’est que nous pouvons accéder au pouvoir-ne-pas-être/
pouvoir-être-autre de toute chose, y compris de nous-mêmes et du monde. 
Mais dire qu’on peut penser cela, encore une fois, c’est dire qu’on peut 
penser l’absoluité du possible de toute chose. (AF 80)41
Our scepticism with regard to knowledge of the absolute does rest on 
an argument, and it has three parts: 1) that the meaning of each one 
of the concepts in this argument from Après la ﬁ nitude is (what for 
the time being we call) ‘contingent’, 2) that each one of these concepts 
(including ‘hyperchaos’) can hyperchaotically become not just differ-
ent but incommensurable with current logic, and that 3) there is no 
hyperchaos that would itself escape this meaninglessness. According to 
Meillassoux, we must now admit that the nerve of such an argument 
is thinkable. But it is thinkable only for the time being, only as long as 
‘thinking’ and ‘argument’ remain untouched by hyperchaos.
So when Meillassoux tells us that ‘the core of your argument is that 
we can access everything’s capacity-not-to-be, or capacity-to-be-other’, 
this is only true for a domesticated other, an other recognisable as 
other, in truth no hyperchaotic ‘other’ at all but an other that remains 
identiﬁ able as other within our current constellation of concepts and 
laws of logic, an other that remains commensurable with the binary of 
being/non-being. No doubt, to claim that we can think such an other 
would indeed, as Meillassoux concludes, be to say that we can think the 
necessary contingency of all things, but that would not be hyperchaos. 
Meillassoux evokes ‘un hyper-Chaos, auquel rien n’est, ou ne paraît 
être, impossible, pas même l’impensable’ (AF 87; author’s emphasis),42 
but when he says ‘unthinkable’ here, he means ‘thinkable as unthink-
able’ (in another instance of split rationality); we are arguing that there 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
153
is an important difference between something which is unthinkable 
and something which is thinkable as unthinkable, between something 
which is either contingent or necessary and something which (in a way 
currently unthinkable) renders the binary of contingency and necessity 
meaningless or defunct.
If it should be objected that ‘whatever change hyperchaotically 
takes place, hyperchaos cannot negate itself, on pain of introducing 
a necessary being’, then we must reply: by virtue of what does our 
current understanding of ‘impossible’, ‘unthinkable’ and ‘hyperchaos’ 
authorise us to pronounce on what would or would not be ‘thinkable’ 
and ‘possible’ in any hyperchaotically incommensurable ‘situation’, 
as if those concepts would necessarily have any ‘sense’ at all ‘there’? 
In other words, Meillassoux underestimates the radicality of his own 
notion of hyperchaos, assuming that our current conceptual armature 
(‘hyperchaos’ included) can be wielded in whatever situation might 
eventuate. The concepts of possibility and impossibility do not begin to 
account for hyperchaos (such that we can say: in hyperchaos, anything 
is possible). The least we can say about hyperchaos (which is also all 
we can say, and in truth nothing at all) is that it will have been incom-
mensurable with the concepts of possibility and impossibility . . . and 
incommensurability.
Our third – and much briefer – objection to Meillassoux’s arguments 
for factiality and non-contradiction being absolute, and the second 
way in which Meillassoux’s hyperchaos is not chaotic enough, is that 
it exempts temporality. Truly radical contingency cannot simply mean 
that ‘anything can not be’, but it must also entail that ‘anything can 
have not been’. In other words, contingency is emasculated if it is con-
ﬁ ned to the present. Why should we exempt ‘past’ events from radical 
contingency, and why should we exempt temporal ﬂ ow and the neces-
sary progression of one instant after another in orderly fashion from 
radical contingency? Surely such a temporally strait-laced contingency 
would be no longer radical, but rather would be itself contingent on 
time.43
4.2.1 Hume’s Problem
We can go further, however, than this denial to Meillassoux of the 
eternity of the principle of non-contradiction, because the critique 
we are in the process of unfolding has implications for Meillassoux’s 
treatment of Hume’s problem. We are happy to grant Meillassoux his 
solution to his reformulation of Hume’s problem: how to explain the 
manifest stability of physical laws if these are supposed to be contingent 
154 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
(AF 125/AfF 92), and we are happy to grant him his refutation of the 
Kantian ‘necessitarian inference’, according to which the stability of 
laws presupposes, as its imperative condition, the necessity of laws (AF 
128/AfF 94). Nevertheless – and this is our fourth objection to factic-
ity and contingency being absolute – because of the radicality of his 
principle of factiality, Meillassoux cannot allow himself the principle of 
non-contradiction in the same way that Hume can: ‘Quant au principe 
de non-contradiction, il nous permet d’établir a priori, sans le recours 
à l’expérience, qu’un événement contradictoire est impossible, qu’il ne 
peut exister ni aujourd’hui ni demain’ (AF 119; author’s emphasis).44
Hume may well indeed be able to make this claim, but Meillassoux 
cannot, for two reasons. The ﬁ rst reason is the critique of the split 
instances of rationality that we do not want to risk the reader’s patience 
by rehearsing again. The second reason is this: suppose that the laws of 
logic were to change radically. Would we necessarily know that such 
a change had taken place? Might it not possibly be the case that we 
would only discern such a change if our cognitive faculties and the laws 
of logic in terms of which they function were to remain untouched by 
such a change, able to observe a sequential ‘before’ and ‘after’? Even if 
we could apprehend the change, it cannot be necessary that we should 
retain a knowledge of the former laws (unless our memories are now 
the object of a non-contingent idolatry), as long as the only necessity is 
contingency.
This objection does not directly undermine the principle of factiality 
or non-contradiction, but it radicalises the foregoing three arguments. 
Now it is not simply the case that factiality cannot be known to be 
‘absolute’ because the truths about the universe necessary to make 
the notion of the ‘absolute’ meaningful are themselves up for grabs in 
hyperchaos, but in addition those laws may have changed without us 
necessarily apprehending it. It also follows from this argument that 
we are not at liberty to accept of necessity the empirical truth that 
Meillassoux refers to as the ‘fait incontestable de la stabilité des lois de 
la nature’ (AF 128).45
Graham Harman’s critique of Meillassoux, brieﬂ y discussed above, 
returns in the context of our present argument with greater force: ‘in 
my view, since he is saying that everything is absolutely contingent, 
what he’s really doubting is that there’s any relationality at all’.46 We 
previously dismissed this argument with Meillassoux’s example of 
gravity, but if we cannot be sure whether or not the laws have changed 
in a given period of time (because we cannot be assured that we would 
necessarily notice such a change, unless 1) our faculties are exempt 
from such a change and 2) we know that they are), then we cannot be 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
155
sure of the relations of which either our logic or our senses inform us. 
Meillassoux’s answer to Harman, namely that ‘my conception is not to 
deny the existence of relations but just to afﬁ rm their factual existence’ 
(where ‘factual’ means not factial but empirical),47 is no longer sufﬁ -
cient to meet the critique, because it is the empirical itself that is being 
questioned. Meillassoux is caught between a rock and a hard place 
here. He has two options: if he afﬁ rms that our understanding and the 
laws of logic cannot have changed in this way, he is making an idol of 
one, or the other, or both; if he is more circumspectly reckoning that 
they will not have changed, then he is supplementing his principle of 
factiality with a faith that, like Nancy’s faith, irreducibly makes reason 
what it is. Meillassoux’s factiality is either an idol, or an article of faith. 
What it cannot be is neither.
4.2.2 Faith, Axiom, Demonstration and Intuition
Having sought to establish the necessity of contingency eo ipso in the 
principle of factiality (which Meillassoux gives as: it is necessary that 
there be a contingent world (ID 110)), and having sought to do so 
without any recourse to a divine will or necessary being, Meillassoux 
claims to have left no territory to which the theologian or mystic can 
ﬂ ee. But we have shown that, in order to arrive at this point, he has 
either to make an idol of reason or supplement it with a moment of 
faith. We now propose to develop this critique by tracking a speciﬁ c 
claim that Meillassoux makes about the principle of factiality: namely 
that it can be demonstrated. It is an important claim for our pur-
poses because it is what distances Meillassoux from both Nancy and 
Badiou on the question of post-theological thought. Contra Nancy, 
Meillassoux claims to have abolished the need for the sort of reason-
supplementing faith that we discussed in the previous chapter. Contra 
Badiou, he argues that the principle of factiality is not the subject of an 
axiomatic decision, but of a logical demonstration. We shall deal with 
these two claims in turn.
In relation to the Nancean argument that reason requires a moment 
of faith in order to be what it is, Meillassoux claims that the factial 
obviates the need for such a faith that holds reason to its incomplete-
ness. The principle of factiality does rely on an eternal constant, but this 
constant is not transcendent; it is not given by revelation, and it does 
not rely on an act of faith. The necessity of facticity itself is an eternal 
‘there is’ outside the existence and inexistence that it regulates (ID 
77). For Meillassoux, this brings about a new possibility of grounding 
reason. Up until now, he explains, shadowing closely the contours of 
156 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Nancy’s argument for the necessity of faith, reason demanded comple-
tion because its ﬁ rst principles, whatever they happened to be, were 
ultimately contingent, and ‘la raison en quête d’un premier principe 
nécessaire, appelait donc d’elle-même à son propre dépassement et la 
foi pouvait légitimement se poser comme l’accomplissement du ration-
nel’ (ID 51).48 For Nancy, the difference is that faith does not complete 
reason but precisely resists such a self-closure. If the demonstration of 
the principle of factiality succeeds, Meillassoux continues, we will no 
longer have any need for such an articulation of faith and reason; it 
will no longer be possible to evince the facticity (that is, the necessary 
contingency) of reason’s ﬁ rst principles as a means of introducing a 
supplement of faith, because these principles will now be grounded on 
the very necessity of facticity, with the glorious result that ‘la raison 
apparaîtra capable à elle seule de rendre raison des vérités dernières du 
monde réel’ (ID 51).49
Reason is excepted from having to ground itself for Meillassoux not 
by an appeal to faith as its supplement, but by appeal to the impossibil-
ity of contingency being contingent. Meillassoux inscribes this in the 
line of philosophical justiﬁ cations beginning with Plato that follows 
the formula ‘only X cannot be X’ (ID 175). In a list that resonates with 
Badiou’s discussion of Plato’s agathon in Philosophie et événement, as 
well as with Nancy’s assertions in L’Oubli de la philosophie and Des 
Lieux divins that every great philosophy must have ‘un mystère au sujet 
de Dieu ou des dieux’ (DLD 24) or ‘le geste de toucher à la limite de 
toute vision du monde’ (OP 75),50 Meillassoux discerns this formula of 
non-duplication (non-redoublement) in Platonic ideas (because what 
makes a phenomenon such and such a phenomenon cannot be a phe-
nomenon), in the Cartesian cogito (because I doubt everything apart 
from doubt), in Leibniz’ logical truths (because nothing is in the mind 
that was not in experience . . . apart from the mind) and in a priori 
forms of perception in Kant (because the form of phenomenal data 
in experience cannot itself be given as a phenomenon in experience). 
Generally speaking, he concludes, the conditions of possibility of expe-
rience cannot themselves be given in experience, but far from limiting 
the exercise of reason in those philosophers who brush up against it, 
this paradox is used to found the exercise of reason and, what is more, 
to found it in terms of something that is immanent and necessary (ID 
176). In other words, at the very point where Nancy sees the need 
for reason-supplementing faith, Meillassoux locates his moment of 
necessity. But as Badiou notes in his treatment of the Platonic princi-
ple of intelligibility (PE 141), the choice between the ‘rationalist’ and 
‘apophatic’ deployment of Plato’s agathon, or in this instance between 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
157
faith and necessity, cannot be exhaustively determined; the choice 
contains an ineradicable unconditionality. If Meillassoux’s proof of 
self-grounding reason works in its own terms – and we have yet to 
explore this point, to which we shall turn our attention below – it does 
not necessarily follow that for this reason alone it is to be preferred 
to, say, Nancy’s ‘faith that is nothing at all’ (nor that faith is to be 
preferred to Meillassoux’s necessity). If such a decision is made on 
exclusively rational grounds (assuming a mutually exclusive dichotomy 
of the rational and the irrational) then the commitment to rationality 
that precedes the choice of a philosophical orientation remains to be 
explained. In other words, demonstrating a self-grounding rationality 
will not in itself lead to the conclusion that a self-grounding principle is 
to be preferred over Badiou’s axioms or Nancy’s ‘faith that is nothing 
at all’. The problem encountered in trying to ‘choose between’ the 
three accounts offered by Badiou, Nancy and Meillassoux, and more 
broadly in choosing a fundamental philosophical orientation, is more 
 complicated than that.
Does Meillassoux succeed in showing that the principle of factiality 
is the object of a demonstration? We cannot say that he does, because 
his demonstration contains a confusion between two sorts of necessity. 
While non-duplication does indeed ground the necessity of contin-
gency, it does not ground the necessity of mathematico-logical truths, 
because it is itself a mathematico-logical truth that would need to be 
grounded and that is, as we have seen, hyperchaotically subject to the 
two riders ‘for the time being’ and ‘as far as we know’. Meillassoux is 
once again bootstrapping his argument, and there lies at the heart of 
his demonstration of necessity an aporia of origin. Meillassoux grounds 
necessity by having recourse to an ungrounded necessity (namely 
non-duplication itself). In the absence of any sufﬁ cient grounding of 
non-duplication outside our two riders, we must conclude that the 
‘demonstration’ of necessity once more ﬁ nally comes to rest either 1) on 
an idolatry or 2) on an act of reasonable faith, the very sort of faith that 
Meillassoux’s dichotomy of faith and reason forecloses, and for which 
he therefore has no category (ID 310).
Turning now to Meillassoux’s relation to Badiouian axiomantics, 
we see that the denial of any need for a reason-supplementing faith 
contributes to Meillassoux’s argument that his principle of factiality is 
subject to demonstration and can have done with what he calls ‘hypo-
thetical reason’.51 Meillassoux begins his argument by pointing to what 
he considers to be the weak spot of Platonic philosophy, namely that 
its axioms simply have to be accepted. The truths of mathematics for 
Plato to be sure do not rely on any poetic, inspired, arbitrary narrative, 
158 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Meillassoux notes approvingly, but rather on a constraining succession 
of deductions. The failing of such philosophy, however, is found at the 
origin of its reasoning, which itself is not a demonstration but simply 
assumed to be true because it is self-evident (ID 165). The problem here 
is with what Meillassoux calls ‘hypothetical reason’ (la raison hypothé-
tique), which he deﬁ nes as the position according to which the origin of 
reason can only be posited (as an axiom, postulate, thesis, hypothesis 
or whatever else), not demonstrated. It is a reasoning shared by math-
ematical logic (in its ‘hypothetical-deductive’ strand) and the natural 
sciences (in their inductive variety) (ID 53).
By contrast, factiality provides a ﬁ rst principle that is demonstrated, 
and thereby seems to re-connect with what Meillassoux, now with 
some irony, calls the deepest ‘illusion’ of philosophy since its Platonic 
inauguration, namely an anhypothetical principle: a principle to found 
rational thought that does not itself have to be posited irrationally and 
in a contingent manner, but which would itself be founded in reason. 
The necessity of an anhypothetical demonstration refers us back to 
the refutation of correlationism we encountered above. Meillassoux 
rejects recourse to a hypothetical axiom as insufﬁ cient both to refute 
 correlationism and to found factiality:
I’m looking for a creative refutation. That is, a refutation which discovers 
a truth, an absolute truth, inside the circle [of correlationism: author] itself. 
That’s why I propose an access to the Real not grounded on an axiom, but 
on a demonstrated principle – the principle of factiality. (SR 426; translation 
altered) 
Meillassoux’s anhypothetical principle cannot be demonstrated directly, 
by deducing it from another proposition (in which case it would not be 
a principle at all), but only indirectly, by showing that anyone who 
would contest the principle must presuppose its truth in their very 
attempt to refute it (AF 83/AfF 61). Such is the principle of non-contra-
diction for Aristotle: to refute it (and therefore perforce to contradict 
it) is already to have respected it. Factiality is assumed, so Meillassoux 
argues, by strong correlationism itself: it must assume the necessity of 
thinking that everything could be radically otherwise than it appears.
In relation to the question of God, anhypothetical factiality achieves 
for Meillassoux what Badiou seeks to accomplish with his recourse to 
ZFC set theory: the death of the god of the poets. For Meillassoux, 
the language of being is not given by poetry, and it is not by that same 
token a language-to-come, but a discourse that is thoroughly demon-
strative (‘de part en part démonstratif’ (ID 162)). Meillassoux does not 
abandon axiomatics, however. He seeks to marry Badiou’s axiomatic 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
159
approach to philosophy with his own elaboration of an anhypothetical 
principle in an attempt demonstratively and ontologically to ground the 
axiom of the empty set (ID 111).
For Meillassoux, the empty set is the sign of contingency itself: there 
is only one empty set,52 hence the unicity of contingency. The sign of 
the empty set is also the sign of the unicity of contingency because its 
written form – Ø – is contingent, the shape of the mark designating the 
empty set could be anything at all. Like contingency, the empty set is 
the only necessity, the one, pure mathematical sign that refers to being 
qua being (where being qua being is contingency as such), thus anchor-
ing mathematics to ontology (ID 123–4). It is therefore overdetermined, 
for by its unity it makes reference not only to its own contingency as a 
signiﬁ er, but to contingency in general. All signs have a common and 
unique referent: the unique and eternal contingency of being.
Acknowledging Badiou to be the ﬁ rst to have held that the empty 
set refers to being qua being, Meillassoux critiques Badiou as standing 
in the shadow of Heidegger when he conceives being as the impre-
sentation of presentation (in other words as inconsistent multiplicity 
before counting-as-one), which Badiou qualiﬁ es as ‘enigmatic’ (EE 
72/BE 59). We share Meillassoux’s critique of Badiou at this point 
and it is this enigmatic nature of being, the retroactive inaccessibility 
that we discussed in Chapter 1, that Meillassoux seeks to rid himself 
of by identifying the referent of the void set with the non-contingent 
contingency of the sign, and not with an enigmatic withdrawal (ID 
125 n.41). Meillassoux is here imputing to Badiou the same sort of 
Romanticism for which Badiou himself chastises post-Heideggerian 
philosophy.
Meillassoux seeks to refute the axiomatic approach with the help 
of another dichotomy. If we claim that reason must begin with a prin-
ciple that is (axiomatically) posited, is that assertion itself posited? If 
yes, then it is in no way necessary and it must admit that the assertion 
‘reason begins with a principle that is demonstrated’ is equally possi-
ble. If the assertion itself is not posited (that is: if it is necessary), then 
Meillassoux wants to see the demonstration of that necessity that does 
not itself rely on a posited principle (ID 60). Either way, the demonstra-
tion must come ﬁ rst, which is precisely the route taken by Meillassoux’s 
own principle of factiality. But it appears that this argument once more 
harbours a false dichotomy, similar to the dichotomy between faith and 
reason that could conceive of no faith which is not exhaustively irra-
tional. Are Badiou’s axioms posited in the way that Meillassoux is sug-
gesting all axioms must be? We saw in the previous chapter that they 
are chosen ‘under the injunction of being’ in modernity; as such, they 
160 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
ﬁ t neither of Meillassoux’s two categories: they are not merely posited, 
and neither are they necessary.
Furthermore, Meillassoux’s own demonstration is supplemented by 
what in ‘L’Inexistence divine’ he calls an intellectual intuition and in 
later texts a dianoetic intuition, which he deﬁ nes as ‘the intellectual 
access to factiality’ (SR 432). There is an ‘essential intertwining of a 
simple intuition and of a discursivity, a demonstration – both being 
entailed by the access to factiality’ (SR 433). Meillassoux explains:
The simple intuition of facticity is transmuted by a dianoia, by a demonstra-
tion, into an intuition of a radical exteriority. I thought that facticity was 
the sign of the ﬁ nitude and ignorance of thought. I thought I had, in factic-
ity, a relation to my own deﬁ cient subjectivity. I discover now that what I 
took for human idiocy was truly an intuition, a radical intuition – that is, 
a relation to the Great Outside. We have a nous unveiled by a dianoia, an 
intuition unveiled by a demonstration. This is why I called it an intellectual 
intuition: not, of course, because it is an intuition which creates its object, 
as Kant deﬁ ned it, but because it is an intuition discovered by reasoning. 
(SR 433–4) 
So it is intuition qua nous (an act of mind or thought, a sense or 
meaning) that is unveiled by a dianoia (intelligence, understanding, 
intellectual capacity), and we would do well not to traduce or polarise 
the semantic range of these two nouns by ascribing to Meillassoux’s 
‘intuition’ any of the mysticism that the term can elsewhere connote. It 
is an intuition because we discover absolute contingency in (à même) 
things themselves (AF 111/AfF 82). Nevertheless, there is a choice to be 
made in intuition, and it is not a choice guided solely by reason. It is the 
choice to project unreason into things themselves (AF 111/AfF 82), the 
decision that our ignorance of the reason of things is not a deﬁ ciency 
of our reasoning but the truth about things. It is at this point that 
Meillassoux ﬁ nds him in the same place as the Badiou of Philosophie et 
événement who faces the undecidability of the apophatic and rationalist 
orientations, for it is here that Meillassoux’s appeal to rationality faces 
a question-begging circularity that must be resolved by the violence of 
an (axiomatic) decision:
I’m a rationalist, and reason clearly demonstrates that you can’t demon-
strate the necessity of laws: so we should just believe reason and accept this 
point: laws are not necessary – they are facts, and facts are contingent – they 
can change without reason. (TWB) 
We should ‘just believe reason’. Why is that necessary, rather than 
merely possible? Why not ‘believe’ the empirical constancy of phe-
nomena, rather than the rational proof of their radical contingency? 
Meillassoux makes a similar appeal when he argues that:
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
161
since Hume has convinced us that we could a priori (that is to say without 
contradiction) conceive a chaotic modiﬁ cation of natural laws, why not 
have conﬁ dence in the power of thought, which invites us to posit the con-
tingency of the laws of nature, rather than in experience, in which alone the 
presentation of the apparent ﬁ xity of observable constants ﬁ nds its source? 
(SD 273; QM’s italics) 
The answer to this rhetorical question is, of course, that if we just 
believe reason then we are right back to the Nancean position that 
Meillassoux is seeking to avoid, whereby reason is supplemented by a 
faith, itself nothing at all, that makes reason what it is. In other words, 
Meillassoux does demonstrate his anhypothetical principle, but only 
on the condition that we ‘just believe reason’ and not ‘observable con-
stants’. Meillassoux has not demonstrated why rational demonstration 
must be the way of proceeding through this dilemma of the rational 
and the empirical. His ‘demonstration’ still stands or falls on an unac-
countable act of faith, the faith inherent in the proclamation that ‘I’m 
a rationalist . . .’.
Ray Brassier also identiﬁ es problems in Meillassoux’s account of 
intuition, but for signiﬁ cantly different reasons. Brassier argues that
if the only way to ensure the separation between the (contingently exist-
ing) ideality of meaning and the (necessarily existing) reality of the 
referent is by making conceptuality constitutive of objectivity, then the 
absolutization of the non-correlational referent is won at the price of an 
absolutization of conceptual sense which violates the materialist require-
ment that being not be reducible to thought. Far from reconciling ration-
alism with materialism, the principle of factuality, at least in this version, 
continues to subordinate extra-conceptual reality to a concept of absolute 
contingency.53
Conceptuality is ‘constitutive of objectivity’ in the sense that the 
‘concept’ of factiality is the truth of everything that (in)exists, but this 
only issues in an ‘absolutization of correlational sense’ if the principle 
of factiality is indeed a concept. The principle does not reduce being to 
thought but intuits in (à même) being an unreason that the principle 
of factiality is then brought in to explain. Without this initial extra-
theoretical butting up against the unreason of things, there would be 
no principle of factiality, and so the problem with Meillassoux’s intui-
tion is not that it ‘threatens to re-invoke some sort of pre-established 
harmony between thinking and being’,54 but that it begs the question 
of rationality.
On the basis of this interweaving of demonstration and intuition, 
Meillassoux calls his reader to a ‘conversion of the gaze’ (conversion du 
162 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
regard) (ID 55; AF 72/AfF 5355), to intuit the contingency of all beings 
by cultivating the habit of perceiving, with a properly intellectual intui-
tion, the real absence of reason of empirical beings, such that we make 
facticity a positive, a priori and indispensible point of access to being 
itself, ‘en sorte de faire de la pensée une puissance sans limite de vérité’ 
(ID 55).56 This intuition does not add to the demonstration, rather it is 
a holding of oneself to the demonstration, and a determination not to 
traduce it through recourse to a necessary being. In this, it is remark-
ably similar to Nancy’s notion of faith, which similarly does not add to 
reason but is precisely a holding of oneself to reason, a determination 
not to go beyond it.
C ONC LUS I O N
As we draw our ﬁ rst consideration of Meillassoux to a close, what 
are we to conclude? First, that the exemplary clarity, force and ambi-
tion of his arguments draw forth passionate engagement. But does 
he succeed in going beyond the dichotomy of theism and atheism? 
The position of believing in God because he doesn’t exist is certainly 
creative and audacious, but Meillassoux only goes beyond a/theism 
by introducing other dichotomies on the basis of which he under-
mines the a/theism binary, namely the split between the knowing-
rationality and known-rationality, and reason and irrational faith. 
Does Meillassoux’s own thought achieve a position that eluded both 
Badiou and Nancy? While he succeeds in occupying a position distinct 
from both Nancean and Badiouian thought, he does not close the 
deal on a/atheism, for his own thought either idolises reason in the 
same way that he criticises metaphysics for idolising necessity, or his 
thought is ﬁ deistic in the same way that, once again, he denounces 
in the case of metaphysics. With Meillassoux we are still not beyond
a/theism.
In the ﬁ nal two chapters we shall approach the question of post-
theological integration from a different angle. Taking our lead from 
the language of hope in which Meillassoux frames his own belief in the 
God who inexists, we shall adopt a more pragmatic approach, consid-
ering how the three different philosophies we have thus far discussed 
engender, translate into, or call for (the precise way to articulate the 
relation will prove to be large part of what is at stake) political justice, 
asking whether the positions taken up in relation to justice are occupied 
in a way that is rigorously ‘without God’. This will open onto a further 
discussion of a possible criteriology for arbitrating between the three 
different approaches to post-theological thought.
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
163
NOTES
 1. ‘From the inexistence of God we infer a world sufﬁ ciently devoid of sense 
that even God can occur in it’ (author’s translation).
 2. ‘For the atheist, God is a matter for the priest; for the philosopher God is 
too serious a matter to be entrusted to priests’ (author’s translation).
 3. So indicated Graham Harman in a mock objection to Meillassoux at the 
one day Speculative Realism conference at Goldsmiths College, London, 
on 8 December 2007:
And ﬁ nally, my real objection to him is that he hasn’t published his 
system yet, because I’d love to stay up the next three nights and read it! 
That would be great reading. He says he’s got multiple volumes coming, 
six or seven hundred pages. I would be delighted to read this right now, 
so please hurry!’ (Harman, ‘Speculative realism’, p. 338)
 
Meillassoux himself refers to the future volume in a footnote in Après la 
ﬁ nitude:
Nous ne pouvons ici qu’être très allusif sur le rôle prédominant du 
ﬁ déisme dans la constitution de la pensée moderne. Nous en traitons 
de façon plus approfondie dans un ouvrage à paraître, où doivent être 
développés l’ensemble des positions théoriques esquissées dans ce livre, 
ainsi que leurs conséquences éthiques: L’Inexistence divine. Essai sur le 
dieu virtuel. (AF 67)
We can only allude here to the predominant role played by ﬁ deism in 
the constitution of modern thought. This issue will be treated in greater 
depth in a forthcoming work in which we hope to develop theoretical 
positions that we are merely sketching here, as well as their ethical con-
sequences: Divine Inexistence: An Essay on the Virtual God. (AfF 132)
 4. The term ‘speculative realism’ has been applied to Meillassoux’s thought 
in a way that groups it somewhat awkwardly together with Graham 
Harman, Ian Hamilton Grant and Ray Brassier. His own characterisa-
tion of his thought is as a speculative materialism: ‘speculative’ inasmuch 
as his thought claims to accede to an absolute in general (AF 47/AfF 34; 
SD 275), and ‘materialism’ inasmuch as the in-itself (qua contingent) is 
independent of any correlation with thought. This speculative materialism 
is opposed to speculative idealism, where the noumenon is nothing but its 
correlation with thought. See Brassier, Nihil Unbound, p. 67.
 5.
It would be no exaggeration to say that Quentin Meillassoux has 
opened up a new path in the history of philosophy, hitherto conceived 
as the history of what it is to know; a path that circumvents Kant’s 
canonical distinction between ‘dogmatism’, ‘skepticism’ and ‘critique’. 
(AfF vii)
164 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 6. ‘allows thought to be destined towards the absolute once more, rather 
than towards those partial fragments and relations in which we compla-
cently luxuriate while the “return of the religious” provides us with a ﬁ cti-
tious supplement of spirituality’ (AfF viii).
 7. ‘For the atheist, God is a matter for the priest; for the philosopher God is 
too serious a matter to be entrusted to priests’ (author’s translation).
 8. See Kearney, Anatheism.
 9. In his reconstruction of religion, Meillassoux chooses to elide the 
 theological lack of consensus on the relation of truths and the divine will.
10. ‘We understand nothing about metaphysics if we fail to grasp that its par-
ticularity resides in this originary aggression towards every form of tran-
scendence, that no other discursivity has possessed’ (author’s translation).
11.
For the word of the cross is folly to those who are perishing, but to 
us who are being saved it is the power of God. For it is written, ‘I will 
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the discernment of the discerning I 
will thwart.’ Where is the one who is wise? Where is the scribe? Where 
is the debater of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the 
world? For since, in the wisdom of God, the world did not know God 
through wisdom, it pleased God through the folly of what we preach 
to save those who believe. For Jews demand signs and Greeks seek 
wisdom, but we preach Christ cruciﬁ ed, a stumbling block to Jews and 
folly to Gentiles, but to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, 
Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God. For the foolishness of 
God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men. 
(1 Corinthians 1: 18–25, English Standard Version)
12. Tertullian, ‘On prescription against Heretics’ and ‘On the ﬂ esh of Christ’, 
trans. Peter Holmes, in The Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. III, ed. Alexander 
Roberts and James Donaldson (Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans 
Publishing Company, 1951), p. 246. For the argument in favour of a 
non-ﬁ deistic reading of Tertullian, now the majority reading, see Osborn, 
Tertullian, pp. 28–9.
13.
If I am able to apprehend God objectively, I do not have faith; but 
because I cannot do this, I must have faith. If I want to keep myself in 
faith, I must continually see to it that I hold fast the objective uncer-
tainty, see to it that in the objective uncertainty I am ‘out on 70,000 
fathoms of water’ and still have faith. (Kierkegaard, Concluding 
Unscientiﬁ c Postscript, p. 204)
14.
the fortuitous, along with the ﬂ eeting, the inconsistent, the ephemeral, 
forms the minor rhapsody of our system of references, whose major 
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
165
mode would be the stable, the consistent, the enduring. [. . .] Nothing 
upon which to ﬁ x, to hold, nowhere to inscribe a profession of faith or 
a grounded assurance. (Author’s translation)
15. Given the crucial importance of dichotomous thinking – or the principle 
of non-contradiction – to Meillassoux’s thought at a number of points, 
it is notable that Badiou signals that L’Immanence des vérités, the third 
volume of L’Etre et l’événement, will introduce the notion of paracon-
sistent negation, allowing that contradictory perceptions of a truth can 
coexist without interrupting the unity of the truth (PE 138).
16. We are following Ray Brassier’s translations in After Finitude, rendering 
factualité with ‘factiality’ and facticité by ‘facticity’. ‘Factual’ will be used 
to refer to contingency, and ‘factial’ to the necessary.
17. ‘We have removed the gods, but we have kept the belief in the divine 
 solidity of laws’ (author’s translation).
18. Meillassoux deals at length with the obvious objections that could be 
raised to this adherance to the contingency of natural laws, foremost 
among which is the observation that natural laws have remained constant 
over a long period: the notion that natural laws could change at any 
instant is surely belied by the fact that they do not change. The argument 
is not directly relevant to our argument here, and so we are not at liberty 
to examine it at length, but it hinges on the difference between chance 
(deﬁ ned as one of a ﬁ nite number of possibilities, like a dice throw) and 
contingency (for which there is no known number of possible outcomes). 
Whereas chance presupposes a prior structure within which it operates 
(for example the structure of the faces of a die), contingency obeys no law 
and works within no such structure (ID 13) and argues that we cannot use 
probabilistic reasoning about the set of all possible worlds, because there 
is no set of all possible worlds (ID 36–8). Contingency is the appearance 
of a new universe of cases, not the appearance of any given universe (ID 
16). Chance therefore cannot be a good precept upon which to base the 
variation of physical laws, because chance itself is only thinkable under a 
regime of the stability of physical laws. If I throw a die a given number 
of times, I can only establish a probability of the result providing that 
 physical laws continue to assure the fall and the coherence of the die.
19.
Only monotheistic religion grounds the idea that everything is contin-
gent: the world is not eternal. It is created, its contingency is accepted, 
even though its non-existence (pure nothingness) cannot be presented. 
The thesis that an omnipotent God exists produces in return, by an 
apparent paradox, a radical conception of the contingency of every 
ﬁ nite and created being – the only being that is accessible to human 
thinking. Judaeo-Christianity, in asserting that the necessity of God 
is inaccessible to human thought, is entirely contingent. (Author’s 
 translation)
166 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
20.
what is, is factical, but that what is is factical, this itself cannot be a 
fact. Only the facticity of what is cannot be factical. Or again, in other 
words: it cannot be a fact that what is is a fact . . . The contingency 
of beings, and it alone, cannot be a contingent property of that being. 
(Author’s translation)
21. ‘there is no law of becoming because there is a becoming of laws’ (author’s 
translation).
22. Hallward, ‘Anything is possible’.
23. Hallward, ‘Anything is possible’, p. 57.
24. Hallward, ‘Anything is possible’, p. 57.
25. Hallward, ‘Anything is possible’, p. 57.
26. Meillassoux uses the example of gravity to argue this point in SR
393.
27. Brown, ‘On After Finitude’, p. 2.
28. Harman, ‘Speculative realism’, pp. 385, 386.
29. Harman, ‘Quentin Meillassoux’, p. 114.
30. Hallward, ‘Anything is possible’, p. 56.
31. Anselm, Monologion and Proslogion, p. 28.
32. ‘Given that God, as All of what is, cannot exist, man cannot be God’ 
(author’s translation).
33. ‘A remarkable point: it is because he is capable of not understanding God 
that man accedes to the eternal’ (author’s translation).
34. ‘it is in a desire to “explain” that religion can exhaust itself in mythology 
and in idolatry’ (author’s translation).
35. ‘From now on, a place was empty. It was occupied by many deputies, 
for example Hegelian Reason as an unfolding of Spirit. But since Hegel 
himself, and more so from him to us, what became clear is that the empty 
place was not to be occupied’ (author’s translation).
36. ‘The philosophical divine is neither a religion – have you ever seen a 
believer deny the existence of God? – nor an atheism – have you ever seen 
an atheist believe in God?’ (author’s translation).
37. Meillassoux’s understanding of inexistence differs from Badiou’s use of 
the term in that, for the Badiou of Logiques des mondes, the inexistent of 
a situation is precisely deﬁ ned as that one element of an object in the world 
that attests to the contingency of that object’s being-there (LM 341/LW 
324), whereas for Meillassoux inexistence, while still the index of contin-
gency, is not framed in terms of a speciﬁ c element of an object but in the 
untrammelled virtualities of hyperchaos.
38. Hallward, ‘Anything is possible’, p. 56.
39. ‘Everything could actually collapse: from trees to stars, from stars to laws, 
from physical laws to logical laws’ (AfF 53).
40. ‘it becomes rationally illegitimate to disqualify irrational discourses about 
the absolute on the pretext of their irrationality’ (AfF 41).
 
Beyond A/theism? Quentin Meillassoux 
167
41.
So long as you maintain that your skepticism towards all knowledge of 
the absolute is based upon an argument, rather than upon mere belief 
or opinion, then you have to grant that the core of any such argument 
must be thinkable. But the core of your argument is that we can access 
everything’s capacity-not-to-be, or capacity-to-be-other; our own as 
well as the world’s. But once again, to say that one can think this is to 
say we can think the absoluteness of the possibility of every thing. (AfF 
58)
42. ‘a hyperchaos, for which nothing is or would seem to be impossible, not 
even the unthinkable’ (AfF 64).
43. This argument is made by Ray Brassier, who concludes that ‘the only 
hope for securing the unequivocal independence of the ‘an sich’ must lie in 
prizing it free from chronology as well as phenomenology’ (Brassier, Nihil 
Unbound, p. 59).
44. ‘As for the principle of non-contradiction, it allows us to establish a priori, 
and independently of any recourse to experience, that a contradictory 
event is impossible, that it cannot occur either today or tomorrow’ (AfF 
87).
45. ‘incontestable fact of the stability of the laws of nature’ (AfF 94).
46. Harman, ‘Speculative realism’, p. 386.
47. Harman, ‘Speculative realism’, p. 392.
48. ‘reason, in search of a ﬁ rst necessary principle, thus itself called for its own 
surpassing, and faith could legitimately put itself forward as the fulﬁ lment 
of the rational’ (author’s translation).
49. ‘reason will show itself capable of accounting for the ultimate truths of the 
real world by itself’ (author’s translation).
50. ‘a mystery concerning God or the gods’ (ODP 129); ‘the gesture of touch-
ing the limit of all worldviews’ (GT 51; translation altered).
51. The other major contributory factor is his argument that thought gives 
access to the in-itself. Though we do not have space to rehearse this argu-
ment in these pages, its essential contours will be clear in the discussion of 
demonstration that follows.
52. This is a common and uncontroversial set theoretical principle. According 
to the principle of extensionality, two sets are equal if they contain the 
same elements. Any set with no elements is the one and unique empty set, 
not simply an empty set. By heuristic analogy, ‘no pigs’ is the same as ‘no 
cows’ or ‘no people’.
53. Brassier, Nihil Unbound, p. 93.
54. Brassier, Nihil Unbound, p. 139.
55. In AfF 53 Brassier tones down the religious connotations of the phrase by 
translating ‘une « conversion du regard »’ as ‘a “change in outlook” ’.
56. ‘so as to make thought a limitless power of truth’ (author’s translation).
168
5. The Politics of the Post-
Theological I: Justifying the 
Political
Si j’ai supprimé Dieu le père, il faut bien quelqu’un pour inventer 
les valeurs.1
We now turn to consider the ethical and political implications of the 
three different approaches to post-theological thinking under discus-
sion,2 namely Nancy’s ‘atheology’, Badiou’s ‘atheism’ and Meillassoux’s 
‘philosophy’. In pursuing its aims, this chapter and the next will be 
asking two broad questions. In the present chapter, we shall seek the 
criteriology of any possible relation between atheism/atheology/phi-
losophy and any ethics or politics whatsoever, opening the question 
of justice. In the ﬁ nal chapter we shall return to the question of justice 
in order to investigate how each position seeks to secure a notion of 
universal justice. The question of justice will allow us to explore to 
what extent each position is a post-theological integration that neither 
ascetically renounces the notion of universal justice nor parasitically 
strives for it on the basis of theological assumptions. The decision to 
treat ‘ethics’ and ‘politics’ side by side in these chapters is neither inno-
cent nor unproblematic. It is a decision necessitated by the desire to do 
full justice to each position, for an exclusion or sequestration of the 
ethical would prohibit reference to material in all three authors that is 
germane to our two questions. Notwithstanding, care will be taken not 
to conﬂ ate the ethical and the political, and to allow each thinker to 
reconstruct his own understanding of what is meant by these terms, as 
well as their relation to each other.
The possibility of a post-theological ethics and politics has to 
contend with threats both of parasitism and asceticism. On the side 
of asceticism, Simon Critchley evokes a ‘moral deﬁ cit’ at the heart of 
democratic life ‘bound up with the felt inadequacy of ofﬁ cial secular 
conceptions of morality’, wondering along with Jay Bernstein whether 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
169
‘modernity itself has had the effect of generating a motivational deﬁ cit 
in morality that undermines the possibility of ethical secularism’.3 
Part of this deﬁ cit can be ascribed to what has come to be known as 
Hume’s is-ought problem, the difﬁ culty of drawing a moral or political 
 imperative form a constative statement:
In every system of morality, which I have hitherto met with, I have always 
remark’d, that the author proceeds for some time in the ordinary ways 
of reasoning, and establishes the being of a God, or makes observations 
concerning human affairs; when all of a sudden I am surpriz’d to ﬁ nd, that 
instead of the usual copulations of propositions, is, and is not, I meet with 
no proposition that is not connected with an ought, or an ought not.4
It is our aim in the pages that follow to address in relation to the three 
thinkers under consideration the relation between what is and what 
ought to be.
A second ascetic problem for a post-theological politics is found in 
the twin propositions that, ‘if God is dead then everything is permitted’, 
and, conversely, ‘if God is dead then nothing is permitted’. The ﬁ rst 
proposition is a misquotation of Dostoyevsky’s Ivan Fyodorovitch. The 
original passage speaks of faith in God and immortality, and draws its 
conclusion not in terms of permission but of morality:
Ivan Fyodorovitch added in parenthesis that the whole natural law lies in 
that faith, and that if you were to destroy in mankind the belief in immor-
tality, not only love but every living force maintaining the life of the world 
would at once be dried up. Moreover, nothing then would be immoral, 
everything would be lawful, even cannibalism.5
The second proposition comes from the seventeenth volume of Lacan’s 
Seminar, where Lacan points out that the ethical mandate of ‘permis-
sion’ disappears along with the death of God (or of the father) who can 
permit, forbid or indeed forgive certain actions:
Il y a longtemps que j’ai fait remarquer qu’à la phrase du vieux père 
Karamazov, si Dieu est mort, alors tout est permis, la conclusion qui 
s’impose dans le texte de notre expérience, c’est qu’à Dieu est mort répond 
plus rien n’est permis.6
This second proposition exposes the ﬁ rst as a parasitism, seeking to 
retain the category of divine permission while denying the divine. 
Both propositions equally raise the problem of the ethical or political 
mandate upon which post-theological thought can draw: by virtue of 
what can a philosophical position lay claim to sanction, normativity 
or imperative without parasitising the concepts of divine permission or 
divine mandate?
A further challenge to a post-theological politics comes as an 
170 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 accusation of parasitism. At least since Carl Schmitt’s inﬂ uential elabo-
ration of the ‘theo-political’ in Political Theology, there is the question 
of the extent to which modern politics per se parasitises religious/ 
theological ideas. Schmitt’s famous claim is that:
All signiﬁ cant concepts of the modern theory of the state are secularized the-
ological concepts not only because of their historical development – in which 
they were transferred from theology to the theory of the state, whereby, for 
example, the omnipotent God became the omnipotent lawgiver – but also 
because of their systematic structure, the recognition of which is necessary 
for a sociological consideration of these concepts. The exception in jurispru-
dence is analogous to the miracle in theology. Only by being aware of this 
analogy can we appreciate the manner in which the philosophical ideas of 
the state developed in the last centuries.7
Whether Schmitt’s thesis is homological (some political concepts 
resemble some religious concepts) or genealogical (modern political 
concepts are conditioned by and reliant upon religious concepts),8 by 
‘imitative atheism’ we mean something stronger than either of these 
theses. It is not enough to show that political notions ‘owe their con-
tours to the very theological traditions and practices, the systems of 
thought and sensibilities, whose authority they seek to curb or hold 
in check’.9 Our concern will rather be with the extent to which post-
theological conceptions of politics implicitly require the persistence, in 
the theological notions they appropriate, of theological assumptions 
they explicitly reject; in other words we are concerned not with analogy 
or genealogy but dependency, with the extent to which post-theological 
politics might not simply parallel the theological, but parasitise it.
5. 1 MEILLASSOU X: F A I TH , V A L U E  A N D 
HY PER C HA O S
It is notable that, in ‘L’Inexistence divine’, Meillassoux moves the axis 
of discussion from the (in)existence of God to a register of hope and 
justice: ‘croire, désormais, ce n’est plus avoir la foi, ce n’est plus croire 
en la loi, c’est espérer une justice digne de ce nom’ (ID 384).10 What is 
most keenly at stake for Meillassoux in the four ways of relating man 
and God seems to be the ethical import of each position. In ‘L’Éthique 
divine’, the third part of ‘L’Inexistence divine’, Meillassoux sketches 
how being and value have drifted asunder in the history of Western 
thought. Plato seeks the uniﬁ cation of being and value in the Ideas: 
justice is written into the harmony of the elements; cosmos and sky 
become the images of the Good itself (ID 305), and this ‘cosmologi-
cal symbol’ is the ﬁ rst of three ‘symbols’ (from sym-ballein, to cast or 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
171
thrust together, in this case the grouping together of value and being) 
that, in the history of Western thought, have provided an ontological 
link between being and value (ID 303). This attempted reconciliation of 
being and value ends, however, with Newton, after whom justice seems 
like a convenient convention (ID 306). Two rearguard actions, two 
further symbols, seek to re-establish the link between value and being.
The second symbol is naturalist or Romantic, and it tries to compen-
sate for the Newtonian split by inscribing value not within the natural 
but the social world: man is born good, and there is an inscription 
of the good in the living, no longer in the matter of the cosmos (ID 
306). The third, ‘historical’, symbol looks to History as the inhuman 
and non-natural entity that ﬁ nally assures the objectivity of value for 
human beings. Today, Meillassoux argues, we are experiencing the 
death of this Symbolism of modernity. We have lost the certainty that 
history is on our side (ID 308). This failure to reconcile being and 
value leaves both belief and atheism wanting, Meillassoux argues, for 
whereas belief cannot be rational, atheism cannot be virtuous (ID 310). 
Nevertheless, the task of any philosophy worthy of that name remains, 
in Meillassoux’s account, to unite being and value (ID 302), and in so 
doing to avoid both atheistic despair and religious obscurantism by 
providing a rational account of the ontological harmony between our 
measureless demand for justice and the absurdity of a world without 
God (ID 300).
Philosophy has hitherto provided three solutions to the problem of 
determining the relationship between the Good and the true (ID 295): 
1) the Good is true because it harkens back to a primordial and neces-
sary reality, although this reality is beyond thought; 2) the Good is true 
because it refers to some ideal, although the ideal is inaccessible; 3) 
the Good is a real and manageable (maîtrisable) possibility. This third 
option, Meillassoux stresses, is of a revolutionary bent: justice can be 
fully realised by human action alone. But this, like the other options, 
is inadequate, because it cannot repair injustice, simply hope for future 
justice. All three solutions proposed hitherto suffer from requiring that 
the Good be real or that there be a real prospect of achieving it (ID 
308), which is why Meillassoux proposes a fourth solution: ‘la vérité 
du Bien, comme Quatrième Monde, ne désigne ni une réalité, ni une 
impossibilité, ni une possibilité maîtrisable: le Bien désigne la vérité 
d’une possibilité non maîtrisable’ (ID 296; QM’s italics).11
For Meillassoux’s factial account of justice the Good is not an ideal 
but an unreal (un irréel), that is to say a real possibility, but one which 
escapes all prediction. It is the truth of becoming itself that teaches 
us this demand for justice (ID 311–12), for it afﬁ rms that something 
172 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
which has no relation to the real (in this case: perfect justice) can 
 hyperchaotically come to be.
Only hyperchaos can deliver a justice that maintains the demand of 
its original excess, namely that justice must be universal in the sense of 
being for all, which would include justice for those now dead. Whereas 
universal justice is absurd for the atheist, who has no hope of justice for 
the dead, the only position that has thus far been able to promise such 
an excessive justice as to include the dead is the religious premise of the 
resurrection of the dead (ID 338). However, the theistic position also 
undermines justice because the existence of any God who would have 
allowed the atrocities of the twentieth century to unfold would itself, 
Meillassoux argues, be a great injustice (ID 286). There is no religion 
or morality, he asserts, that must not bow to one or other of these two 
conditions. So the circle that Meillassoux gives himself to square ‘comes 
down to making thinkable the statement conjugating the possible 
resurrection of the dead [. . .] and the inexistence of God’ (SD 267–8; 
QM’s italics). This is accomplished by the principle of factiality, for 
which everything that is logically possible is really possible,  including 
 resurrection (ID 290).
In Meillassoux’s fourth symbol, value is re-inscribed into being in 
terms of the real and ineliminable possibility of ‘illegal’ change (that is: 
change not conforming to pre-existing laws) (ID 312). Thus the absurd-
ity of hyperchaos itself, far from being the rock upon which the desire 
for justice runs aground, provides the very pledge of possible justice (ID 
299).
Meillassoux freely acknowledges that this link between value and 
truth is unfounded:
la philosophie part toujours d’un postulat qui peut fort bien être impos-
sible à démontrer, qui peut fort bien être faux, ou idéologique, à savoir: la 
valeur n’est pas une simple invention humaine, la valeur est la découverte 
d’une vérité concernant le monde, le réel extra-humain, et cette vérité 
doit être dégagée par la seule raison, sans l’intervention de la révélation 
 transcendante. (ID 300)12
So with value we are back in the realm of postulates, not demonstra-
tions. Meillassoux makes explicit that there is no discourse that can 
lead the reader by degrees to accept his hope for universal justice; ‘il se 
fera ou non du biais de l’acceptation ou du refus du temps tel que nous 
l’avons pensé’ (ID 288).13 He cannot build a cumulative argument for 
it, and must simply immerse the reader in the postulate in medias res.
The certainty that value is not a social construction, that it bespeaks 
a truth about the world, rests in Meillassoux’s reconstruction of phi-
losophy on a wager. Indeed, he seeks to re-write Pascal’s religious 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
173
wager in his own philosophical terms. Whereas the man who believes 
in transcendence sees in earthly events signs to be deciphered (ID 373), 
Meillassoux’s gamer is the one who has the power (puissance) not to 
make a given event into a sign, even in the case of the most striking 
coincidence (ID 374). What this gamer seeks is an encounter not with 
destiny, but with chance (ID 375).14 Pascal’s mistake is that he assumes 
the gamer wants to win, Meillassoux argues, but in fact the gamer 
wants to come face to face with chance, inaccessible to probabilistic 
calculations (ID 376). Meillassoux re-frames the wager along these 
lines, addressing the gamer in the second person: the great dice thrower 
is the one who hopes for justice, and continues hoping as he plays and 
plays again. We need dice-throwers who will approach justice like they 
approach the gaming table (ID 376). So the gamer throws, and hopes. 
She hopes for the appearance (surgissement) of a new justice, and her 
hope is founded on the ontological truth of necessary contingency (ID 
33). We shall return below to the question of what precisely we are to 
understand by throwing the die; for now we shall continue to pursue 
the question of justice.
Meillassoux distinguishes the dice-thrower’s hope for justice from 
illusion, as well as from a religious or abstract principle; it is the 
rational anticipation of what he calls the fourth World of justice. The 
three worlds which this fourth World succeeds are matter, life and 
thought (ID 293), all of which appeared ex nihilo within the world 
that preceded them. Meillassoux uses the term ex nihilo as a cognate 
for ‘contingent’ when he is describing certain appearances that cannot 
be explained by a theory of chance (ID 38). As opposed to an idea of 
chance which understands change in terms of a pre-ordained, ﬁ nite 
repertoire of potential outcomes (like throwing a six-sided die), contin-
gency exceeds every pre-existing totality of cases, even an inﬁ nite one, 
and claims that cases themselves can be created (ID 22). Surgissement 
ex nihilo is without any reason, and by that token limitless (ID 12). 
Meillassoux’s privileged example of such appearing from nothing is the 
emergence of life on earth, the coming to being of a qualitatively new 
set of circumstances not contained within that which preceded them 
(ID 16).
A similar argument can be made for a number of different cases of 
emergence: sensation cannot be reduced to a material structure, and 
conceptual thought cannot be reduced to sensation (ID 33–4). Life 
(including the sensation of pain) is not a latent property of matter, as 
if pain was asleep in matter beforehand (ID 31), and to the objection 
that the ex nihilo is simply too unconstrained to be taken seriously 
(why would it be life that emerges from matter, not any of an inﬁ nite 
174 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
number of other virtualities?), Meillassoux replies ‘avant de contester 
ce surgissement ex nihilo pour son caractère fantastique, il faudrait se 
demander s’il n’est pas plus fabuleux de confondre la matière avec un 
dormeur’ (ID 32).15
Crucially, Meillassoux argues that the World of justice, also called 
the truth of the Good (la vérité du Bien, ID 296) is the only world that 
can succeed the third World of thought: ‘si un monde surgit encore, 
ce ne peut être que le Monde de justice. Car tout autre surgissement 
ne constituerait qu’une variation « monstrueuse » des trois Mondes 
antérieurs’ (ID 296).16 The reasoning is opaque here, but it appears 
that Meillassoux is arguing that any change other than the appear-
ing of the World of justice will simply be a change within the existing 
world (ID 290–1). It follows that, if the only necessity is contingency, 
the only necessity for the present world is the possible appearing of 
the world of justice. The inevitability of a further hyperchaotic change 
bringing about the World of justice must also be understood in terms 
of Meillassoux’s assertion that ‘rien ne peut surpasser l’homme’ (ID 
293)17 (where man is distinguished from other animals by his reason, 
more speciﬁ cally by his capacity to intuit the principle of factiality (ID 
138)), a move that seems to be the logical extension of his exemption 
of his own reasoning from hyperchaotic change. Despite his best prot-
estations, it remains unclear, at least to this reader, how holding the 
position that the World of universal justice is the only world that can 
succeed the present one can possibly avoid ﬂ ying in the face of hyper-
chaos  otherwise than by idolising human reason.
A further critique of Meillassoux’s position could take the following 
form: what if hyperchaotic change were to bring about a situation not 
in which the world suddenly conformed to our sense of justice (through 
the resurrection of the dead or whatever other means), but in which 
our sense of justice suddenly conformed to the world as it is? What if 
the surprising chance is that we suddenly consider our world to have 
been perfectly ‘just’ all along? This is unthinkable (both logically and 
ethically) perhaps, but surely not hyperchaotically impossible, unless 
our sense of justice is idolatrously exempted from hyperchaotic change. 
This critique echoes the argument we mounted against Meillassoux in 
the previous chapter. Brown is quite right to suggest that ‘a speculative 
demonstration that whatever situation is contingent rather than neces-
sary (despite its manifest stability) does not undermine the political 
urgency of working toward the contingent stability of another situation 
– toward new and different ways of structuring or distributing relations 
among the given’,18 but his intervention, like Meillassoux’s argument, 
does beg the question of justice: our understanding of what is just must 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
175
in some way (once again) be exempt from hyperchaos (or we must at 
least wager that it will not change – or we will not recognise it to have 
changed – for the foreseeable future) whereas the principle of factial-
ity insists that contingency alone, and not our current understand-
ing of justice, is necessary. This poses a signiﬁ cant problem for any 
 criteriology of ethics or politics in relation to Meillassoux’s philosophy.
A ﬁ nal set of questions that Meillassoux needs to face concerns the 
analogy of throwing the die itself. What does it mean to throw the die 
in the ‘real world’? How, in other words, might we inﬂ uence a hyper-
chaotic change? Can the die be ‘loaded’? And, if it cannot, does this 
not expose Meillassouxian hope as a distraction from practical steps 
to bring about meaningful political change? Peter Hallward voices 
this latter concern in relation to Après la ﬁ nitude when he critiques 
Meillassoux for not being able to think concrete political situations:
Rather like his mentor Badiou, to the degree that Meillassoux insists on the 
absolute disjunction of an event from existing situations he deprives himself 
of any concretely mediated means of thinking, with and after Marx, the pos-
sible ways of changing such situations [. . .] the abstract logical possibility 
of change (given the absence of any ultimately sufﬁ cient reason) has strictly 
nothing to do with any concrete process of actual change.19
Hallward’s argument is answered with reference to Après la ﬁ ni-
tude by Nathan Brown, who responds that ‘Meillassoux’s book has 
nothing whatsoever to do with an empirical analysis of political or 
social situations or possible ways of transforming them’,20 but from 
‘L’Inexistence divine’ we can go further, and see that Hallward’s 
reading of Meillassoux is only at best partially correct.
Meillassoux addresses the question of quietism directly, arguing 
that the constant possibility of the appearing of justice does not lead 
to passive waiting, but on the contrary to the awareness of human 
possibility (ID 347). Far from being a mere waiting game (attentisme), 
it is in hoping for a justice worthy of the name that the individual is 
moved to act in conformity with that hope. Meillassoux also deals 
with the question of the ‘real world equivalent’ of the dice throw, in 
a section of ‘L’Inexistence divine’ entitled ‘Le Fatalisme’ (ID 326–7). 
There is no fatalism in factiality, passively waiting for the appearing of 
justice, Meillassoux insists, but rather ‘la condition pour que l’universel 
advienne, c’est donc qu’il soit désiré en acte’ (ID 327; QM’s empha-
sis).21 Each time I act in accord with justice I renew this waiting: ‘On 
peut ainsi comparer l’acte libre à un coup de dé – coup de dé qui ne 
garantit pas la chance, mais qui seul la rend possible’ (ID 327).22 So it 
seems that, by dint of throwing the dice (that is: by actively desiring the 
universal) enough, I provide the condition for its coming. And by dint 
176 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
of acting in accordance with universal justice here and now, I avoid a 
passive waiting. But this seems completely out of line with the justice 
for the dead that Meillassoux insists is the only universal justice. How 
do I ‘actively will’ the resurrection of the dead? What differentiates 
Meillassoux’s desiring from sacriﬁ ces offered to the gods of rain or 
victory, in the hope that such actions might inﬂ uence the future course 
of events? And why should human desire make any difference at all 
to hyperchaotic change? Meillassoux seems to argue that it does, but 
remains as yet opaque on the mechanism of any such inﬂ uence.
Nathan Brown’s counterargument to the quietism charge is 
 illuminating here:
precisely because any given or constructed situation is absolutely contin-
gent rather than necessary, it has to be upheld by conviction and by force, 
even if we cannot assure its protection against the perpetual threat of 
 disintegration.23
Maybe, but this is a very different conception of ‘hope’ for a future 
justice. What role, then, do ‘conviction and force’ have? Only that we 
throw the die until we get what we want, and then we stop throwing, 
hoping against the ‘perpetual threat of disintegration’. It seems that nec-
essary contingency is now the enemy of our convictions, not their only 
hope, and our real hope is in our ability to produce just that change we 
want, before closing down the possibility of change once more.
5.2 NA NC Y : ETH OS  A N D C A L L
Like Meillassoux, Nancy rejects the notion of any ‘move’ from ontol-
ogy to certain ethical or political principles. Such a move is dangerous:
on devrait savoir que, d’une pensée, disons de l’être, ou de l’essence, ou 
des principes – peu importe ici – , à une politique et à une éthique, la 
conséquence n’est jamais bonne (pourquoi oublie-t-on systématiquement 
l’adhésion massive et durable au régime nazi de tant de théoriciens de la 
« philosophie des valeurs »?) (EL 214–15)24
The error in such a move is to pass unproblematically from the inter-
rogation of ‘the principle’ as such, to the ﬁ xing of certain determinate 
principles. ‘Principles’ cannot be deduced from ‘the principle’, under-
stood as the originary sharing of being, the principle of freedom. To 
ﬁ x any such determinate principles would be to parasitise religion, to 
erect in the place of a ‘proof of God’ an originary Reason of the world, 
which is exactly what Nancy’s atheology seeks to avoid (ADC 49). The 
rejection of any Reason or End for the world does not result, however, 
in ignoring the question of ethics altogether, rather ‘notre question est 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
177
de part en part la question du Bien dans un monde sans ﬁ n ou à ﬁ ns 
singulières’ (CM 77–8).25
Furthermore, to distinguish physics and ethics is already to be 
functioning within the history of philosophy governed by closure of 
metaphysics (the closure of meaning into signiﬁ cation). It is to stop 
asking where something like ‘ethics’ comes from, and what, prior to 
any ‘domain of ethics’, could authorise any ethical law in general (IC 
116/RP 29). It is not that ontology and politics are bridged, more that 
it is denied that their separation was originary. It is only a parasitic 
metaphysics that divided ontology and ethics in the ﬁ rst place, that the 
supposed gulf between them should need to be bridged.
5.2.1 Ethos
The discourses of ontology and ethics are for Nancy post facto reduc-
tions of a sense which is both ontological and ethical. It is a mistake 
to suppose that we need to make a ‘move’ from ontology to ethics, 
because being for Nancy is not a brute fact, an il y a, in the ﬁ rst 
place (PD 90, 93/FT 176, 178). Being is not the ‘there is’ of a brute 
given, but rather that there is giving (‘qu’il y a don’), in other words 
no signiﬁ cation can be ascribed to the fact that being is, in the same 
way that we might ascribe signiﬁ cation to what there is. It is Nancy’s 
distinction between signiﬁ cation and sens that is doing the work here. 
There can be no signiﬁ cation of sense, because sense is the condition of 
possibility of signiﬁ cation. Nancy summarises this situation helpfully 
when he says that ethics is ‘phatic’ rather than ‘semantic’, that sense-
making exscribes itself rather than inscribing itself in maxims or works 
(œuvres) (PD 112/FT 195). Ethics is not the discipline concerned with 
moral signiﬁ cation, as opposed to cognitive or physical signiﬁ cations, 
but the touching of being. It follows that all disciplines – the cogni-
tive, the logical, the physical, aesthetic, moral – are ‘originally ethical’ 
(PD 105/FT 188); in fact, only ontology can be ethical (ESP 39/BSP 
21), and ethics is the ontology of ontology itself (PD 103/FT 187). To 
understand these latter two claims we need to examine ﬁ rst Nancy’s 
plural singularity and then the notion of ethics as ethos.
The elision of the difference between ontology and ethics is part of 
Nancy’s elaboration of the spacing of singular plural being. Singular 
plural being not only requires a rethinking of being such that the ques-
tion of social being becomes the primary ontological question (ESP 78/
BSP 57), but being also needs to be rethought so that it is no longer a 
ﬁ rst philosophy upon which ethics supervenes. When Nancy insists that 
singular plurality (or plural singularity, as singulier pluriel can equally 
178 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
be translated26) is not only another signiﬁ cation but also another syntax 
(ESP 57–8/BSP 37), he means that we must not simply think of ﬁ lling 
the categories ‘ontology’ and ‘ethics’ with new content, but we must 
rethink the categories themselves, casting singular plural ontology as 
an ethos and a praxis.27 Just as it situates itself before the distinction 
between the singular and the plural, being singular plural situates itself 
before the distinction between ontology and ethics, or between being, 
acting, sense and behaviour (ESP 87/BSP 65). Pure reason is in itself 
practical reason Nancy insists, adopting a Kantian idiom, because it 
is, irreducibly, common reason (raison commune), with the avec at its 
groundless ground: ‘Il n’y a de différence entre l’éthique et l’ontologique 
: l’« éthique » expose ce que l’« ontologie » dispose’ (ESP 123).28
This re-deﬁ nition of ontology is necessary in order to overcome a 
parasitic political theology of self-sufﬁ ciency. Any ontology that does 
not touch the limit where all ontology gets tied up with something other 
than itself resolves to just such a theologico-political self sufﬁ ciency 
(SM 175/SW 112). The insistence that the distinction between ontol-
ogy and ethics is derivative forms an important element of Nancy’s 
attempt to leave ‘theologico-politics’ to elaborate an atheological space 
of  politics (SM 181/SW 118).
In order to elaborate a thinking which does not recognise as primary 
the disjunction of being and value, Nancy employs the term ethos, an a 
priori synthesis of concept and affect (PD 108/FT 191). Ethos, Nancy 
explains, has two distinct meanings: on the one hand presence and 
disposition, on the other hand stay (séjour) and behaviour. The two 
meanings blend in the motif of ‘holding oneself’ (la tenue), and it is such 
a ‘holding’ that is at the bottom of every ethics (CM 36/CWG 42). This 
is no ‘moral philosophy’ derived from a ‘ﬁ rst philosophy’, but rather 
a ‘thinking of being’ that is neither ethical nor ontological, neither 
 theoretical nor practical (PD 105/FT 189).
This is an idea of Heideggerian inspiration, for in terms of Heidegger’s 
fundamental ontology, Nancy argues, it is not simply that the thinking 
of being implies an ethics but, more radically, that the thinking of being 
presents itself as an ethics: Heidegger’s ‘fundamental ontology’ is justly 
called an ‘original ethics’ (PD 105/FT 189). Nancy is at pains to stress 
that ethos is not superimposed on being from the outside, nor does it 
imbue being with any values alien to being itself. Ethos for Nancy is a 
behaviour, and the thought of this behaviour is ‘original ethics’: ethos 
as conducting oneself (la conduite) according to the truth (PD 105/FT 
189) that is prior to any ‘ethics’ or ‘politics’ (VD 62/TD 33), namely the 
truth of singular plural being.
So what does it mean to conduct oneself according to the truth of 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
179
 singular plural being? It means to preserve that freedom by virtue of 
which there can be any relation to values or to law in the ﬁ rst place 
(EL 200/EF 163). The importance of freedom is paramount in under-
standing Nancy’s ethos. Ethos is not the Good, however that may be 
conceived in a given philosophy (Plato’s agathon, Kant’s good will, 
Spinozan joy, Marxian revolution, Aristotle’s zoon politikon), but the 
archi-originary ethicity without which there would be no such deter-
minations of the good (EL 200/EF 163), namely the free decision to 
‘receive oneself’ (se recevoir), to hold oneself as a decision (de se tenir 
elle-même comme décision). The Good for Nancy relies on this freedom 
of decision, a decision which is the ‘empty’ moment of any ethics. We 
have to decide about ethical content and ethical norms, laws, excep-
tions, cases and negotiations, but there is no law or exception for the 
decision, unless it is the law that withdraws from (and stands behind) 
all laws, namely freedom itself (EL 200/EF 163).
Nancy is not, for all that, propounding an ‘ethics of freedom’, 
because freedom is ethos itself as the opening of space (EL 187–8/
EF 146), ethos as the space of ethics (and of ontology), rather than an 
ethics of ethos. Once more, this resonates with the relation between 
sense and signiﬁ cation:29 there can be no gift of sense (sens) because 
sense is the giving of the gift of signiﬁ cation, and similarly there can be 
no ethics of ethos because ethos is the possibility, the space, of ethics. 
Freedom is not the property of such and such a being (any more than a 
given signiﬁ cation ‘has’ sens), rather being itself is opened by freedom. 
Ethics is rethought as ethos, where the freedom of the free choice – 
rather than the choice of the free choice – is paramount.
An ethical imperative only makes sense if it is addressed to a freedom 
of speech which its address both conﬁ rms and conceals (IC 123/RP 
36). Furthermore, the command only makes sense if it addresses a ﬁ nite 
freedom. The imperative is part of the structure of ﬁ nitude, Nancy 
afﬁ rms from his reading of Heidegger’s Kantbuch, where Heidegger 
afﬁ rms that a being which, in its very ground, is subject to a duty 
or imperative, knows itself to be in a state of non-completion, and 
knowing itself in this state at its very ground, such a being knows itself 
to be ﬁ nite (IC 124/RP 37). In other words ethos, inscribed in the warp 
and woof of being itself, bears an irreducible relation to ﬁ nitude. But 
it is not an ethics of ﬁ nitude (which would leave us once more with an 
ethical domain supervening upon a prior, ﬁ nite, ontological situation), 
but ﬁ nitude as ethics and as the opening of ethics (IC 124/RP 37). The 
difference between the two is this: whereas the ethical imperative has 
always been construed as the properly inﬁ nite teleonomy30 of a being 
which, though itself only provisionally ﬁ nite, nevertheless is promised 
180 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
the appropriation of its end, Nancy is arguing that we understand 
ﬁ nitude-ethics as the expropriation, or opening-as-disenclosure, of any 
end, in other words we must understand ethics in terms of freedom and 
ethos.
The insistence on freedom means that ethos yields a thought which, 
says Nancy quoting Heidegger, has no result (PD 106/FT 189 n.62),31 
not in the sense that it is impotent, but in the sense that it yields no 
ﬁ xed norms or sets of values. Nevertheless, it is its own result: it is 
possible as a thought only to the extent that it is already a behaviour 
(une conduite). It does not guide behaviour, rather it itself guides, and 
it guides itself (the two senses of elle conduit elle-même) to thinking 
behaviour in general. As such, ethos avoids two equal and opposite 
errors. On the one hand, it is incommensurable with the ‘philosophy 
of values’ which would attempt to ﬁ x signiﬁ cation by projecting it into 
some ‘beyond’ or other, circumscribing the ethical to any determinate 
idea, concept or discourse. In this sense, again, it has no result. On the 
other hand, neither does ethos yield a subjective, autonomous ethical 
free choice, which in fact amounts to the same ﬁ xing of sense as the 
philosophy of values itself. It avoids this pitfall because, although it 
has no result, it is its own result: it is possible as a thought only to the 
extent that it is a behaviour (conduite). In an admirably short formula-
tion from ‘Une exemption de sens’, Nancy sums up the twin dangers, 
‘Garder, préserver le sens d’être rempli aussi bien que d’être vide, voilà 
l’éthos’ (DCD 180).32 There is a way of holding oneself that accords 
with with singular plural being, and it is to preserve the freedom of 
decision. Neither a philosophy of value nor autonomous choice can 
assure human dignity (PD 106/FT 189), where dignity is understood as 
having, in one’s being, to make sense of being. It follows that dignity, 
like ethics, must be seen in relation to ﬁ nitude, where ﬁ nitude signiﬁ es 
the condition in which sens is the ground and its truth is sense-making 
(faire-sens). Inﬁ nitude, by contrast, Nancy continues, would be the 
condition of a being whose meaning would be its ﬁ nished product, 
 self-possessed and self-sufﬁ cient.
Our contemporary moral disarray, insists Nancy, stems from not 
having found a way to think values and free choice together (PD 106/
FT 189). It is this negotiation of values and free choice that is provided 
by Nancy’s ethos, in the same way that sens provides for signiﬁ cations, 
without being reduced to any signiﬁ cation in particular. The move 
from a system of values to ethos as ethics is a distinctly atheological 
move for Nancy, in a world which is essentially not the representation 
of a universe or of a ‘here below’, but the excess of ethos beyond any 
representation in a world which holds itself, conﬁ gures itself, without 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
181
any relation to a given principle or ﬁ xed end (CM 46–7/CWG 47). 
Furthermore, it follows in such a world for Nancy that atheism (in the 
sense of the post-theological) is the only ethos possible, the only dignity 
of the subject (DDC 30/DisDC 17).
5.2.2 The Call
There remains, nevertheless, an unanswered question for Nancy’s 
ethos. Even if ontology and ethics are a posteriori reductions of a more 
originary ethos, by virtue of what does or can that ethos exert a nor-
mative purchase on behaviour? In other words: why act in accordance 
with freedom, or with being singular plural? Can ethos command, or 
prescribe, acting in accord with the marriage of freedom and values? 
It is for a response to these sorts of questions that we need to consider 
Nancy’s notion of the call or appeal (appel).
Let us be clear: Nancy certainly does use the language of obligation 
in relation to singular plural being. The ethos of thinking ‘us’ in singular 
plurality is an obligation, but it is an imperative without a command:
On pourrait dire qu’il y a dans la liberté l’impératif ontologique, ou l’être 
comme intimation – mais à la condition d’ajouter que c’est sans comman-
dement [. . .] ou que le commandement se confond avec l’abandon de la 
liberté à elle-même, jusque dans le caprice et jusque dans la chance. (EL 
198–9)33
This imperative that does not become a commandment, Nancy argues 
in La Pensée dérobée, is also an address, and the call or the address is 
itself nothing other than sense (PD 172/AfS 88), sense as address, as the 
opening of the possibility of return or response (renvoi).
In L’Adoration, Nancy develops the idea of a response to this call as 
‘adoration’. Taking his cue from the etymology of ‘adoration’ – oratio 
as solemn speech or, more precisely, speech held (tenue), a tension of 
the voice, and ad-oratio as speech addressed to something or someone 
– Nancy uses the term to signify speech the content of which is insepa-
rable or indiscernible from its address (ADC 28), whether it be invoca-
tion, call, adjuration, imploring, celebration, dedication, salutation, or 
address itself. Adoration is the ‘salut!’ of an address which contains 
almost nothing other than itself, that bears a recognition, an afﬁ rma-
tion of the existence of the other (ADC 29), and is not sublimated into 
a higher order of speech.
But does this imperative, call, or address that elicits adoration have 
any ethical weight, so to speak? Is there any obligation to heed it, 
to adore? The most persuasive way to ﬁ nd such a force is explored 
182 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
by Martin Crowley in his L’Homme sans.34 Crowley rejects the task 
of deriving a politics of equality from an ontology, but nevertheless 
employs the notion of a call to suggest a relation other than that of 
derivation: ‘si celle-ci [une politique égalitaire] n’est assurément donnée 
par aucune ontologie, il se peut bien qu’elle soit néanmoins appelée par 
toute ontologie qui pose, comme on aime à le dire aujourd’hui, l’égalité 
de chaque un avec chaque un.’35
In a very carefully chosen phrase, Crowley evokes ‘this exposition 
which, in common, we do not have’ (‘cette exposition qu’en commun 
nous n’avons pas’)36 as the ontological situation which demands to be 
taken into account in our politics. Crowley follows Robert Antelme’s 
argument in L’Espèce humaine that the revelation of the indivisible 
unity of the human race deﬁ nitively disqualiﬁ es all discrimination, ren-
dering actually existing differences intolerable.37 It would be hasty to 
discern here an ethics of victimhood of the sort that Badiou dismisses 
as reducing the human to the animal datum of its tortured body (S 
246–7/Cen 175), for the notion of equality cannot be reduced to the 
corporeal, and an appeal to ontological equality is not an oppressive 
metaphysics of pity (S 248–9/Cen 176) because the call is not addressed 
to empathy but to ethos, to the ethico-ontological condition of exist-
ence. Nevertheless, the position is still open to the charge of being 
reactionary, for the resistance against inequality relies on there being 
inequalities to resist, and beyond this resistance struggles to provide a 
constructive political vision.
The ground of equality for Crowley is human ﬁ nitude: there is no 
human being who is not ﬁ nite. This ‘proposition of ﬁ nitude’ establishes 
an irreducible ontological equality and, at the same time, demands 
(exige) its political realisation.38 For Crowley, the ethical imperative of 
ﬁ nitude demands variously that we verify and realise,39 honour40 and 
translate into action41 its ontological equality. Nevertheless, the ques-
tion remains: why should we heed this call? Simply because it is onto-
logical? But why should ontology be normative? This Everest ethics 
(we obey the demand ‘because it’s there’) lacks persuasiveness. If things 
were ontologically otherwise, for example in the logically possible and 
ethically repugnant situation where there would indeed be a fundamen-
tal ontological difference between different groups of ‘human beings’, 
would such an ontology also issue a demand it would be intolerable to 
disobey, or would there be certain possible ontologies that it would be 
our duty to ‘resist’ and not to ‘verify’? Why should what is ontologi-
cally most fundamental necessarily be normative, to use Crowley’s lan-
guage ‘by this very token’ (par là même)?42 We might conclude that it is 
because Crowley’s ontology is one of equality, not because this equality 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
183
is ontological, that it is considered normative here, and if this is so then 
it begs the question of why equality should be normative.
In relation to the call/demand and response, there is the additional 
complicating factor of the theological connotations of any such 
call. Critchley derives his notion of ‘the unfulﬁ llability of the ethical 
demand’ in part from Lévinas,43 and when he tries to secularise the call 
in his ethics of ﬁ nitude in Very Little, Almost Nothing, its interpolative 
power crumbles into a ‘minimal, fragile, refusable’ ethics of ‘the experi-
ence of what I call atheist transcendence’,44 in an unappealing choice 
between a theological call and a ‘moral recommendation, even exhor-
tation, an appeal to the individual reader from an individual writer’.45 
This is neither how Nancy or Crowley understands the demand.
By the time of publishing Inﬁ nitely Demanding Critchley has 
 modiﬁ ed his stance to that of an methodological ethical agnosticism:
The ultimate metaphysical source of ethical obligation, should there be such 
a thing, is simply not cognizable. In my more extreme view, the question of 
the metaphysical ground or basis of ethical obligation should simply be dis-
regarded as a philosophical wheel spinning with neither friction nor forward 
motion. Instead, the focus should be on the radicality of the human demand 
that faces us, a demand that requires phenomenology and not metaphysics.46
But the question is: precisely what human demand faces us? Short-
circuiting the metaphysics of resistance or commitment by an answer 
with the structure of ‘we all know . . .’ does not yet address the ques-
tion of what makes the ‘good’ good, but rather opens the structure 
of demand and response to being hijacked by ‘undesirable’ demands 
 emanating from ‘undesirable’ ontologies.
It seems that, one way or another, the notion of a demand, call or 
appeal cannot provide – or at least has not yet provided – the link 
between ontology and ethics that Critchley and Crowley need it to: 
Critchley ends up supplementing his demand with a Badiouian ethics 
of decision, and Crowley cannot give an account for why ontological 
equality should be normative. Nancy’s own notion of ethos, according 
to which the distinction between ontology and ethics is itself derivative, 
masking a more primitive tenue or habitus, begs the same question: it 
may be original, but that does not in itself make it good.
Nevertheless, this meditation on the call has not been in vain, 
because it allows us to respond to a number of critiques that have 
been made of Nancy’s sense and singular plural ethos. Bruno Bosteels 
charges Nancy’s notion of withdrawal/retracing (retrait) – whereby 
Nancy critiques the withdrawal of the ﬁ eld of political possibilities (le 
politique) such that a determinate form of politics (la politique) ﬁ lls 
184 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
the whole political horizon – with abandoning the possibility of real 
political change that can abolish the current state of politics in favour of 
seeking to anticipate a truly unheard-of event, a true encounter with the 
real.47 In other words, Nancy’s politics of the retrait, and, by extension, 
his ethics as ethos and call/address as adoration, is ascetic, politically 
emasculated, anaemically unable to engineer radical change.
In L’Adoration Nancy recognises a similar danger himself, meditat-
ing on the importance of ‘enthusiasm’ (etymologically ‘passage into 
God’ or ‘sharing of the divine’) for a secular politics: ‘comment ne pas 
emporter l’enthousiasme dans la mort de Dieu?’ (ADC 113).48 Nancy 
responds to his own question: we must begin by not confusing the 
fervour of enthusiasm with the fury of fascism, which always refers to a 
closed and determined ﬁ gure (the people, the party, the leader, the idea, 
the vision . . .). That is not adoration, but adulation. The fervour of 
adoration, by contrast comes in the dilection that accords or recognises 
the unique and incalculable value of the other, both for the lovers in the 
throes of passion and desiring that passion for all beings:
Elle est ferveur pour l’existence multiple et singulière : pour chacune, donc, 
tour à tour, pour chacune à l’exclusion des autres, et cependant pour toutes, 
en droit, et en fait au moins pour plusieurs qui répondent à plusieurs modes 
de cet « amour » unique et polymorphe (ADC 113)49
So Nancy’s response to the charge of political quietism is not to search 
after all for an idea or a party as a focus for political fervour, but to 
seek the enthusiasm of that which precisely transcends every idea. 
Nancy’s is not the fury of signiﬁ cation, of ethics or of la politique, but 
enthusiasm, after the death of God, for sens, ethos and le politique. It 
is a false dichotomy, Nancy argues, to assume that this has nothing to 
do with determinate political situations: ‘Parler de “sens” et de “vérité” 
au milieu de l’agitation militaire, des calculs géopolitiques, des souf-
frances, des grimaces de bêtise ou de mensonge n’est pas “idéaliste”, 
c’est toucher à la chose même’ (CA 16).50 The ‘thing itself’ here is the 
ontological equality to which alone appeal can be made for concrete 
political action in political situations. In Crowley’s terms,
Ces êtres sans qualités, sans part, sans phrase, exilés des processus de sub-
jectivation politique, récusent par là même le formalisme des droits humains 
existants, en exigeant par là même que soit incessamment vériﬁ ée et réalisée 
l’égalité ontologique que déclare la ﬁ nitude.51
For his part, Simon Critchley departs most decisively from Nancy in 
his dislocation of politics from any ontological presuppositions:
We are on our own and what we do we have to do for ourselves. Politics 
requires subjective invention, imagination and endurance, not to mention 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
185
tenacity and cunning. No ontology or eschatological philosophy of history 
is going to do it for us.52
In an analysis which is more Badiouian than Nancean, Critchley 
afﬁ rms that ‘politics is a disruption of the ontological domain and 
separate categories are required for its analysis and practice. There is 
no transitivity between ontology and politics.’53 But when Critchley 
sketches what ontologising politics would mean, it is ‘seeing politics 
as the expression of some common substance’.54 Nancy’s ethos is not 
the expression of some common substance, as – once more – Crowley 
succinctly captures with his ‘exposition which, in common, we do not 
have’. Critchley fails to see the difference between sens and  signiﬁ cation, 
between ethos and ethics.
Furthermore, in rejecting the ontologico-ethical imperative of ethos 
and seeking to meld a Lévinasian theory of demand and subjectiv-
ity with a Badiouian decision and commitment, Critchley opens 
himself to a pointed Badiouian critique. In his response to Inﬁ nitely 
Demanding, Badiou questions Critchley’s contention that at the core 
of his (Critchley’s) neo-anarchism lies not an ontology but an inﬁ nitely 
demanding ethics of commitment. Badiou agrees with Nancy against 
Critchley when he points out that ‘you stay within the opposition of 
ontology and ethics. And that is the great idea of Lévinas. But after 
all it is not certain that there is an opposition between ontology and 
ethics’.55 Indeed, Badiou continues, there is no such opposition in his 
own thinking, for
the becoming-subject of an individual under the condition of the process of 
the truth, and ﬁ nally under the commitment to an event, is of an ontological 
nature in one sense: because it is something, an event, which is a rupture in 
the order of being as such.56
It is to Badiou’s own disruption of the dichotomy of ontology and 
ethics that we now turn.
5 . 3  BA DIOU : SU BTR AC TI ON  A N D W A GE R
Badiou’s rethinking of ethics and politics is motivated by a determina-
tion to expel from them any vestiges of theological or religious inﬂ u-
ence, to inscribe the re-founding of politics in a philosophical horizon 
disengaged from latent theology. To this end, ethics and politics must 
extricate themselves from two legacies: Lévinas’s ethics of absolute 
Alterity, and Kant’s ethics of judgment. In this section we will deal with 
each of these legacies in turn, beginning with Badiou’s reading of, and 
response to, Lévinas. What Badiou objects to above all in Lévinasian 
186 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
ethics is that the Other is only ever the immediate phenomenon of a 
transcendent principle of absolute Alterity, the Tout-Autre, which is 
‘bien évidemment le nom éthique de Dieu’ (E 39).57
This ethics is nothing more than a child of theology, guaranteed at 
every point by the ineffable God. Badiou’s critique of Lévinas at this 
point is radical: there is no separating alterity from the Tout-Autre 
upon which it relies at every point, and as such Lévinas has no philoso-
phy, properly speaking, at all, nor even a theology (which assumes that 
divinity can be predicated and identiﬁ ed), but rather an ethics, an ethics 
that has now become the ultimate name of relating to others and to the 
Altogether-Other, of relating as re-ligio. The conclusion: every attempt 
to make ethics into the principle of thought and action is religious in 
essence (E 40/Eth 23).
Badiou also deﬁ nes his own ethical and political position in con-
tradistinction to Kant’s ethics of judgment. What Badiou objects to 
most is Kant’s ethical ﬁ nitude, his perpetual examination of limits, his 
obsession with critique, ‘car une seule pensée est bien plus vaste que 
n’importe quel jugement’ (Circ1 71–2),58 and the lack of ‘thought’ 
in such an ethics – where thought is the sort of decisive rupture we 
encountered in Chapter 1 with the birth of philosophy – amounts to 
nihilism: ‘Où l’homme puisera-t-il la force d’être l’immortel qu’il est? 
Quel sera le destin de la pensée, dont on sait bien qu’elle est invention 
afﬁ rmative, ou qu’elle n’est pas?’ (E 30).59 The ethics of judgment relies 
on the notion of a general human subject, the subject of human rights 
for whom ethics is reduced to humanitarianism, deﬁ ning the human 
subject as a victim (E 26/Eth 10) and as the white-Man as the good-
Man behind the victim-Man (E 28/Eth 13). In contrast to Lévinas’s 
ethics of the Altogether-Other, Badiou offers an ethics and politics of 
the event, and in contradistinction to Kant’s ethics of judgment, he 
elaborates an ethics and politics of the decision.60
5.3.1 Politics of the Event, Politics of the Real
In a footnote on Rimbaud’s Une Saison en enfer in Conditions, Badiou 
deﬁ nes his own thinking in contrast to what he sees as the identiﬁ cation 
of ontology and politics in Nancy (C 140 n.22/Con 229 n.15). This 
false identiﬁ cation, Badiou argues, comes from having excluded science 
(speciﬁ cally mathematics) from thinking. For Nancy there is only 
one thinking, the thinking of sense, and this allows Nancy no means 
qualitatively to distinguish the ontological from the ethical or political, 
whereas in contrast to Badiou’s own thought allows multiple places of 
thought (namely politics, science, art, love). Further on in Conditions, 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
187
Badiou marks his disagreement from Nancy over what he sees as the 
latter’s ‘ontologisation’ of the event, which leads inevitably to the 
‘doctrine of sense’ (C 249 n.22/Con 307 n.17). For his part, Badiou’s 
is a politics not of being but of the event, where a political event is 
understood as the appearing of a possibility (such as the Republic, or 
the power of the workers) which was previously unnoticed, a local 
opening of political possibilities (PE 19–20). An event is political (as 
opposed to amatory, scientiﬁ c or artistic) if its ‘material’ (that which is 
incorporated into its subjective) is collective, or if the event cannot be 
attributed to anything other than the multiplicity of a collective (AMP 
155/MetP 141). The political event furthermore, like all events, is both 
situated (in that it is always the event of a given situation) and sup-
plementary (in that it is never part of, nor counted in, the situation: in 
set theoretical terms it is included, but does not belong) (E 92/Eth 68). 
The supplementary, situated event is crucial for understanding Badiou’s 
post-theological politics.
For Nancy in Une Pensée ﬁ nie, the event may be ‘la venue à la présence 
de la chose’ (PF 203),61 but the essence of the event in Badiou’s own 
account is pure disappearance, and the ‘thing’ (as truth) comes not as 
sense, within the encyclopedia of a situation, but as non-sense. In other 
words, it is basic for Badiou that ethics and true politics must rupture 
with ontology, not be a simple extension of how things already are; they 
are susceptible of no proof, derivable from no theory, and provable by 
no argument. The event ‘demonstrates what is impossible for the count’ 
(PP 129), and what is at stake for any truly political thought is counting 
as one what is uncounted (AMP 165/MetP 150). The Badiouian ‘ought’ 
is not founded on the ontology of a situation, but on a world’s inexist-
ent; it is a choice for things that are not over things that are (SP 59/SPe 
46–7, quoting Romans 4: 17), such that the essence of the political is not 
a plurality of opinions but the prescription of a rupture with what there 
is (AMP 34/MetP 24). This ethical and political rupture with ontology is 
indispensible if Badiou’s thinking is to be post-theological.
Emblematic of politics as rupture is Rousseau who, with the social con-
tract, establishes the modern concept of politics (EE 380/BE 345; see also 
PP 13). The social contract is an event in Badiou’s sense in so far as it is the 
announcement of the law without law, an illegitimate intervention (EE 
254/BE 230), the possibility of the impossible and the ground of politics 
(PLP 78). The exemplarity of Rousseau is broader than this, however, 
for ‘la politique commence par le même geste par lequel Rousseau dégage 
le fondement de l’inégalité : laisser de côté tous les faits’ (PLP 78).62 The 
political event, like Rousseau’s contract, is not guided or circumscribed 
by the facts of the situation within which it is proclaimed.63
188 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
If Badiou’s ethic of truths-as-events stresses the importance of 
rupture, his ethic of truths-as-processes emphasises the signiﬁ cance of 
faithfulness. If the Rousseauian contract is a political event, then the 
Jacobin ‘constant effort of virtue’ (AMP 148/MetP 133) is a faithful 
holding-oneself to the self-attesting sovereignty of the general will. This 
ﬁ delity is not commanded or impelled by any fact of the situation, not 
deduced or observed, and the event itself is the product not of a fact, 
but of an interpretation (PLP 77), a poem (PLP 63), and therefore 
politics is much more of an art than a science (PLP 90), an art of the 
interpretative intervention. Under these conditions, an ethics of ﬁ delity 
is not an ethics of alterity as that which is, but of the same as that which 
comes to be (E 46/Eth 27). Difference is what there is; the discourse of 
what ought to be is sameness.
For Badiou there is no single discourse of ethics, but as many situated 
ethics as there are situated truths:
L’éthique n’existe pas. Il n’y a que l’éthique-de (de la politique, de l’amour, 
de la science, de l’art). [. . .] Une philosophie se propose de construire un 
lieu de pensée où les différents types subjectifs, données dans les vérités sin-
gulières de son temps, coexistent. Mais cette coexistence n’est pas une uni-
ﬁ cation, et c’est pourquoi il est impossible de parler d’une éthique. (E 47)64
It would also be impossible to speak of there being only one ethical 
imperative, if that imperative were to enjoin any particular conduct. 
Nevertheless, there are indeed ethical imperatives in Badiou, but they 
do not mandate any particular truth, rather the courage and consistency 
with which a subject remains faithful to a truth: ‘Aimez ce que jamais 
vous ne croirez deux fois’ (E 75),65 ‘Continuer!’ (E 74),66 and his own 
re-working of Lacan’s ‘ne pas céder sur son désir’ (E 68),67 where desire 
is the unknown par excellence, the unknown of the inexistent (E 68/Eth 
47), or the void, or the impossible (PP 121). The import of the impera-
tive translated more transparently into Badiou’s own idiom is ‘ne pas 
céder sur ce que de soi-même on ne sait pas’ (E 68).68 What is called for 
is a ‘discipline of the real’ (Circ2 48/Pol 57). We see a homology here 
between Nancy’s and Badiou’s ethics, for whereas Nancy’s ethos does 
not dictate particular determinate ethics but addresses rather the way 
in which one is to hold oneself in relation to all ethics, so here Badiou’s 
maxims concern not the quality of one truth in contrast to another, but 
the faithfulness with which any truth is to be followed.
5.3.2 The Decision
We have seen that Badiou rejects Lévinas’s ethics of Absolute Alterity 
before ontology in favour of an ethics of the situated same that rup-
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
189
tures from within ontology. What remains to be investigated is the 
precise nature of that rupture, and this brings us to Kant. Badiou rejects 
Kant’s ethics of judgment for an ethics of hypothesis and decision. In 
the opening pages of L’Ethique, Badiou opposes Kant’s ethics of judg-
ment to Hegel’s ethics of the decision. For Kant’s practical reason, 
‘l’éthique est principe de jugement des pratiques d’un Sujet, que ce 
sujet soit individuel ou collectif’ (E 16).69 For Hegel on the other hand, 
ethics (Sittlichkeit, as opposed to morality, Moralität) is an immediate, 
not a reﬂ exive action, and ethics essentially consists in the immediate 
 ﬁ rmness of decision.
Badiou rejects the determinant judgment of Kant’s second critique 
(AMP 26/MetP 16), with its ﬁ xing of maxims of action, and he rejects it 
not simply as bad politics, but as apolitical, for ‘la discussion n’est poli-
tique qu’autant qu’elle se cristallise dans une décision’ (AMP 24–5).70 
The sort of judgment required in politics is not the determinant judg-
ment of the Critique of Practical Reason but the reﬂ ective judgment of 
taste in the Critique of Judgment:
l’engagement politique a la même universalité réﬂ échissante que le jugement 
de goût pour Kant. L’engagement politique n’est inférable d’aucune preuve, 
et il n’est pas non plus l’effet d’un impératif. Il n’est ni déduit ni prescrit. 
L’engagement est axiomatique. (PLP 75–6)71
Badiou does not shy away from the way in which reﬂ ective judgment 
would seem to reorient politics as a matter of like or dislike: ‘La poli-
tique se donne dans un jugement public où s’énonce si ceci – qui n’est 
pas un objet, mais un apparaître, un avoir-lieu – me plaît ou me déplaît’ 
(AMP 26).72 Furthermore, the function of the reﬂ ective judgment is not 
to proclaim whether a particular event is ‘good’ or ‘bad’, but to give 
consistency to the event that it interprets by proclaiming its name, and 
thereby to organise ﬁ delity to the event (see PLP 78). This judgment is 
ethical in Badiou’s sense, where ethics is the courage and persistence of 
holding to a truth.
The name for a political engagement that bears no causal or direct 
relation with any ontological situation is axiomatic (PLP 76). Such an 
engagement is heterogeneous to opinions and also to (existing) knowl-
edge; it is militant and combative as it ﬁ ghts against every attempt to 
interrupt or corrupt it, to reduce it to the immediate interests of the 
human animal, to repress it or meet it with sarcasm (Circ3 40–1/Pol 
133). Its reaction to all these attempts is to name them as enemies. 
Axiomatic political engagement rests not upon a proof or a deduction, 
but upon a hypothesis (PLP 75). This is its point both of maximal dif-
ference and of greatest proximity to the Nancean call. The difference 
190 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
is that, whereas the Nancean call issues an injunction that demands to 
be obeyed, there is no such call issued by the Badiouian event. That 
Badiou the atheist should choose the example of Christ’s resurrection 
in Saint Paul illustrates how the event is not an event because it compels 
adherence, but by virtue of a subject’s pure decision to be faithful to 
it. Thus when Badiou says that a truth addresses all, he means only 
that it is universalising, not that it issues a compelling demand. This 
is also the point of greatest proximity, however, because Nancy’s call 
requires something like the Badiouian decision to ford the gap of com-
pulsion that we identiﬁ ed above, whereas the Badiouian decision, we 
shall argue below, requires something like the Nancean demand if his 
atheism is not to undermine his Marxism.
The political tense for Badiou is the future anterior; it is a tense of 
organisation, as its double dimension suggests (PLP 105–6):
Le pari politique présume que de l’interruption, de l’inadmissible, 
l’organisation va se déduire, selon des paris successifs actualisables, déploy-
ant ainsi au futur antérieur un radicalisme jamais barré par le roc de la loi. 
[. . .] Il s’agit d’organiser ceci, que d’un événement réel, donc absurde du 
point de la loi, peut procéder l’inﬁ ni. (PLP 113)73
Badiou’s political future anterior is not without a certain violence. 
Nothing that overcomes the ﬁ nitude of the human animal by incorpo-
rating it into a subject and subordinating it to the eternity of Truth has 
ever arrived without anxiety, courage and justice, nor as a general rule 
without terror (LM 99/LW 88). It is democratic materialism which, 
assuming that there are no eternal truths but only bodies and languages, 
and that the only absolutes on the horizon of existence are life, suffering 
and ﬁ nitude, can make no distinction between political terror (which 
attacks living bodies) and the ‘terror of the matheme’ (which attacks 
customary ways of thinking) (LM 98/LW 88).
The future anterior violence of political intervention is, in Badiou’s 
way of thinking, the object of a wager:
C’est ce type d’intervention que seul son effet qualiﬁ e, et qui est sous le péril 
de la nullité, que j’appelle intervention en pari. La politique est pascalienne 
de prétendre qu’il vaut mieux en tout cas parier, lorsqu’on est parvenu à 
l’extrême limite de ce que la sécurité d’analyse autorise, et que prolonge, 
comme je l’ai dit, l’intervention discriminante. (PLP 104; see also PLP 90)74
Politics is Pascalian not only in that it claims that, having arrived at the 
limit of all demonstration and proof, it is better to wager, but also in 
that the arrival at the limit of all demonstration and proof is inevitable:
Le monde n’est pas plus transitif à Dieu pour Pascal que pour moi le social 
ne l’est à la politique. De même que les ensembles sociaux sont inconsist-
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
191
ants en politique, de même – pour Pascal – le « double inﬁ ni » du Monde 
ne dessine nul tout d’où inférer Dieu. Le rapport subjectif à Dieu est dans 
l’aléatoire d’un pari (il faut aussi parier la politique communiste : vous ne la 
déduirez jamais du Capital). (PLP 86–7)75
The parallel with Pascal is, however, inexact, but not for the reason elic-
ited by Jacques Rancière,76 who critiques Badiou for confusing Pascal’s 
wager and his understanding of miracles. The miracle, Rancière points 
out, is not for Pascal the object of a wager, but a certainty. But contra 
Rancière, it is not the ‘miracle’ – truth as event – that is at stake at this 
moment in Badiou’s thought, but rather the future anterior of truth as 
process. Belief in God cannot be deduced from the facts and opinions 
of a situation, but that does not make it a miracle. What is wagered, 
if we follow Badiou’s reconstruction, is that God, or communism, will 
have been and not, precisely not, that they are. The parallel with Pascal 
is inexact because Pascal’s account of the relation between proof and 
faith is more nuanced than Badiou’s. While Pascal considers metaphysi-
cal proofs of God as of little account,77 he admits of other categories of 
proof that he does take to be convincing:
Tous ceux qui ont prétendu connaître Dieu et le prouver sans J.-C. n’avaient 
que des preuves impuissantes. Mais pour prouver J.-C. nous avons les 
prophéties qui sont des preuves solides et palpables. Et ces prophéties étant 
accomplies et prouvées véritables par l’événement marquent la certitude de 
ces vérités et partant la preuve de la divinité de J.-C. En lui et par lui nous 
connaissons donc Dieu.78
Prophecies, which themselves come not from exterior proofs but 
through an inner and immediate feeling,79 are none the less ‘solid and 
palpable’ when they are fulﬁ lled and proved truthful. If, at a push, we 
can refer to prophecy itself as a future anterior wager in Pascal, then 
what Pascal refers to as its proof can no longer be spoken of as a ‘to 
have been’. Neither metaphysical proof nor proof by prophecy can be 
spoken of as a wager for Pascal; the former is next to useless and the 
latter is solid and palpable.
Furthermore, just as Badiou’s mathematical axiomatisation is moti-
vated by the injunction of modernity, so also this political axiomatisa-
tion is itself the response to an experience. In Théorie de la contradiction 
Badiou describes the events of May 1968 as his Damascus road experi-
ence (TC 9), and in the course of an extemporaised debate in English 
with Simon Critchley in New York, Badiou explains the relation 
between this experience and his political thought:
The great question for me is not really what being is. Ok, mathematics. I 
know all that and I can make subtle remarks about being qua being but my 
192 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
fundamental question is a very simple one, quite small. This question is: 
What exactly is something new? What is novelty? What is creation? This is 
biographical because it is for me fundamentally the consequence of my expe-
rience in France of May ’68, and its consequences. It’s not an abstract ques-
tion as I really underwent the experience of a complete change of life and 
experienced the conditions of an event. So I have to justify this experiment 
[author: experience?] philosophically. It’s not a hard academic problem. My 
beginning was not: ok, I know what knowledge is, I have to know what 
truth is. This was not my way. My way was: I have had a living experience 
of what is something absolutely new and a vivid experience of when some-
thing happens, the very nature of which is novelty, something like the birth 
of a new subject. And I ﬁ rst experienced this point in my life and only after 
had to create the concepts to justify and clarify this point. (ONTS 361–2) 
It would be incorrect to assume that the axioms governing Badiou’s 
politics are chosen ex nihilo; they are considered responses to a power-
ful political experience, reverse engineered to facilitate and account for 
the sort of political event that the young Badiou experienced. Badiou’s 
politics of the decision and event are his own ‘adoration’, responding 
to, and seeking to create the conditions for, the political event. The dif-
ference is the central role that language plays in Nancean adoration, 
contrasted with Badiou’s premium on ﬁ delity to the subtractive event.
There are further questions that need to be raised in relation to 
Badiou’s position. It does not necessarily follow, from a critique of 
Lévinas’s reliance on the Tout-Autre, that we need to dispense with 
an ethics of alterity. Simon Critchley draws his reader’s attention to 
‘Blanchot’s discreet critique of Lévinas’ in which ‘the absolute relation 
can only be understood socially’, not in ethical terms as the trace of an 
Absolute Alterity or a Good beyond being, but as the alterity of the 
neutral, anonymous being of the il y a (there is).80 Blanchot’s other-
ness is shorn of the ethical and theological connotations it retains for 
Lévinas. Critchley himself follows Blanchot’s lead and elaborates what 
he calls an ‘atheist transcendence’ based on ‘the other’s claim on me 
and how that claim changes and challenges my self-conception’.81 But 
for Badiou this is robbing Peter to pay Paul. For Badiou, Kant drives 
the One from his ontology only to let it re-enter via his ethics. Here, 
Blanchot and Critchley seek to expel the divine from their ethics of 
ﬁ nitude, but in that insistence on ﬁ nitude they deny the ‘nothing is inac-
cessible’ that alone can guarantee the expulsion of the divine. Even if an 
ethics of ﬁ nitude succeeds in not relying on God as its ultimate referent, 
such secularisation is in vain for it can never rid itself of the inaccessible 
God beyond its limits. There is no such thing as ‘atheist transcendence’.
One further critique of Badiou’s politics comes once more from 
Rancière, who claims to discern in it a latent Christianity. The model 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
193
of Badiouian faithfulness, Rancière argues, must be the Christ event: 
‘La ﬁ délité dont la nécessité se déduit de l’indécidable du geste mal-
larméen vient en effet trouver son modèle dans la mise en circulation 
d’un événement bien particulier, l’événement de la croix’.82 The Christ 
event, Rancière argues, enters the lists against a God of the philoso-
phers which allows no move from philosophy to politics, no re-found-
ing of philosophy after a political impetus. Rancière reverses Pascal’s 
dictum: instead of Plato preparing us for Christianity,83 for Badiou it 
is Pascal, with his rejection of the God of the philosophers in favour of 
the ‘God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob’ who prepares us for Badiou’s 
Platonism.84 The folly of the cross marks out the place of this new 
Platonism, lifting politics’ submission to ‘ordinary’ democratic means. 
Rancière concludes:
Le prix de l’opération, il me semble, est que cette politique mathématisée ne 
puisse être qu’ecclésiale dans sa forme et suspendue à une événementialité 
autoréférentielle, soit celle du miracle autour duquel l’Eglise s’organise, soit 
l’exercice de la récusation interminable de tous les noms sous lesquels la 
politique dans son ordinaire se présente.85
This charge, in so far as it evokes the supposed miraculous nature of 
the Badiouian event, falls in with similar critiques of Badiou in neglect-
ing the dual nature of Badiouian truth as event and process, with which 
we dealt in Chapter 3. In so far as it claims that the unstated paradigm 
for Badiouian truth – both its event and the process of faithfulness – is 
the Christ event, then Badiou’s elaboration of his four truth conditions 
coupled with his insistence on being able to use religious terms in his 
own secular context leave Rancière’s reading vulnerable to the charge 
that it is reasoning post hoc ergo propter hoc: if Badiouian truth resem-
bles a certain reading of the Christian tradition, as Badiou in his book 
on Saint Paul is all too ready to acknowledge it does, we cannot from 
this conclude that truth adopts or assumes all the features of that tradi-
tion, most saliently its theism. It does not necessarily follow, but might 
it still none the less be the case? Badiou’s own account of the event in set 
theoretical terms in L’Etre et l’événement and his further elaboration 
in terms of the inexistent and points in Logiques des mondes provide 
a robust non-theistic reading of politics that leaves Rancière’s charge 
speculative at best. As we shall see in the following chapter, it is not at 
this point that Badiou’s politics is vulnerable to the charge of a latent 
theology, but in its faith in the goodness of equality.
The question of whether Badiou’s future anterior construction of the 
truth-process is in fact a latent eschatology is raised by, among others, 
Quentin Meillassoux.86 Noting that the vast majority of Marxists 
194 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
have renounced eschatology as a religious residue, Meillassoux singles 
Badiou out as isolating Marxism’s eschatological moment and dissemi-
nating it among the four truth conditions: ‘Au lieu que la critique dis-
solve chez Badiou l’illusion religieuse de l’eschatologie, l’eschatologie 
devenue irréligieuse de l’événement déploie sa puissance critique 
sur le présent terne de nos renoncements ordinaires’ (TES 10–11).87 
Meillassoux’s characterisation of Badiou’s eschatology as ‘irreligious’ 
(rather than, say, atheist or secular) is not to be taken here as suggesting 
a compromise with the theological.88
Meillassoux is, however, following in the footsteps of the many 
who underestimate the importance of incremental effort and process in 
Badiou’s notion of the event. In Saint Paul Badiou is careful to distin-
guish his reading of Paul from judicial eschatology: ‘Paul semble plutôt 
caractériser l’espérance comme simple impératif de la continuation, 
principe de ténacité, d’obstination’ (SP 99).89 Nevertheless, as we shall 
explore more in the ﬁ nal chapter Badiou’s politics does share the inevi-
tability of the eschatological vision (PE 21), and if historical inevitabil-
ity is in and of itself eschatological, then Badiou’s thought does have 
an eschatological dimension. If Badiou’s thought is eschatological on 
this score then so is Meillassoux’s own, however, for as we have seen 
he insists that the world of justice is the only world that can succeed 
the third world of thought (ID 296). We see no warrant to count every 
inevitability as an eschatology, and so we do not see in Badiou’s politics 
(or in Meillassoux’s) either a religious eschatology or what Meillassoux 
calls the irreligious eschatology of the event.
A further critique of a politics of the interpretative event is that 
it makes political events too rare, especially when compared with a 
politics of the ontological demand, or call, and that Badiou’s politics 
struggles to escape the charge of quietism or, in the terms of our inves-
tigation in this book, asceticism. Whereas for Badiou the sequences that 
lead to political events are rare (AMP 115/MetP 101; EE 379/BE 344) 
for Critchley:
I see politics as everywhere, as being a really quite banal, or rather mundane, 
call to forms of mobilization that begin from the place where you are, where 
you are working (or where you are not working), the place where you are 
active and where you are thinking90
Similarly, Slavoj Žižek identiﬁ es in Badiou’s thought the ‘quietist 
patience’ of ‘awaiting the unpredictable arrival of a not-to-be-actively-
precipitated “x” sparking genuine change’,91 and Andrew Gibson 
discerns a ‘pathos of intermittency’ in the all-too-rare events that punc-
tuate periods in which we are captive to the idea that nothing begins or 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
195
is going to begin (S 113/Cen 140). For Badiou’s part, however, simply 
deﬁ ning politics into being by widening the scope of what we call 
‘political’ is hardly a solution to the rarity of politics. However rare it 
is, politics has existed, exists and will exist (AMP 167/MetP 152). As 
for the charge that the infrequency of an event may lead to a political 
quietism as we wait for the event to arrive, Badiou once more stresses 
the importance of process as well as event:
Cette vision de ma philosophie qui tend à identiﬁ er purement et simplement 
vérité et événement n’est qu’un court-circuit. Dans toute situation il existe 
des processus ﬁ dèles à un événement antérieur. On n’a pas affaire à l’attente 
désespérée d’un événement miraculeux. Il s’agit plutôt de tenir jusqu’au 
bout, jusqu’à saturation, ce que l’on a pu tirer de l’événement antérieur et 
d’être ainsi préparé autant que faire se peut à la réception subjective de ce 
qui se produira inévitablement. (PE 21)92
But what does it mean to be ‘prepared’, if we are not to wait for 
the event as a grace (PE 22)? Badiou’s response to this question, like 
Meillassoux’s account of the relation between the dice throw and 
hyperchaotic change, leaves itself open to the charge of being too 
weak:
« Être préparé à un événement » cela veut dire être dans une disposition 
subjective de reconnaissance de la nouvelle possibilité. Puisque l’événement 
est nécessairement imprévisible, n’étant pas dans la loi des possibilités 
dominantes, préparer l’événement, c’est être disposé à l’accueillir. [. . .] Être 
préparé à un événement, c’est être dans un état d’esprit où l’ordre du monde, 
les puissances dominantes n’ont pas le contrôle absolu des possibilités. [. . .] 
L’autre façon d’être préparé, connexe à la première, c’est la critique de 
l’ordre établi. (PE 22–3)93
Preparedness, then, equates to being disposed to recognising and wel-
coming necessarily unforeseeable, unheard-of possibilities, to cultivat-
ing a state of mind where the way things are is not the way they need 
to be, and to critiquing the way things are. In Badiou’s case it is impor-
tant that we understand this preparedness, however, in the context of 
eternal truths: the universalising event (for example: Spartacus) has 
already happened and there is always already a process of ﬁ delity to the 
event underway.
In addition the rarity of the event, Critchley also argues for a more 
circumspect understanding of the political in the face of what elsewhere 
he calls Badiou’s ‘heroism of the decision’:94
what I suspect in Badiou is the seduction of a great politics, the event that 
would, in Nietzsche’s words, break history in two. But perhaps the epoch of 
great politics, like the epoch of great art for Heidegger and Hegel, is over. 
Perhaps. And perhaps that is a good thing. Perhaps we have had enough 
196 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
of the virile, Promethean politics of the will, the empty longing for total 
revolution.95
Over against this ‘great politics’, Critchley himself concludes that 
‘perhaps we have to content ourselves with smaller actions and smaller 
victories, an everyday and heroically anti-heroic militancy’.96 However, 
this seems to be not an alternative to Badiou’s politics, but a subset of 
it. We have seen that Badiou is quite happy to accommodate modest 
gestures of ﬁ delity to the event, and once more it seems that Critchley 
is joining those who focus on Badiou’s understanding of truth as event 
and neglect truth as process. Furthermore, the charge of a heroism of 
the decision is one that Badiou, for his part, welcomes:
On me dit quelquefois que je ne vois dans la philosophie qu’un moyen de 
rétablir, contre l’apologie contemporaine de l’ordinaire et du futile, les droits 
de l’héroïsme. Pourquoi pas? Cependant, l’héroïsme ancien prétend justiﬁ er 
la vie par le sacriﬁ ce. Mon vœu est de le faire exister par la joie afﬁ rma-
tive que procure universellement le suivi des conséquences. Disons qu’à 
l’héroïsme épique de qui donne sa vie, succède l’héroïsme  mathématique de 
qui la crée point par point. (LM 536)97
This justiﬁ cation of heroism from Logiques des mondes provides 
us with a ﬁ tting summary of Badiou’s politics, with its ineradicable 
heroism, but nevertheless a heroism not exclusively of the grand 
gesture, but of the ‘point by point’ creation of the ‘life’ of truths.
It might be thought that the way to a post-theological integra-
tion is through a syncretism of call and decision, for it would seem 
that what Badiou’s atheism is lacking is the imperative of a Nancean 
demand, and what Nancy’s atheology is lacking is the trenchancy 
of a Badiouian decision. Such is the approach of Simon Critchley in 
Inﬁ nitely Demanding. Critchley tries to bring together Badiouian ﬁ del-
ity with an understanding of demand and response closer to Nancy’s. 
This eclecticism leads him to some philosophical shoehorning, trying 
to marry aspects of systems of thought which, if not utterly incompat-
ible, are not shown to cohere. He claims that ‘the logic of the event in 
Badiou is that an event is that which makes a demand on a subject, of 
which the subject approves and to which it decides to bind itself, to be 
faithful’.98 But in Badiou’s axiomatic politics it is far from clear that 
the event makes a demand; it is addressed to all, but not as an impera-
tive. The Badiouian event does not interpellate me in the same way as 
singular plural being. To be ﬁ t for Critchley’s purpose, an already-event 
would have to interpellate a not-yet-subject, but this would undermine 
Badiou’s future anterior, truth as process, and the heterogeneity of the 
event to the situation. There is no easy way of fusing Nancean demand 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
197
with the Badiouian decision. Furthermore, such a fusion would not be 
the last word on post-theological integration. The decision does not 
make the call compelling (that would violate the axiomatic cornerstone 
of Badiou’s thought), and the call does not make the decision inevita-
ble (that would violate the principle of freedom by which Nancy seeks 
to avoid parasitising religion). Bringing together call and decision in 
these terms, even if that were possible, would not bring about a post-
theological integration.
C ONC LU SI ON
The aim of this chapter has been to probe how our three thinkers seek to 
draw criteria for thinking the political from their respective approaches 
to the post-theological, and to evaluate to what extent they can inte-
grate the political positions that they testify to holding into those 
reworkings. In Meillassoux’s case the claim that universal justice is the 
only World that can follow the current world of thought is ultimately 
unconvincing, and the injunction to act in accordance with that becom-
ing therefore lacks force. Hyperchaos, the condition of Meillassouxian 
faith in the God who inexists, seems to pose insurmountable problems 
for his desire to develop the consequences of a desire for universal 
justice in the direction of concrete action in the present.
For Nancy, while ethos obviates the need for a reconciliation of 
ontology and ethics, the call, based as it is on an appeal to (or on the 
appeal of) singular plural being, fails ultimately to provide a compelling 
justiﬁ cation for regarding equality as politically normative. It is difﬁ cult 
to see how the call could have normative value without it becoming 
parasitic on the structure of divine injunction, and without such force 
it risks atheistic asceticism. Furthermore, the struggle against inequal-
ity perversely relies on the continuing existence of what it seeks to 
 eradicate; it is unable to see beyond the horizon of resistance.
In Badiou’s case, it is far from convincing to claim that his politics is 
parasitic on the Christ event, on the Pascalian wager, or on Christian 
eschatology, but his understanding of the political in relation to the 
event is ascetic measured by the yardstick of the political change he 
seeks to bring about. As in our discussion of the principle of intelligibil-
ity in the previous chapter, we are returned to an inaugural experience, 
compelling for the one whose experience it is (in this case, Badiou’s own 
experience of May 1968) but lacking universal compulsion. Part of our 
task in the ﬁ nal chapter will be to trace this motif of an original experi-
ence or desire more thoroughly through all of our three thinkers, and 
reﬂ ect on its implications for their post-theological thinking.
198 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Though the question of the criteriology of the political is partially 
addressed by each position, there is in each case a weakness that leaves 
the respective political commitments ultimately undernourished by 
the post-theological thinking in whose soil they grow. In the ﬁ nal 
chapter we shall continue this investigation by focusing more closely 
on the question of universal justice, probing what measures our three 
thinkers can bring to bear in their approaches to fashioning a notion 
of the universal as they seek to develop their various post-theological 
 integrations.
NOTE S
 1. Jean-Paul Sartre, L’Existentialisme est un humanisme (Paris: Gallimard, 
1970), pp. 36–7; ‘if I have excluded God the Father, there must be some-
body to invent values’ (Sartre, ‘Existentialism and humanism’, p. 44).
 2. In these ﬁ nal two chapters we continue to use ‘atheism’ in two related 
senses, a narrow sense in which atheism is parasitic upon theism and 
both are rejected in favour of atheology or philosophy, and a broader, 
looser sense in which ‘atheism’ covers the three positions under discus-
sion inasfar as they each seek to think ‘without God’. The context will 
sufﬁ ciently determine in which sense the term is being used in each 
instance.
 3. Critchley, Inﬁ nitely Demanding, p. 8.
 4. Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, p. 521.
 5. Fyodor Dostoyevsky, The Brothers Karamazov (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1998), p. 87.
 6. Jacques Lacan, Le Séminaire, livre XVII, p. 139; ‘I have long remarked 
that to the phrase of old father Karamozov, if God is dead, everything is 
permitted, then the conclusion imposing itself within the text of our expe-
rience is that the response to God is dead, is nothing is any longer permit-
ted’ (Lacan, ‘A theoretical introduction’, p. 15).
 7. Schmitt, Political Theology, p. 36.
 8. The nature of Schmitt’s claim is unclear. For a discussion of what is at 
stake in the different interpretations, see de Vries, Religion and Violence, 
pp. 218–19.
 9. Hent de Vries, ‘Introduction: before, around and beyond the theologico-
political’, in de Vries and Sullivan (eds), Political Theologies, p. 1.
10. ‘to believe from now on, is no longer to have faith, is no longer to believe 
in the law, it is to hope for a justice worthy of this name’ (author’s 
 translation).
11. ‘the truth of the Good, as the Fourth World, does not designate a 
reality or an impossibility or a controllable possibility: the Good 
designates the truth of a possibility that is not controllable’ (author’s 
translation).
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
199
12.
philosophy always begins with a postulate that may very well be impos-
sible to demonstrate, that may very well be false, or ideological, namely: 
value is not simply a human invention, value is the discovery of a truth 
concerning the world, the extra-human real, and this truth must be 
found uniquely by reason, without the intervention of a transcendent 
revelation. (Author’s translation)
13. ‘it will happen, or not, through accepting or refusing time as we have 
thought it’ (author’s translation).
14. It is hard not to conclude that Meillassoux’s gamer does indeed see coin-
cidence as a sign, precisely as a sign of chance, ascribing to it an aleatory 
explanation in the same way that a religious believer might ascribe it a 
providential explanation. Meillassoux’s argument from miracles relies on 
just such an ascription, seeing the ‘miraculous’ as a sign of hyperchaos.
15. ‘before contesting this appearing ex nihilo because of its fantastical char-
acter, you should wonder if it is not even more marvellous to confuse 
matter with someone asleep’ (author’s translation).
16. ‘if another world appears, it can only be the World of justice. Because 
every other appearing would only constitute a “Monstrous” variation on 
the three previous Worlds’ (author’s translation).
17. ‘nothing can surpass man’ (author’s translation).
18. Brown, ‘On After Finitude’.
19. Peter Hallward, ‘Anything is possible’, p. 55.
20. Brown, ‘On After Finitude’.
21. ‘the condition for the arrival of the universal is thus that it be actively 
desired’ (author’s translation).
22. ‘We can thus compare the free act to a dice throw – a dice throw that 
does not guarantee luck, but which alone makes it possible’ (author’s 
 translation).
23. Brown, ‘On After Finitude’.
24.
we should know that in the move from a thinking, let us say of being, 
of essence, or of principles – it matters little here – to a politics and 
an ethics, the consequence is never good (why do we systematically 
forget the massive and enduring adherence of so many theorists of the 
 ‘philosophy of values’ to the Nazi regime?). (EF 171)
25. ‘our question is through and through the question of the Good in a world 
without end or without singular ends’ (CWG 64).
26. This point is made by Philip Armstrong in Jean-Luc Nancy (p. 125).
27. Nancy intriguingly informs his readers (ESP 87 n.1/BSP 201 n.56) of his 
intention to publish a volume with the title L’Ethique originaire.
28. ‘There is no difference between the ethical and the ontological: the 
“ethical” exposes what the “ontological” disposes’ (BSP 99).
200 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
29. The equivalence is not foreign to Nancy’s thought, as we see from a 
 discussion of art in Les Muses:
C’est un devoir pour l’art de mettre ﬁ n à l’« art ». Mais ce devoir ne dresse 
pas, sur un mode puritain, une « éthique » contre une «  esthétique ». Il ne 
relève pas non plus de ce qu’on serait tenté d’appeler une « éthique de 
l’esthétique ». Ce devoir énonce le sens comme ethos. (Mu 68)
It is a duty for art to put an end to ‘art.’ But this duty does not, in some 
puritan mode, erect an ‘ethics’ against an ‘aesthetics.’ Nor does it stem 
from what one would be tempted to call an ‘ethics of the aesthetic.’ This 
duty utters sense as ethos. (Mus 38)
30. The word ‘teleonomy’ was ﬁ rst coined by Colin S. Pittendrigh ‘in order to 
emphasize that recognition and description of end-directedness does not 
carry a commitment to Aristotelian teleology as an efﬁ cient causal prin-
ciple’ (C. S. Pittendrigh, ‘Adaptation, natural selection and behavior’, in 
A. Roe and George Gaylord Simpson, eds, Behavior and Evolution, New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1958, pp. 390–416). It is notably taken 
up by Jacques Monod in Le Hasard et la nécessité ( Paris: Éditions du 
Seuil, 1970).
31. The comment comes in the context of a close reading of Heidegger’s Lettre 
sur l’humanisme, trans. Roger Munier (Paris: Aubier, 1963), p. 155.
32. ‘To keep, to protect sense from being ﬁ lled, as well as from being emptied 
– that is ethos’ (DisDC 122).
33.
One could say that in freedom there is the ontological imperative, or 
being as intimation – but under the condition of adding that this is 
without commandment [. . .] or that the commandment is lost in free-
dom’s abandonment to itself, all the way to caprice and chance. (EF 
155)
34. Crowley, L’Homme sans. Simon Critchley’s exploration of these themes 
in Inﬁ nitely Demanding leads to the circumspect conclusion that ‘we have 
to accept that the universality of the moral law should interest us without 
being able to explain the cause of that interest’ (p. 33). Critchley eventu-
ally argues, along with Badiou, for the necessity of an intervention, a deci-
sion, to motivate ethics (Critchley, Inﬁ nitely Demanding, pp. 49, 128).
35. Crowley, L’Homme sans, p. 19; author’s emphasis; ‘if the latter [an egali-
tarian politics] is deﬁ nitely not given by any ontology, it can none the less 
very well be called by every ontology that posits, as we like to put it these 
days, the equality of each one with each one’ (author’s translation).
36. Crowley, L’Homme sans, p. 95.
37. Crowley, L’Homme sans, pp. 66–7.
38. Crowley, L’Homme sans, p. 19.
39. Crowley, L’Homme sans, p. 171.
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
201
40. Crowley, L’Homme sans, pp. 71–2.
41. Crowley, L’Homme sans, p. 116.
42. Crowley, L’Homme sans, p. 171.
43. Critchley, Inﬁ nitely Demanding, pp. 10–11.
44. Critchley, Very Little, p. 28.
45. Critchley, Inﬁ nitely Demanding, p. 9.
46. Critchley, Inﬁ nitely Demanding, p. 55.
47. Bosteels, Alain Badiou, pp. 192–3.
48. ‘how can we avoid enthusiasm being carried off with the death of God?’ 
(author’s translation).
49.
It is a fervour for multiple and singular existence: for each one, there-
fore, each in turn, for each one to the exclusion of the others, and yet 
for all, de jure, and de facto at least for several who respond to several 
modes of this unique and polymorphous ‘love’. (Author’s translation)
50. ‘To speak of “sense” and “truth” in the midst of military agitation, geo-
political calculations, suffering, and the grimaces of stupidity or of lying, 
is not “idealistic”, it is to border on the thing itself’ (author’s translation; 
the translation of CA in CC begins on page 25 of the French original).
51. Crowley, L’Homme sans, p. 171.
These beings without qualities, without parts, without qualiﬁ cations, 
exiled from the process of political subjectivisation, challenge by that 
very token, the formalism of existing human rights, as they demand by 
that very token, that the ontological equality declared by ﬁ nitude be 
unceasingly veriﬁ ed and realised. (Author’s translation)
52. Critchley, Inﬁ nitely Demanding, p. 132.
53. Critchley, Inﬁ nitely Demanding, p. 147.
54. Critchley, Inﬁ nitely Demanding, p. 147.
55. Badiou, ‘On Simon Critchley’s Inﬁ nitely Demanding’, p. 161.
56. Badiou, ‘On Simon Critchley’s Inﬁ nitely Demanding’, p. 161.
57. ‘quite obviously the ethical name for God’ (Eth 22).
58. ‘For a single thought is far greater than any judgment’ (Pol 35).
59. ‘From what source will man draw the strength to be the immortal that he 
is? What shall be the destiny of thought, which we know very well to be 
afﬁ rmative invention or nothing at all?’ (Eth 14; translation altered).
60. In a way that echoes Jean-Jacques Lecercle’s reading of Badiou on lit-
erature, Simon Critchley reads Badiou’s accounts of Kant and Lévinas 
as ‘necessary caricatures’ necessitated by the fact that ‘philosophy works 
through the leverage of straw men and women’ (Baldwin and Haeffner, 
‘ “Fault Lines” ’, p. 304). In a more Badiouian idiom, we discern in these 
readings an example of the politics of the decision itself, the forcing of a 
‘point’, a violent reduction of detail in order to present a binary choice: 
either Lévinas/Kant or Badiou.
202 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
61. ‘the coming into presence of the thing’ (BTP 171).
62. ‘politics begins with the same gesture by which Rousseau uncovers the 
foundation of inequality: leaving aside all the facts’ (author’s translation).
63. In ‘Philosophie sans conditions’ Nancy gestures at a proximity between 
ethos as receiving-oneself and holding-oneself and Badiou’s ﬁ delity. 
Expounding on ethos as ‘the art of holding to that which, in general, allows 
us to keep going with composure (de tenir et d’avoir de la tenue)’ (CM 
134/CWG 90; translation altered), Nancy juxtaposes this deﬁ nition with 
Badiou’s Ahmed the philosopher in his determination to ‘Tenir ce point! Le 
trouver et le tenir! La philosophie n’a pas d’autre but! Que chacun trouve 
son point et le tienne!’ (PSC 79/PWC 49, quoting AP 101). The difference 
between Badiou’s ﬁ delity and Nancy’s holding-oneself as ethos is that 
Badiouian ﬁ delity is faithful not to an ontological condition but precisely 
to that which inexists within a situation, and it is a decision that breaks 
with the ontological, not a recognition of our ontological condition.
64.
Ethics does not exist. There is only the ethic-of (of politics, of love, 
of science, of art). [. . .] A philosophy sets out to construct a space of 
thought in which the different subjective types, expressed by the singu-
lar truths of its time, coexist. But this coexistence is not a uniﬁ cation 
– that is why it is impossible to speak of one Ethics. (Eth 28)
65. ‘love what you will never believe twice’ (Eth 52).
66. ‘Keep going!’ (Eth 52).
67. ‘do not give up on your desire’ (Eth 47)
68. ‘do not give up on that part of yourself that you do not know’ (Eth 47).
69. ‘Ethics is the principle that judges the practice of a Subject, be it individual 
or collective’ (Eth 2).
70. ‘debate is political only to the extent that it crystallizes in a decision’ (MetP 
15).
71. ‘political engagement has the same reﬂ exive universality as Kant’s judg-
ment of taste. Political engagement cannot be inferred from any proof, and 
neither is it the effect of an imperative. It is neither deduced nor prescribed. 
Engagement is axiomatic’ (author’s translation).
72. ‘Politics can be found in a public judgment which states whether this – 
which is not an object, but an appearing, a taking-place – pleases me or 
displeases me’ (MetP 16).
73.
The political wager presumes that organisation will be deduced from 
interruption, from the inadmissible, according to successive actualisable 
wagers, thus unfolding in the future anterior a radicalism that is never 
blocked by the rock of the law. [. . .] This is what must be organised: 
that the inﬁ nite can proceed from an event that is real, and thus absurd 
from the point of view of the law. (Author’s translation)
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
203
74.
It is this type of intervention, qualiﬁ ed only by its effect and imperilled 
by nullity, that I call a wager-intervention. Politics is Pascalian when 
it claims that it is always better to wager when you have arrived at 
the farthest limit of what is allowed by the security of analysis, and of 
what is extended by the intervention that discriminates, as I have said. 
(Author’s translation)
75.
The world is no more transitive to God for Pascal than the social is 
to politics for me. In the same way that social sets are inconsistent in 
politics, for Pascal the ‘double inﬁ nite’ of the World does not plot any 
whole form which God can be inferred. The subjective relation to God 
is in the unpredictability of a wager (Communist politics must also be 
wagered: you will never deduce it from Capital). (Author’s translation)
76. Jacques Rancière, Untitled discussion’, pp. 220–1.
77. Blaise Pascal, Pensées [Lafuma] 190/[Brunschvicg] 503.
78. Pascal, Pensées, 189/547; see also 355/706.
All those who have claimed to know God and prove his existence 
without Jesus Christ have only had futile proofs to offer. But to prove 
Christ we have the prophecies which are solid and palpable proofs. 
By being fulﬁ lled and proved true by the event, these prophecies show 
that these truths are certain and ths proves Jesus is divine. In him and 
through him, therefore, we know God. (Pensées, trans. Krailsheimer, 
p. 56)
 
Krailsheimer follows Lafuma’s numbering.
79. Pascal, Pensées, 328/732.
80. Critchley, Very Little, p. 82.
81. Critchley, Very Little, p. 82.
82. Rancière, Untitled discussion, p. 220. ‘The faithfulness whose necessity is 
deduced from the undecidable of the Mallarméan gesture in fact ﬁ nds its 
model in the circulating of a very particular event, the event of the cross’ 
(author’s translation).
83. Pascal, Pensées, 612/219.
84. Rancière, Untitled discussion, p. 223.
85. Rancière, Untitled discussion, p. 223.
The price of the operation, it appears to me, is that the form of this 
mathematised politics can be nothing other than ecclesial in its form 
and suspended on a self-referential eventuality, either that of the 
miracle around which the Church organises itself, or the exercise of the 
never-ending challenging of all the names by which ordinary politics 
presents itself. (Author’s translation)
204 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
86. The question is also pursued by Liam A. O’Donnell in ‘Saint Paul: apostle, 
militant, communist’. O’Donnell identiﬁ es Badiou’s ‘persistence of the 
revolutionary demand’ as a secular eschatology (p. 349). We reject this 
eschatological misreading of the demand for the same reasons that we 
distance ourselves from Rancière.
87. ‘Instead of critique dissolving the religious illusion of eschatology for 
Badiou, the now irreligious eschatology of the event unfolds its critical 
power in the drab present of our usual renunciations’ (author’s transla-
tion).
88. In ‘L’Inexistence divine’, Meillassoux uses the term irréligieux to suggest a 
true metaphysical atheism, not a position parasitic on religious categories. 
For example:
Ainsi, les philosophies « héritières » qui se veulent aujourd’hui des 
pensées de l’athéisme le plus intransigeant de la ﬁ nitude assumée, sont 
en vérité des reprises radicalisées de ces thèses dont la ﬁ n effective n’est 
qu’une légitimation du religieux dans sa pleine irrationalité. C’est donc 
la métaphysique, et non l’antimétaphysique, qui est en son fond une 
entreprise résolument irréligieuse. (ID 274)
Thus the philosophies styled as ‘descendants’, that want to be the most 
intransigent opponents of assumed ﬁ nitude in contemporary atheis-
tic thought, are in truth a radicalised return of these ideas issuing in 
effect only in a legitimation of religion in all its irrationality. Thus it is 
 metaphysics, and not anti-metaphysics, that is at bottom a resolutely 
irreligious enterprise. (Author’s translation)
89. ‘Paul seems instead to characterize hope as a simple imperative of 
 continuation, a principle of tenacity, of obstinacy’ (SPe 93).
90. Baldwin and Haeffner, ‘ “Fault Lines” ’, p. 296.
91. Žižek, In Defense of Lost Causes, p. 391.
92.
This vision of my philosophy which tends purely and simply to identify 
truth with event is nothing but a short circuit. In every situation there 
are processes faithful to a preceding event. It has nothing to do with the 
hopeless wait for a miraculous event. Rather it has to do with holding 
on to the end, to the point of saturation, what we have been able to 
draw from the preceding event, and in this way to be prepared as much 
as possible for the subjective reception of what will inevitably occur. 
(Author’s translation)
93.
‘To be prepared for an event’ means to be in a subjective disposition of 
recognising the new possibility. Since the event is of necessity unforesee-
able as it is not in the law of dominant possibilities, to prepare for the 
event is to be disposed to welcome it. [. . .] To be prepared for an event 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological I: Justifying the Political 
205
is to be in a state of mind where the order of the world, the dominant 
powers, do not have absolute control over what is possible. [. . .] The 
other way of being prepared, connected to the ﬁ rst, is the critique of the 
established order. (Author’s translation)
94. Critchley, Inﬁ nitely Demanding, pp. 47–8.
95. Critchley, ‘Demanding approval’, p. 27.
96. Critchley, ‘Demanding approval’, p. 27.
97.
I am sometimes told that I see in philosophy only a means to re-estab-
lish, against the contemporary apologia of the futile and the everyday, 
the rights of heroism. Why not? Having said that, ancient heroism 
claimed to justify life through sacriﬁ ce. My wish is to make heroism 
exist through the afﬁ rmative joy which is universally generated by fol-
lowing consequences through. We could say that the epic heroism of the 
one who gives his life is supplanted by the mathematical heroism of the 
one who creates life, point by point. (LW 514)
98. Critchley, Inﬁ nitely Demanding, p. 48; see also Critchley, ‘Comment ne 
pas céder sur son désir’, p. 223.
206
6. The Politics of the Post-
Theological II: Justice
Plaisante justice qu’une rivière borne.1
Having considered in general terms how Badiou, Nancy and Meillassoux 
understand the relation of their post-theological ontologies to matters 
ethical and political, in this ﬁ nal chapter we take one political idea, 
namely justice, to serve as a case study of post-theological integration. 
In interrogating how our three thinkers understand and deploy the 
notion of justice we shall be asking whether their respective treatments 
succeed in avoiding both parasitism (seeking to be rid of God in ways 
that assume or require God) and asceticism (renouncing or retrench-
ing, along with God, the scope of the theological notion of justice). 
Furthermore, can post-theological thought appropriate the notion of 
justice in a way that adequately addresses what Simon Critchley identi-
ﬁ es as ‘the felt inadequacy of ofﬁ cial secular conceptions of morality’?2 
In particular, the question we shall pursue is whether post-theological 
integrations can secure a notion of universal justice.
6 . 1  MEILLASSOU X: U NIVE R S A L  JU S TI C E  A N D 
R ESU R R E C TI O N
Meillassoux’s discussion of the question of justice in ‘L’éthique divine’, 
the third section of ‘L’Inexistence divine’, begins with a denial: justice 
is inaccessible both to theism and to atheism. Universal justice is absurd 
for the atheist, who has no hope of justice for those now dead, but it 
is also absurd for the believer, who can only hope for justice from a 
God whose reign is manifestly not one of justice (ID 286). There is 
no religion or system of morality, Meillassoux insists, that is not prey 
either to the atheist’s problem, or to the theist’s. The believer desires 
justice, but he must sacriﬁ ce his reason on the altar of that desire; the 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
207
virtuous atheist, while keeping his lucidity, has to sacriﬁ ce the demand 
for universal justice. He may try to mask his mutilation of justice, but if 
the Good is not, there is only pleasure and pain (ID 353). The problem 
common to both positions is ‘cette absurdité bâtarde, mi-religieuse, mi-
athée, de la désespérante pérennité des lois de la nature, indifférentes à 
notre soif de justice’ (ID 6).3
6.1.1 The Philosophical Divine
Unwilling to sacriﬁ ce the hope for universal justice, even for the dead, 
Meillassoux splits the horns of a/theism’s unsatisfying dilemma by 
introducing the position he calls ‘the philosophical divine’ (ID 371). 
Like the religious believer, the philosopher believes in God, and can 
therefore claim as her own the religious hope for universal justice; like 
the atheist, the philosopher denies the existence of God, and so is not 
saddled with having to charge current injustice to God’s account (ID 
384). The philosopher is not caught in the ‘spectral dilemma’ of having 
‘either to despair of another life for the dead, or to despair of a God 
who has let such deaths take place’ (SD 265). The difference between 
the atheist and the philosopher is this: whereas the atheist accepts that 
regret is on his side of the argument (regret that there will be no justice 
for the dead, and therefore no universal justice), the philosopher admits 
no such thing. More than this, the philosopher moves the burden of 
regret to the religious position, for no-one, Meillassoux conjectures, 
can wish to be saved by an actually existing God charged with all the 
horrors of history.
Meillassoux’s philosophy, as we have seen, embraces a messianic 
hope for justice. Unlike the nihilist, who hopes for justice in another 
life, the philosopher hopes for immortality in this life (immortality, 
this time, in the sense of living for ever) and does not seek any alibi to 
defer or lift that hope, not even the alibi of engaging in the struggle for 
it (such that, implicitly, the struggle becomes more important than the 
goal, as is the risk for positions that simply resist injustice). Religion 
and atheism alike rely on the identiﬁ cation of this life with Pascalian 
wretchedness, but the philosopher afﬁ rms that the ﬁ ght for justice – 
with its necessary condition of injustice and wretchedness – is not an 
essential condition of existence (ID 358).
But in what sense does the philosopher hope for immortality in this 
life? To begin with, the principle of factiality allows immortality to 
be thought as an immediate virtuality among the hyperchaotic, non-
totalisable inﬁ nity of other virtualities, and as a real – that is to say, 
non- contradictory – possibility (ID 290). Everything that is logically 
208 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
possible is really possible, including the rebirth of bodies (ID 290). 
Furthermore, if the hope for justice is out of all proportion with the 
current state of the world, that simply reﬂ ects the disproportionality 
(démesure) of  hyperchaotic becoming (ID 339).
Meillassoux couches this hope in his teleological narrative of four 
Worlds that we began to explore in the previous chapter. The fourth 
World, the World of Justice and the world of the rebirth of man, is 
the world in which humanity acquires immortality, which Meillassoux 
argues is the only life worthy of the human condition. Foreclosing any 
poetic reading of this desire, he insists that rebirth is not a metaphor; 
the actual rebirth of bodies is the only condition that makes justice 
thinkable (ID 297). If there is to be universal justice we must be born 
again, because only the rebirth of man makes possible universal justice, 
up to and including the injustice of a life snatched away (ID 292).
But we must question this conclusion. Does rebirth efface any injus-
tice done in this present life? If I am raped (for example), no prolon-
gation of life will efface the injustice of that violation. If I live for an 
eternity in bliss I was still raped, and that rape was still unjust. Justice 
requires more, in remedying an injustice, than the subsequent absence 
of wrong. Surely an equally possible solution, on Meillassoux’s abso-
lute contingency, and one that satisﬁ es the condition of universal justice 
more fully, would be for my understanding of what is just and unjust 
to be hyperchaotically transformed such that the rape would not, after 
all, be unjust. Only by such means could the rape be effaced as an injus-
tice. Otherwise, injustice remains, regardless of what does or does not 
succeed it in a span of time however long. Such a solution would only 
be thought repulsive if we were to retain our current understanding of 
justice which, in the nature of the case, we would not.
When it comes to how such a justice will arrive, Meillassoux’s occu-
pation of religion’s territory is even more pronounced. He begins from 
the position that religion’s desire for justice is a desire for the wholly 
other, and as such is unthinkable; any inability to take man as the end 
of action is religious (ID 328). Meillassoux’s hope for universal justice 
is therefore human: there is a human mediator between our current 
situation and universal justice. This mediator is called variously by 
Meillassoux the Child of Man, or God, and s/he receives the power 
(from where?) to produce the rebirth necessary for justice by the same 
appearing (surgissement) ex nihilo that brought life from matter (World 
two) and rational intelligence from life (World three). It is this progres-
sion to which Meillassoux appeals in justifying why this particular 
ex nihilo appearing should be desired. What humanity aspires to is 
‘enfanter Dieu, comme la matière a enfanté la vie et la vie la pensée’ (ID 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
209
380),4 a desire that expresses itself in terms of the ill-deﬁ ned dice-throw 
discussed in the previous chapter. We are God’s ancestors, and not his 
creatures: ‘Dieu est précisément le surgissement de l’étant factuel par 
qui advient la renaissance en vue de la justice’ (ID 381).5 God will be 
the ‘last-born’ (le dernier-né) of humanity. This Christic aspect of the 
universal is in no way a rational religion, Meillassoux stresses, but an 
immanent ethic radically stripped of religiosity; it is not parasitic, but 
an appropriation of religious motifs within a frame rigorously without 
God. The Child of Man assures the impossibility of a religious vision of 
appearing; s/he teaches that her or his power is not the manifestation of 
a transcendence, but a contingency.
The Child of Man has, according to Meillassoux, ﬁ ve qualities: 
1) goodness: its action is guided by the universal; 2) omniscience: it 
possesses knowledge of the singular becoming of the living and the 
dead (in other words, it knows the truth of absolute contingency); 3) 
omnipotence: it possesses the power to achieve the rebirth of the dead 
by an act of the will (volontairement); 4) it possesses the power once 
and for all to abolish its own omniscience and omnipotence; and 5) 
the mediator in fact does divest itself of these powers once and for all, 
after the rebirth has been brought about, thereby submitting the power 
of contingency that it has received to the will to become a man among 
men, equal to all others.
These ﬁ ve stages trace for Meillassoux an inverted Christic 
Hegelianism. In Hegel’s notion of God in the Science of Logic, the inﬁ n-
ity of God requires that He pass into ﬁ nitude, becoming contingent, 
limited and incarnate, in order that ﬁ nitude itself be overcome as the 
limit of the inﬁ nite. But the inclusion of the ﬁ nite in the inﬁ nite cannot 
be deﬁ nitive, because then the inﬁ nite would be ﬁ nite. The ﬁ nite must 
be a moment of the inﬁ nite. The Christ must die, in order to assure 
the dialectic movement inﬁ nite – ﬁ nite – inﬁ nite, or God – man – God 
(see ID 133). In this Hegelian conception, contingency is subordinated 
to the real necessity of the All (ID 333). With Meillassoux’s Child of 
Man we see this process reversed. Contingency itself is an expression of 
necessity, and rather than ﬁ nitude being dialectically overcome in the 
One-All of divine inﬁ nity, divinity itself is brought under the one uni-
versal condition of contingency in the dialectic ﬁ nite – inﬁ nite – ﬁ nite, 
or man – God – man (ID 334). While Meillassoux shares with Hegel 
the intuition of the Christic character of the rational (ID 382), the terms 
are reversed.
Meillassoux argues that with this inverted Christic Hegelianism 
Man is no longer denigrated, as in religion and atheism alike, but 
neither is he elevated to a dangerous Promethean pedestal. Promethean 
210 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
 humanism is nothing but the religious vision that man makes of and for 
himself (promé-théisme/‘Prome-theism’), an instance of what we are 
calling imitative atheism that makes an idolatry of the power of man 
instead of the power of God; such a ‘man-made God’ can commit all 
God’s atrocities in God’s stead (ID 123). Factial ethics gives humanity 
no such warrant to be exalted as a messianic saviour; humanity merely 
gives birth to the Child of Man.
It is the possible appearing of the Child of Man that provides the 
normative moment in Meillassoux’s ethics:
être digne de l’enfant de l’homme devient le paradigme de ma relation à 
l’autre: rappeler par un geste l’autre homme à sa propre humanité, ce qui 
revient à être attentif à la singularité possible de l’autre; savoir répondre par 
ses actes propres à l’appel attentif de l’autre homme, ce qui revient à être 
digne de celui qui a su exemplairement se faire homme parmi les hommes. 
(ID 382)6
In this, Meillassoux’s ethics structurally bears much in common with a 
Christianity that looks to Jesus the Son of Man for its ethical paradigm. 
To make this comparison is not to threaten Meillassoux’s thought with 
parasitism, however, for this is precisely his aim. In fact, Meillassoux’s 
philosophy has everything in common with religion in general (and, 
most often, with Christianity in particular) apart from belief in an 
actually existing God. Nevertheless, ‘God’ remains, now understood in 
terms of the principle of factiality and the Child of man: ‘Dieu, désor-
mais, peut désigner la possibilité d’une vie philosophique, éveillée et 
espérante, au-delà de la croyance religieuse et des lois naturelles. Une 
vie enﬁ n sans foi ni loi’ (ID 335).7
For Meillassoux’s philosophy, everything desirable about religion 
can be incorporated into immanence, ‘en sorte que la philosophie ne 
se distingue ultimement de la religion que par la permanence en cette 
dernière d’un Dieu actuellement existant qui ne peut plus alors être véri-
tablement désiré’ (ID 371).8 Meillassoux has no qualms about branding 
himself a believer. The philosophical divine believes not in the existence 
of God but in God, as opposed to the priest who, because he believes in 
the existence of God, does not believe in God (ID 386).
In this move, which is nothing if not bold, Meillassoux claims to 
have united Jewish religion and Greek reason. Hitherto the synthesis 
has either been religious (Augustine, Aquinas), or rational (Hegel). But 
ﬁ nally, with the factial, Judaic messianism no longer runs athwart the 
eternity of mathematical truths, because the principle of factiality, and 
not mathematical truths, now describes the real eternity of this world. 
So in a strong claim for what we are calling post-theological integra-
tion, the hope for justice offered by the Judaeo-Christian understanding 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
211
of time can root itself in the mathematical eternity offered by the imma-
nence of Greek thought. The unity of a culture of the universal and of 
equality is now possible (ID 377).
6.1.2 The Ethical Jolt
One piece remains to be added to this jigsaw of Meillassoux’s account 
of universal justice: the jolt (la saccade). There are two ‘jolts’ in 
‘L’Inexistence divine’. We have already met the ﬁ rst as the moment 
of intuition by which a human being becomes aware that the illusory 
nature of sense experience veils the eternal inconstancy of the intelligi-
ble. This ontological intuition is the ‘essential jolt’ (saccade essentielle), 
the jolt by which one comes to ‘see’ the eternal. The second jolt follows 
the ﬁ rst. Convinced, by the essential jolt, of the possibility of immortal-
ity (because, like everything else, it is a virtuality), the individual breaks 
through his religious disgust for humanity to arrive at an active desire 
for immanent universality (ID 386). This second shift is to hope for 
and desire the justice that is revealed to be possible by the ﬁ rst jolt; it 
is to ‘feel’ the universal (ID 345, 369). To understand Meillassoux’s 
account of justice, the two jolts must be taken together: ‘Le cœur de 
l’éthique factuale réside ainsi dans le nouage immanent de l’étonnement 
 philosophique et de l’espoir messianique’ (ID 294; QM’s italics).9
The desired justice is, Meillassoux freely admits, far from the current 
state of the world. But factial ethics focuses not on the difference 
between desire and reality but rather on the real possibility of desire. 
It is not possible to desire absolutely a conceivable object; in trying to 
conceive an image of Paradise we succeed only in obtaining an adequate 
representation of Hell (ID 356). Meillassoux’s ethics then does not pre-
scribe to humanity a determinate end, but simply promises a happiness 
beyond the range of any anticipatory representation, yet not beyond 
this world and not beyond humanity. This does not render the factial 
useless, however, because this hope is superior to nihilism’s renun-
ciation of hope and the desirability of what is hoped for. Rather than 
counteracting the excess of desire by hoping for some religious, other-
worldly satisfaction, I unveil the real possibility of the most extreme 
desire, rejecting all religious hope in the name of this desire (ID 356). 
With the jolt, the hope for justice is liberated from the transcendence of 
a God-master, as well as from the rationalism of a real necessity; both 
religion and relativism are exposed as a deﬁ cit of thinking (ID 354).
Seeking a common trait that ethically unites all people, Meillassoux 
ﬁ nds it in the capacity for the two jolts and the desire for justice. 
Desired justice is indifferent to what de facto distinguishes and divides 
212 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
humanity, including death, and in this it makes a bid for universality, 
like Nancy’s spacing or Crowley’s exposure ‘which, in common, we 
do not have’.10 It is less clear in Meillassoux’s case, however, how to 
include within this universality the ethical status of humans who have 
lost, or who never had the capacity to participate in the ontological 
and divine ‘jolts’, or who for whatever reason act less ‘rationally’ than 
others. Are those with congenital mental disabilities or geriatric mental 
deterioration, having lost irrevocably the capacity to think the eternal, 
still human? Are some humans more human than others? Any univer-
sality that rests on a capacity or on a desire risks undermining itself as 
universal.
There is another problem with grounding humanity in the capacity 
for rational thought and the desire for justice. Meillassoux writes about 
the possibility of justice with a puzzling teleological certainty: ‘Rien ne 
peut donc advenir au-delà de l’homme [. . .] la seule nouveauté possible 
succédant à l’homme est le recommencement de l’homme’ (ID 293).11 
But surely it is not logically impossible that some other being (elec-
tronic, organic or an amalgam of both perhaps) should be able to think 
eternity, either as the result of a gradual process or all of a sudden. We 
know that nothing can surpass man (ID 293), Meillassoux afﬁ rms, but 
it remains unclear by virtue of what we can make that claim.
There are at least two further questions raised by Meillassoux’s 
divine philosophy and the ethical jolt. The ﬁ rst is this: how do we 
move from a logical-real possibility of immortality to its desirability? 
Why should everyone at all times want to achieve immortality in this 
life? Unless Meillassoux is proposing a hell to accompany his beatiﬁ c 
vision of justice, why not politely decline the second jolt? Furthermore, 
the desire for justice is not sufﬁ cient to ground a desire for immortal-
ity, for either 1) the righting of all wrongs may take a very long time 
but it would not of necessity take an eternity, in which case we would 
desire to live just as long as it takes for justice to be done, or 2) justice 
takes an eternity to accomplish, in which case the desire for justice is 
never achieved, contra Meillassoux’s insistence that it can be achieved. 
Immortality cannot be desired on account of a desire for justice alone.
Secondly, these reﬂ ections compound the need for Meillassoux to 
address the question we raised in the previous chapter and that rests on 
our analysis in Chapter 4 of the place of logical laws in Meillassoux’s 
system. If everything is contingent, why is my desire for justice not con-
tingent? Why can it not either 1) discontinue as a desire or 2) radically 
change, so that what I consider just and unjust shifts, either partially 
or entirely? We have seen that Meillassoux is careful not to prescribe 
the detail of a future happiness because any image of Paradise would 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
213
be an adequate representation of Hell, but this analogy requires the 
capacity to distinguish Paradise from Hell and for that distinction itself 
to be non-contingent. On Meillassoux’s account, why not hope that 
the problem of evil will be solved by a change in my understanding of 
what is just, rather than by a rebirth of humanity? I cannot reply that 
it is ethically repulsive to hope for the former, for that simply misun-
derstands the radical nature of contingency; of course I cannot conceive 
how I could ever be content to view the current state of things as just, 
precisely in the same way that I cannot conceive what a just situation 
will resemble, but neither hope is logically impossible.
6 . 2  N AN C Y : U NI VER SA L DEM A N D FO R  J U S TI C E
Nancy’s account of justice, like Meillassoux’s, deploys a range of 
theological and religious terms. We shall trace Nancy’s understanding 
of justice through the notions of capitalism, democracy, and com-
munism, arguing that what Nancy calls his ontological communism is 
with respect to politics what his atheology is with respect to religion. 
In seeking to address the problems of capitalism Nancy rejects both 
theistic and atheistic solutions, and moves towards a position that bears 
many similarities to Meillassoux’s approach to occupying the ethico-
political territory of the religious believer non-parasitically.
6.2.1 Capital
In L’Adoration Nancy argues that there have been three great muta-
tions in the way in which human beings have organised themselves in 
the world. The ﬁ rst two he identiﬁ es as the Neolithic revolution and 
the age of empires, and the third mutation replaced the ‘scheme of 
reproduction’ with the ‘scheme of production’. In the scheme of repro-
duction power is exerted to maintain the glory of the observances and 
hierarchies of the established order, whereas in the scheme of produc-
tion efforts are directed instead to the fruitfulness of production (ADC 
117). With this third great transition, the sumptuous opulence of sacred 
riches gave rise to another sort of wealth, a wealth of accumulation, 
growth and investment, a wealth of that which returns to the wealth 
holder as surplus value (PD 152).
This new regime of wealth was later called ‘capitalism’, the substitu-
tion of productive and invested wealth for unproductive and glorious 
wealth (ADC 30). The growth of value for its own sake circulated in the 
autonomous and puriﬁ ed sealed bubble of the ﬁ nancial markets (PD 
152). Capitalism brings about what Nancy after Marx12 calls a ‘general 
214 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
equivalence’, a notion as old as Plato who, in his Laws, argues for the 
beneﬁ cence of the retailer who ‘reduces the inequalities and incommen-
surabilities of goods to equality and common measure’.13 Capitalism 
is ﬁ rst and foremost the choice of a mode of evaluation, namely evalu-
ation by equivalence. When a society takes the decision that value is 
in equivalence, that society is capitalist (VD 45/TD 23). Ends, means, 
values, meaning (sens), actions, works and persons are all exchange-
able and circulable, for all are substitutable according to the universal 
equivalence of capital.
Capital’s universal is the indeﬁ nite (l’indéﬁ ni), a bad inﬁ nity that 
merely perpetuates indifference, rather than the true inﬁ nite which 
inscribes afﬁ rmative difference; it is tolerance rather than confronta-
tion, and grey rather than colour (VD 57/TD 31). Nancy calls this bad 
inﬁ nite a world without sky, dissipating the world in a ‘globalisation’ 
that, while inﬁ nitely expansible, is always closed in upon itself in its 
one universal value that destroys all other value (CM 45–6/CWG 46). 
Capital reduces spacing to banal general equivalence.
With capital it is not simply a question of value, however; it is also a 
question of ontology. Capital is an ontology in so far as being becomes 
a symbol of production itself; co-existence follows the technical and 
economic pattern of networks of exchange (ESP 71/BSP 50), an ontol-
ogy alien to any notion of value beyond exchange. In so doing it also 
lays bare the with as the fundamental trait of being and sense (ESP 
86/BSP 64), an ambivalence that gives capital a certain necessity in 
Nancy’s thought, though not a sufﬁ ciency. Capital even unfolds the 
simultaneity of the singular and the plural, but its singular is the indif-
ferent and interchangeable particularity of the unit of production, and 
its plural is the network of market exchange (ESP 97/BSP 73).
Atheism is powerless to resist capitalism. In fact, it is intricated in 
capitalism’s historical moment: ‘Le commun est orphelin de toute reli-
gion, religieuse ou civile – et cela même, cette conjonction de l’athéisme 
et de l’individualisme, par conséquent aussi, de toute évidence, du capi-
talisme, cela doit donner à penser’ (DDC 30).14 In L’Adoration, Nancy 
sketches a response to this issue raised in La Déclosion. It cannot be 
denied, he argues, that we must ﬁ nd some way of regulating capital-
ism’s accumulation, that such accumulation needs to be ‘moralised’ 
(ADC 119). Any such morality cannot be that of individual interests, 
however, because either such a morality is driven by ‘man’ as indi-
vidual, producer and subject, which is the very same model upon which 
capitalism thrives, or else, in its more revolutionary guise, it is cast 
according to the presuppositions of a particular individual (ADC 119). 
In seeking a way to check capitalism from the inside, Nancy looks to 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
215
John Maynard Keynes, quoting an afﬁ rmation that he (Nancy) qualiﬁ es 
as strong, courageous and still up to date:
I see us free, therefore, to return to some of the most sure and certain prin-
ciples of religion and traditional virtue – that avarice is a vice, that the exac-
tion of usury is a misdemeanour, and the love of money is detestable, that 
those walk most truly in the paths of virtue and sane wisdom who take least 
thought for the morrow. We shall once more value ends above means and 
prefer the good to the useful. We shall honour those who can teach us how 
to pluck the hour and the day virtuously and well, the delightful people who 
are capable of taking direct enjoyment in things, the lilies of the ﬁ eld who 
toil not, neither do they spin.15
The question for Nancy, however, is how to determine the ends that 
are to be valued above means, the good that is to be preferred to the 
useful. The answer is not to be found in the economy itself, nor indeed 
in beginning with the idea of regulation, but it must be sought by begin-
ning with ‘ends’, with metaphysics or, if we prefer, with the mystical 
or the poetic, all ways of evoking our relation to inﬁ nite sense (ADC 
120–1). We must seek a sense that is beyond distributive and calcu-
lative justice, the excellence or hyperbolic virtue of justice, that can 
disrupt the regime of power (force) and capital as we know them (ADC 
90). It is the search for this sense that will take us through Nancy’s 
 understanding of democracy and communism.
6.2.2 Ontological Communism
The possibility of striking up a new relation to capital is what Nancy 
explores in his treatment of democracy and communism. Democracy 
for Nancy is a detotalising politics, and in line with Nancy’s atheology 
that rejects a/theistic dogmas, democracy resists both theocratic and 
secular versions of political theology. Perhaps the only meaning (sens) 
that can be given to democracy is that it is a-ﬁ gural: it provides no ﬁ g-
urable destiny, no truth of the common, rather it conﬁ gures the space 
of the common so that we can open out in that space the abundance 
of forms that the inﬁ nite can take (VD 50/TD 27). In this, democracy 
plays for Nancy in his political thought a role equivalent to sense in 
relation to signiﬁ cation: it is the giving of a gift, opening of a ﬁ eld 
in which meanings or values can circulate. As such, ‘democracy’ for 
Nancy is 1) the name of a regime of sense whose truth engages man 
as such, and cannot be subsumed under any ordering instance, be it 
religious, political, scientiﬁ c or aesthetic, and 2) the duty to invent the 
politics not of ends but of means to open, and keep open, the spaces in 
which those ends are set to work (mises en œuvre) (VD 60–1/TD 33).16 
216 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Politics thus conﬁ gured must be thought as distinct from the order 
of ends, just as sense must not be collapsed into the signiﬁ cations the 
space for which it opens. Nancy’s democracy is ﬁ rst a metaphysics – a 
metaphysics of spacing and opening – and only thereafter a politics (VD 
62/TD 34). Nancy takes care though to stress that metaphysical democ-
racy does not found political democracy. Indeed, that would confuse a 
distinction that is consubstantial with democracy itself: the order of the 
State does not decide on the ends of man, either communal or singular 
(VD 62/TD 34).
The way in which Nancy understands democracy to loosen the 
grip of capitalism’s general equivalence can be seen in considering his 
claim that democracy exceeds the political order, that it reconﬁ gures 
ontology as an-archic, in the sense that it has no principle (or end), no 
precondition and no model. In other words, democracy takes seriously 
the ‘nothing’ in Bataille’s understanding of sovereignty as nothing (VD 
57/TD 31), not giving the ﬁ nal word to religion or to nihilism, both 
of which hypostatise nothing (rien) into Nothingness (le Néant). An 
atheological politics is a politics without the ‘Christmas projection’ 
(DDC 121/DisDC 145) of a principial moment, be it the tablets of Sinai 
or the social contract. Instead of a ﬁ nal word, democracy takes the rien 
seriously in the inﬁ nity that it opens within ﬁ nitude.
This anarchy is not subsumed under any principle or end, and if it 
does have a meaning it is that it has no identiﬁ able authority other than 
from a desire which expresses a real possibility of being ‘tous ensemble, 
tous et chaque un de tous’ (VD 29).17 Anarchic democracy provides the 
basis of a challenge to capital’s general equivalence in what Nancy calls 
‘creating the world’, and the name of this challenge is ‘justice’:
Créer le monde veut dire: immédiatement, sans délai, rouvrir chaque lutte 
possible pour un monde, c’est-à-dire pour ce qui doit former le contraire 
d’une globalité d’injustice sur fond d’équivalence générale. Mais mener 
cette lutte précisément au nom de ceci que ce monde sort de rien, qu’il est 
sans préalable et sans modèle, sans principe et sans ﬁ n donnés, et que c’est 
exactement cela qui forme la justice et le sens d’un monde (CM 63; J-LN’s 
emphasis).18
Anarchic democracy incites to (engage à) actions, operations, even 
struggles that allow the absence of arche¯ to be rigorously preserved 
(VD 57/TD 31). The demo-cratic ‘power of the people’ is the power 
to bring to ruin the arche¯ and then to take in hand the inﬁ nite opening 
thereby disclosed. This is a fundamental choice made by a whole civili-
sation, just like the choice of a whole civilisation for capitalism, but the 
choice for anarchic democracy results in the annulment of the general 
equivalence that perpetuates the indeﬁ nite rather than inscribing the 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
217
inﬁ nite. Furthermore, this is no notional or theoretical choice: ‘Entrer 
dans cette pensée, c’est agir déjà. C’est être dans la praxis par laquelle 
se produit un sujet transformé plutôt qu’un produit conformé, un sujet 
inﬁ ni plutôt qu’un objet ﬁ ni’ (VD 58).19
The choice for anarchic democracy is not merely a position of dissent 
or revolt, but it works loose the very basis of general equivalence and 
questions its bad inﬁ nity. Nancean democracy deconstructs the arche¯ 
of general equivalence and opens a space for the inscription of the actu-
ally inﬁ nite – that is to say, the giving of value, the sens of equivalence’s 
signiﬁ cation – in its indeﬁ nite bad inﬁ nite.
Democracy opens general equivalence, but in itself it does nothing 
to offer another understanding of value. An initial indication of what 
form ‘another understanding’ of value might take is given by capital-
ism itself, however, in its awkward attempts to gesture toward a value 
that escapes equivalence, an absolute value that it cannot incorporate. 
Nancy explores this uneasy relation in his discussion of the art market 
in La Pensée dérobée, where he sees in the inﬂ ated prices commanded 
by works of art as capitalism’s impotent indication of a value foreign 
to capital:
Le très grand prix est comme la manifestation – impuissante, gesticulatoire 
– de l’absence absolue de prix: une toile de Vinci est sans prix ( [this paren-
thesis is not closed: author] et dans un cas pareil, en fait, le sens propre et le 
sens ﬁ guré de cette expression tendent l’un vers l’autre. On ne peut chiffrer 
le prix de la Joconde, bien qu’on le puisse pourtant, comme à la limite, dans 
une logique d’assurance par exemple. (PD 151–2)20
In his own thought, Nancy elaborates this incommensurable value in 
terms of a communism which is the truth of democracy. If democracy 
is the un-principle – or an-arche – of politics as sense, then communism 
is its ethos. The stakes are these: democratic capitalism tries to make a 
world with simple atoms, but that world dissipates in general equiva-
lence. Something more, something else, something other than capital’s 
general equivalence is necessary for a world: some ‘clinamen’ (CD 17/
InC 3).
What the atomised individuals of democratic capitalism have ‘in 
common’ is articulated by Nancy in terms of ontological communism. 
When Nancy says that communism (like democracy) is an ontological, 
not a political proposition (Com 65/Comp 378), we are to understand 
this ontology as the being-in-common that is incommensurable with 
what exists, the giving which cannot be reduced to anything that is 
given. Communism is the truth of democracy as sense is the truth of 
signiﬁ cation: it is the with of being-with that replaces capitalism’s 
218 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
exchangeability of equivalent generalities with the spacing of incom-
mensurable singularities. Nancy’s Vérité de la démocratie is a plea not 
for the preservation of existing democracy, but for the reinvention of 
democracy, with communism as its truth (VD 55/TD 30) and with 
1968 as the ﬁ rst murmurings of its demand. Unless democracy becomes 
communist it will remain a system of managing necessities and least 
worst options, shorn of any desire or spirit, of any breath or sense (VD 
30/TD 15).
Ontological communism precedes and exceeds every ‘given’ and is 
that by which anything in general can take place (avoir lieu). As such, 
communism is not an ontology of ‘Being’ or ‘what is’, but of being 
inasmuch as it is nothing of what is, ‘l’être en tant qu’il n’est rien de ce 
qui est’ (Com 65).21 But the ontology of being-in-common must also be 
a radical political programme:
Non pas au sens des thèses et des projets d’un parti, mais bien plutôt au 
sens où le politique lui-même et en totalité doit s’y « re-programmer », doit 
inscrire un à-venir que ne recèlent nul concept ni programme de la « poli-
tique » consubstantielle à une autre ontologie, à toutes nos ontologies. (Com 
87–8)22
The political programme of communism is a political re-program-
ming, a civilisational decision not to install equivalence as the only 
value, not to establish a politics that apes our capitalo-democratic 
ontology, to take account of the exposure of plural singularities, not 
simply of capital ﬂ ows. It is not a return to the sacred values and hier-
archies of the pre-capitalist world, but neither is it a reconciliation to 
the general equivalence of a secularising capitalism. Neither theistic nor 
atheistic, it is political atheology.23
In La Comparution Nancy insists that, to begin with, ‘communism’ 
was simply the injunction to think after God, but (according to what in 
these pages we are calling imitative atheism) it became confused with 
any number of theological or onto-theological interpretations of the 
‘death of God’ in terms of Man, History or Science. These interpreta-
tions are now coming to an end, however, and the thinking and praxis 
of sharing (partage) indicates what arrives with this end (Com 57/
Comp 374). In other words, ontological communism refuses to replace 
God with any idol of humanity or human progress; it takes the death of 
God seriously by refusing any parasitic pretenders to the divine throne.
Just as it is threatened by such idolatry, communism is also threat-
ened by dissolution into capital’s general equivalence. It is a discordant 
paradox of atheism, Nancy argues, that although it may be the only 
possible contemporary ethos, the only dignity of the subject, neverthe-
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
219
less its historical conjunction with individualism and capitalism means 
that the disappearance of religion leaves the orders of the common 
and of culture orphaned, renewing the still unsatisﬁ ed desire for com-
munism (DDC 30/DisDC 17). Only an ontological communism can 
resist dissolving into capitalism’s general equivalence; only an onto-
logical communism can challenge the atomised ontology of general 
 equivalence that sustains political capitalism:
Si « politique » doit à nouveau dire quelque chose, et dire quelque chose de 
nouveau, ce ne peut être qu’en touchant à cette « essentialité » de l’existence 
qui est à elle-même sa propre essence, c’est-à-dire qui n’en a pas, qui est 
« archi-essentiellement » exposée à cela même – et d’une exposition qui 
comporte à la fois, dans sa structure et dans sa nature, la ﬁ nitude de toute 
singularité et l’en-commun de son partage. (Com 92–3)24
The communist ontology of ‘being inasmuch as it is nothing of what 
is’ forms the basis of a political demand: ‘Tout d’abord, nous sommes 
en commun. Ensuite, nous devons devenir ce que nous sommes : la 
donnée est celle d’une exigence, et celle-ci est inﬁ nie’ (VD 24–5).25 This 
demand cannot be determined or deﬁ ned; there is no pre-vision, no 
fore-sight, and the demand is open because it is incalculable, defying 
capital’s general culture of calculation and its anticipation of outputs 
and yields (VD 31/TD 16). More than that, this incalculability is onto-
logical (because the communist demand is issued in singular plural 
being itself), and by that token it cannot be subsumed by capitalism as 
an internal critique, remaining as an anarchic subversion of capital’s 
closed loop of general equivalence.
In addition to eschewing the atheism intricated with individualism 
and capitalism, Nancy’s appeal to the incommensurable also occupies 
religious terminology in L’Adoration. The name Nancy gives to our 
relation to sense beyond justice is adoration, from ad-oratio: speaking 
towards, speech whose content is inseparable from its address (ADC 
29). Nancy’s privileged example of adoration is the simple greeting 
‘salut!’ We cannot salute that which is produced, because it enters into 
general equivalence and into the circulation of all ‘products’ which can 
multiply and be invested, but which cannot salute (ADC 30). The rela-
tion here entertained between the informative sense of language and its 
absolute afﬁ rmative sense is the enigma that plays out in the relation in 
the art market between exchange value and absolute value (PD 152).
In singular plural being, singular existences are not related by a 
universal exchange value but only by the incommensurability of their 
‘dignity’, ‘value’ and ‘price’, a price without price that Nancy equates 
with sense. It is to this inestimable value that adoration is addressed, 
making adoration itself the evaluation of that which cannot be valued, 
220 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
of that which is of absolute value (ADC 88–9). In Nancy’s ontological 
communism, the incommensurable has replaced capitalism’s universal 
exchangeability. Adoration speaks not of universal exchange but of an 
inﬁ nite and mutual referral (renvoi mutuel inﬁ ni) that ﬁ rst addresses 
itself to adoration. Adoration is not the production of unending wealth 
but the praise of inﬁ nite sense (ADC 22). Nancy gives this address to the 
incommensurable the name ‘God’ (ADC 113), God not as a determi-
nate being but only as the ‘salut’ of address. It is a mistake to interpret 
these theological terms as so many concessions to, or the unmasking 
of, a latent religious framework in Nancy’s political thinking, that is 
to say as a simple religious parasitism. Like Meillassoux’s evocation of 
the Child of Man, Nancy’s use of religious terms is the point at which 
his post-theological integration is at its most aggressive. Adoration and 
the inestimable value of communism are not a manifestation of the 
theologico-political any more than singular plural being is divine. This 
point is perhaps best made by clarifying what Nancy does and does not 
mean by incommensurability.
Nancy identiﬁ es two measures of incommensurability in the Western 
tradition: incommensurability according to the Other and incommen-
surability according to the with (l’avec). The Other, with its intimacy 
and proximity, is other than the social, where the social is an expression 
of the common as shared being. It is also, of course, one of Janicaud’s 
main objections to the theological turn in French phenomenology and 
the focus of Badiou’s dismissal of Lévinas’s politics as a crypto-theology 
in L’Ethique. By contrast, the other of being-with is an other that 
cannot be inscribed within the dichotomy of immanence and transcend-
ence that residual atheism perpetuates; it must be understood within the 
context of Nancy’s own transimmanence, as the ‘just measure of the 
with’ or the ‘just measure of the incommensurable’. The ‘just measure 
of the with’ is a subjective genitive: the with is the just measure of the 
gap (écart) of one singular origin to another (ESP 105/BSP 81). It is in 
this way that Nancy draws from his communism a justice (which in this 
context means a universality and an equality) which does not dissolve 
either into capital’s general equivalence or into the antisocial intimacy 
of incommensurability according to the Other. In other words, Nancy’s 
notion of justice is neither parasitically theo-political nor atomistically 
atheistic.
This is not just a politics of distributive justice, however. Nancy’s 
politics demands more than simply the equal distribution of rights and 
freedoms. Distributive justice will always come second, after exist-
ence in common (ADC 12). What is demanded is an effective equality 
(égalité effective) of the ‘surgissement unique et incommensurable d’une 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
221
singularité [. . .] mesurable à aucune signiﬁ cation.’ This ‘more than 
justice’ could be called fraternity, understood as ‘l’acte de nouage [. . .] 
l’acte de partage et du tissage qui comme tel n’a pas de sens mais donne 
lieu à tout événement de sens’ (SM 179).26 This can be neither, on one 
hand, an exclusive fraternity of communal essences nor, on the other 
hand, a fraternity of general equivalence. It is the fraternity of the in-
common, not of the Other or of capital. What ontological communism 
demands is the fraternal equality of the in-common. It is therefore a 
misguided conﬂ ation of the two forms of incommensurability to read 
this evocation of fraternity in Nancy as a concession to community as 
communion or shared essences.
Nancy’s ontological communism might be thought to be weak in 
its potential for bringing about political change or unduly pessimistic 
in the ﬁ nitude of the singular plural being it assumes. In his treatment 
of Nancy’s communism in Alain Badiou, une trajectoire polémique, 
Bruno Bosteels reads Nancy too much like Derrida, stressing that 
Nancy understands communism to be unforeseeable, still entirely 
to-come, failing to draw attention to Nancy’s ontological communism 
that drives the demand for this communism to come.27 For Bosteels, 
Nancy’s communism is separated from all the dreams or nightmares of 
immanence and transcendence, possessing no common measure with 
substances or subjects,28 but for Nancy himself this ‘ontological detach-
ment’ (though Nancy would prefer to call it an ethos) is the means by 
which his communism can mount anything but a superﬁ cial resistance 
to the unrestricted circulation of capital. It is because communism is 
ontological that it exerts an immediate and ineradicable demand. As 
for communism possessing ‘no common measure’ with substances or 
subjects, Nancy stresses that ontological communism simply is the just 
measure of the with: it does not possess common measure because it is 
common measure.
In relation to the objection we saw formulated by Meillassoux 
above, that thinking the human according to ﬁ nitude will conjure up 
the Christian model of man as a poor fallen creature condemned to 
an ailing wretchedness with no way out other than divine salvation, 
Martin Crowley provides us with a Nancean response. Recognising 
the hostility to all ﬁ nite thinking on the part of those who can see in 
it nothing but the limits of this christianising vision that reduces the 
human to the pathos of a victim-existence from which only a God can 
save us,29 Crowley points out that there is no inevitable move from 
afﬁ rming human ﬁ nitude to seeing every contestation of ‘the way 
things are’ perishing in the indifference of a metaphysical destiny.30 
Ontological communism provides precisely such an afﬁ rmation of the 
222 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
ﬁ nite human that still leaves open the possibility of radical change. 
In one ﬁ nal move, Crowley seeks to secure the universality of this 
politics: ‘Ne puisant ainsi aucune valeur dans quelque paradis perdu ni 
dans quelque terre promise, l’articulation politique de l’inachèvement 
humain se fondera par impossible dans la seule universalité admis-
sible: c’est-à-dire, dans le besoin’.31 As a marker of universal human-
ity, need has an advantage over Meillassoux’s capacity to think the 
eternal, namely that all humans all the time are subject to some level 
of material need. Moreover, since material need is not a value, it 
cannot be negated. Thirdly, though not all humans are equally needy 
all the time, this universal is negatively manifested in the bodies of the 
abused, so the human universal lines up politically (s’aligne politique-
ment) with those in most need.32 This alignment of humanity with 
need does, however, reproduce the awkward position of locating uni-
versal humanity in terms of lack and orientating politics to a reactive 
 mitigation of that lack.
6. 3 BADIOU : JU STICE  O PE N  TO  A L L
‘From Plato until today, there is one word which can sum up the 
concern of the philosopher with respect to politics. This word is 
“justice” ’ (PP 29). Justice is the central concern of Badiou’s politics, but 
unlike Nancy’s communism, the notion is for Badiou emphatically not 
ontological: justice is an axiom. Justice stands in relation to the State 
as inconsistency stands in relation to the count; it is ‘the philosophical 
name of the incon sistency, for the state, of any equalitarian political 
orientation’ (PP 32). The effect of such an orientation is ‘to undo the 
ties, to desocialize thought, to afﬁ rm the rights of the inﬁ nite and the 
immortal against ﬁ nitude, against Being-for-death’ (PP 32). In the terms 
of Théorie du sujet, justice demands the dialectic precariousness of 
law, that law be open to being shaken, being split (TS 176/ThS 159). 
As such, justice must not be deﬁ ned, because ‘any deﬁ nitional and pro-
grammatic approach to justice makes of it a dimension of the action of 
the state’ (PP 30). Justice is not to be found in any positive deﬁ nition; it 
can ‘only name the most extreme moments of inconsistency’.33 ‘Justice’ 
itself, however, is not a political term; it is a generic category ‘by which 
a philosophy attempts to seize the equalitarian axiom inherent in a veri-
table political sequence’ (PP 30). The ‘equalitarian axiom’ is a political 
term, and is given by singular statements, in other words statements 
within a particular situation or world.
The term Badiou uses to describe how philosophical justice relates 
to the political equalitarian axiom is seizure or grasping (saisie): justice 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
223
‘seizes the latent axiom of a political subject’ (PP 30). Justice therefore 
is not an aspiration or the blueprint for a political programme, for 
‘the equalitarian axiom is present in political statements, or it is not 
present. And by consequence, we are within justice, or we are not’ (PP 
30). Justice here is simply a judgment on the collective being – in other 
words the subject – of a political truth, and therefore ‘[p]olitical equal-
ity is not what we want or plan, it is what we declare under ﬁ re of the 
event, here and now, as what is, and not what should be’ (PP 30). On 
a number of occasions Badiou returns to a phrase from Beckett’s How 
it is to sum up this axiomatic understanding of justice: ‘En tout cas on 
est dans la justice je n’ai jamais entendu dire le contraire.’34 There is 
no ﬁ nality in Beckett’s account of justice, Badiou notes; it refers purely 
to the equality of the ﬁ gures (or members) of a collective subject of a 
political truth.
Justice is a term used to describe the universal subject of political 
truths. The ‘justice’ or ‘equality’ evoked is not universal in the Nancean 
sense – in the sense that each singularity is ontologically equal in its 
incommensurability with all others – but in the same sense in which 
Badiou employs universality in relation to truths: de jure universal 
because open to all without exception, but de facto limited to those 
incorporated as the subject of the truth. Justice and equality are no 
more and no less than the justice and equality enjoyed by the subject of 
a political truth, and ‘a political orientation worthy of being submitted 
to philosophy under the idea of justice is an orientation whose unique 
general axiom is: people think, people are capable of truth’ (PP 29). 
By extension, people are also capable of justice. There is, however, no 
guarantee that all necessarily are indeed capable of truth (or justice), as 
Badiou fully acknowledges: ‘There is no political orientation linked to 
truth without the afﬁ rmation – afﬁ rmation which has neither a guar-
antee nor a proof – of a universal capacity for political truth’ (PP 29). 
This leaves Badiou exposed to the same problems we identiﬁ ed with 
Meillassoux’s account of justice resting on the capacity to think the 
eternal. If there is no guarantee that there is indeed a universal capacity 
for political truth, it follows that there is no guarantee that there can 
ever be universal justice.
6.3.1 Capital
It is clear, in this context, why capitalism for Badiou can never be just. 
The free circulation of wealth and the rule of majority opinion in what 
Badiou calls capitalo-parliamentarianism is the antithesis of the subject 
seized by the truth of an equalitarian maxim:
224 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Le monde du capitalisme généralisé et arrogant où nous vivons nous ramène 
aux années 1840, au capitalisme naissant, dont l’impératif, formulé par 
Guizot, est: « Enrichissez-vous! ». Ce que nous traduirons par: «Vivez sans 
idée». Nous devons dire qu’on ne vit pas sans idée. (Circ5 56)35
The result of this absence of idea is that ‘what is fuses miserably with 
what can be’ (PP 31) and capitalism facilitates no possibility of radical 
change. Nevertheless, just as the role played by capitalism was not 
wholly negative for Nancy, so also for Badiou capital has an important 
function.
In his ﬁ rst Manifeste, Badiou closely ties his understanding of capital 
to the disenchantment of the West. The enchanted cosmos was governed 
by a notion of presence with which we are familiar from our discussion 
of the God of the poets in the second chapter. It is this presence, Badiou 
argues, that underwrites the sacred hierarchy and sacred bonds of the 
enchanted cosmos. So in order to move from this enchanted cosmos to 
a disenchanted universe, it is necessary to break these sacred bonds and 
overcome the incarnational notion of presence that underpins the sacred 
cosmos. What makes this a real possibility for our epoch, Badiou argues, 
is capital: ‘A qui devons-nous d’être délivrés du mythe de la Présence, de 
la garantie qu’elle accorde à la substantialité des liens et à la pérennité des 
rapports essentiels, sinon à l’automaticité errante du capital?’ (M 37).36
It is capital, then, which provides the historical vehicle for a disen-
chanted cosmos; the working of capital and the working of disenchant-
ment here run in parallel.
Just as, for Nancy, capital exposes the simultaneity of the singular 
and the plural, so also for Badiou it plays here an important role in 
preparing the way for communism. Capital exposes the pure multiple 
as the foundation of presentation because it is universal, dissolving all 
particular values into one universal exchange value. To be clear: capital 
is to justice as axiomatised set theory is to truth. Neither capital nor set 
theory are timeless; they are both historical articulations which privi-
lege the quantitative over the qualitative, in other words that privilege 
counting, and one way of counting, to the rigorous exclusion of other 
measures of quantity/value.
In so far as the ﬂ ow of capital knows no bounds or restrictions, it 
exposes sacred resistance to free exchangeability as contingent and con-
structed, and so performs on the social level what mathematics achieves 
for Badiou’s ontology: purging it of any bonds or ties. In so doing 
capital violently creates a new basis (assise) for generic humanity (BF 
126), in the same way that mathematised ontology clears the ground, 
so to speak, for truth. Any philosophy worthy of the name must be able 
to measure up to capital (M 39/Man 58).
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
225
In this Badiou is following Marx, as he acknowledges in ‘Politics and 
Philosophy’:
Emancipatory politics, as I say somewhere in my Manifesto for Philosophy, 
must be at least equal to the challenge of capital. That is Marx’s idea. When 
Marx says that capital destroys all the old ties, all the ancient sacred ﬁ gures, 
that it dissolves everything in the frozen waters of selﬁ sh calculation, he says 
it with a certain admiration. (PoP 113) 
This leaves us with a tension: if capital is to be overcome, then should 
it not follow, by Badiou’s own logic, and by the shape of Badiou’s 
own thought, that disenchantment too, that parallel of capital, is to 
be overcome? If capitalism is not an end in itself for Badiou, then 
neither is disenchantment And, if this is the case, what would the 
overcoming of disenchantment – as a parallel to the overcoming of 
capitalism – look like? The answer: it looks like an post-theological 
integration.
If disenchantment and the atheism of ‘nothing is inaccessible’ were 
ends in themselves for Badiou then he would be quite satisﬁ ed with 
universal and unrestricted capitalism having brought about precisely 
the dissolution of sacred bonds that disenchantment demands. But 
this alone is insufﬁ cient for a post-theological integration, because 
having secured a disenchanted universe Badiou moves in on the terri-
tory previously occupied by religion and argues that the overcoming 
of presence and a cosmos of sacred bonds opens the way for truth:
la désacralisation n’est nullement nihiliste, pour autant que « nihilisme » doit 
signiﬁ er ce qui prononce que l’accès à l’être et à la vérité est impossible. Tout 
au contraire, la désacralisation est une condition nécessaire pour qu’un tel 
accès s’ouvre à la pensée. (M 37)37
So the role that capital plays for Badiou is necessary and irreducible, 
but not ﬁ nal, because he is not simply seeking to resist theism but to 
occupy its territory: the objective Marxist analysis is indispensible, but 
it cannot of itself give rise to a politics of emancipation because any 
such resistance will always already have stoked the ﬁ res of totality and 
dominant power (BF 121).
In a ﬁ gure that neatly captures his rejection both of asceticism and 
parasitism, Badiou renounces Romanticism’s imitative hypostatisation 
of Life and an ascetic capitulation to the general equivalence of the 
market that forecloses any Truth:
comment sortir [. . .] du romantisme, sans consentir à la sophistique nihil-
iste dont le pur présent est le marché mondial, l’économie, et l’automatisme 
consensuel du capital? Comment n’être pas pris dans l’alternative: la Vie 
(mythème) ou la Bourse (celle du Capital)? (19R 268)38
226 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
The way to avoid these two unappetising alternatives is to recognise 
that the false universal of capitalism (false because it is indeﬁ nite, not 
actually inﬁ nite) prepares the way for the universal of truth.
Despite, or even because of its place in preparing the way for his 
post-theological integration, capital occupies a problematic place in 
Badiou’s thought. The parallel between capital as the untying of social 
bonds and ZFC set theory as the undoing of all substantial relations 
relegates capitalism, as Žižek is quick to point out in In Defense of Lost 
Causes, to ‘the naturalized “background” of our historical constella-
tion’, depriving Badiou of the ability to mount a critique of political 
economy:
if not the immediate goal of the emancipatory politics, anti-capitalism 
should be its ultimate aim, the horizon of all its activity. Is this not the lesson 
of Marx’s notion of the ‘critique of political economy’ (totally absent in 
Badiou)? Although the sphere of the economy appears ‘apolitical,’ it is the 
secret point of reference and structuring principle of political struggles.39
Nancy’s critique of capitalism is more robust than Badiou’s on this 
point. An ontological communism can challenge the atomised ontology 
of general equivalence that sustains political capitalism in a way that a 
communism subtracted from ontology as a truth cannot. Ontological 
communism cannot be subsumed by capitalism as an internal critique, 
for it remains as an anarchic subversion of capital’s closed loop of 
general equivalence, with the same force as that general equivalence. 
For Nancy, communism is the truth of democracy, not the truth of capi-
talism, and this allows him to reject capital while still drawing commu-
nism from a democratic general equivalence. It is Badiou’s conﬂ ation of 
capital and democracy in his capitalo-parliamentarianism that makes it 
difﬁ cult for him to articulate communism in a way that does not either 
presuppose or neutralise capitalism.
6.3.2 Communism
The difﬁ culties multiply when we see that communism stands in rela-
tion to capitalism in the same way that truths stand in relation to the 
privilege of the count (over qualitative measurements) brought about 
by ZFC set theory. Communism for Badiou is an Idea, a truth that can 
be incorporated by different subjects at different historical moments. As 
an Idea, ‘communism’ should not be rendered as an adjectival adjunct 
to a particular politics, and this short-circuit between the idea of com-
munism and actually existing politics has led to ‘communisms’ that 
spawned oxymorons like ‘Communist party’ or ‘Socialist state’ (Circ5 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
227
189/CH 240). Badiou rejects the socialisms of the twentieth century 
as abject failures, having adopted a capitalist dogma of inequality 
(Circ5 10/CH 5), and he rejects the adjectival uses of ‘Communist’ and 
‘Socialist’ as no longer able to uphold the idea of communism (Circ5 
202/CH 257). Instead, he favours a recovery of the generic sense of 
‘communism’ found in the young Marx (2M 153), an understanding 
of communism as ‘une hypothèse régulatrice qui enveloppe les champs 
variables et les organisations nouvelles de la politique d’émancipation’ 
(2M 153–4).40 ‘Communism’ as a philosophical concept can be equated 
with justice; it is the ground (fond) of every emancipatory orientation 
(Circ4 151/MOS 113–14), inasmuch as it names forms of political 
organisation not modelled on a hierarchy of places (Circ5 52/CH 60). 
In other words, communism operates under the equalitarian maxim.
When Badiou refers to communism as an ‘Idea’ he is adumbrat-
ing the third volume of L’Etre et l’événement, provisionally entitled 
L’Immanence des vérités (the immanence of truths) (PE 105). An Idea 
offers the horizon of a new possibility; neither political practice nor a 
political programme, it is the possibility in the name of which we act, 
transform, or have a programme (PE 24). It is the subjectivation (in 
other words the incorporation of a truth in a body that makes that 
body – be it an individual, a group or a work of art – into a faithful, 
reactive or obscure subject) of a relation between the singularity of a 
truth procedure and a representation of History (Circ5 185/CH 235). 
For example, the French Revolution had three great ideas – liberty, 
equality, fraternity. However, notes Badiou, the French Revolution 
subordinated equality to the freedom to own property, whereas the 
great idea of communism is that equality norms liberty and fraternity 
(PE 25, 26).
It is important to be clear that the Idea of communism is not under-
stood by Badiou as an abstract notion. It comprises three components: 
political, historical and subjective. The political component is a politi-
cal truth, an eternal truth subtracted from the bodies and languages of 
democratic materialism; the historical component is the local inscrip-
tion of a political truth-procedure in a particular situation; the subject 
is the collective and in-principal universal group of those faithful to 
the political truth. For this reason, it is better to understand the Idea 
of communism as an operation, rather than as a notion (Circ5 187/CH 
237): ‘[l]’Idée communiste est l’opération imaginaire par laquelle une 
subjectivation individuelle projette un fragment de réel politique dans la 
narration symbolique d’une Histoire’ (Circ5 189).41 So the ‘Idea of com-
munism’ means that a subject holds itself to a truth in a given situation, 
and it cannot be equated with the animating notion behind all actually 
228 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
existing or previously existing communist states; it is not a purely politi-
cal name, nor purely historical, nor purely ideological (Circ5 187/CH 
237). Badiou coins the term ‘ideation’ to describe the indiscernability 
of life and Idea in the subject of a truth (2M 20), a ‘true life’ (2M 124).
This tripartite understanding also helps us to avoid the error of 
thinking that Badiou’s communism is an idealistic and impotent 
waiting for the never-to-come Revolution. To say that an Idea is a 
horizon does not mean that it is solely to-come. An Idea presents a 
truth as if it were a fact (comme si elle était un fait), or it presents 
certain facts as symbols of the real of a truth. Through the Idea of 
communism we can articulate the process of a truth in the impure 
language of the State (Circ5 200/CH 254), with the understanding that 
the post-revolutionary State will be the State of the withering away of 
the State, the State that organises the transition to the non-State (Circ5 
195–6/CH 238–9).
Though the Idea is always afﬁ rmed in the present, it will not always 
succeed in its eventual realisation. Badiou sees this as in no way 
detrimental to the hypothesis itself. Taking the analogy of Fermat’s 
last theorem (Circ5 11/CH 6) Badiou notes that from Fermat’s for-
mulation of the hypothesis to Wiles’s demonstration there elapsed a 
number of years (358 in fact) and countless attempts at its justiﬁ ca-
tion. What was imperative during the three centuries that intervened 
was not to abandon the hypothesis despite the ongoing impossibility 
of proving it. More than that, the failures themselves were produc-
tive and drove forward the life of mathematics: ‘En ce sens, l’échec, 
pourvu qu’il n’entraîne pas qu’on cède sur l’hypothèse, n’est jamais 
que l’histoire de la justiﬁ cation de cette dernière’ (Circ5 11).42 Badiou 
traces the same process through the events of May 1968, the Cultural 
Revolution and the Commune of Paris: in each case, apparent and 
sometimes bloody failures were and remain stages in the proof of 
the communist hypothesis. The ‘propagandist use’ of the notion of 
the failure of communism is therefore to be resisted (Circ5 12/CH 
7). Every failure can be localised to a point, to a binary choice in the 
development of an Idea, and so every failure is a lesson that can ﬁ nally 
be incorporated into the positive universality of the construction of a 
truth (Circ5 33/CH 39). In other words, political difﬁ culties are never 
global but contained within a ‘space of possible failures’, a space 
where we must search, after a failure, for the point at which, from 
now on, we will not permit ourselves to fail (Circ5 34/CH 39–40). 
Some may not like the legitimation of political violence implicit in 
this position, but it is hard to criticise it as a quietism that refuses to 
engage in the ‘real world’.
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
229
It is also important to understand that for Badiou communism does 
not refer to one subset of political events, but to political events in 
general. All political truths are communist because all political truths 
are universalising and equalitarian (OR 16). In so far as 1) only a 
politics with an Idea (or a politics of truths) deserves to be called a real 
politics, 2) the Idea of communism is the ground of every emancipatory 
orientation, and 3) political truths for Badiou are always emancipatory 
in that they break down hierarchies and declare a universal subject, 
communism is the only Idea with which to confront the ‘Get rich!’ 
mantra of capitalo-parlemantarianism.
One ﬁ nal nuance. In comparing Badiou’s axiomatic and Nancy’s 
ontological justice, we need to recognise that Badiou does evoke 
ontological equality in his gloss on Beckett’s ‘En tout cas on est dans 
la justice je n’ai jamais entendu dire le contraire’,43 albeit as the onto-
logical equality of the subject: ‘La justice ici évoquée, qui est un juge-
ment sur l’être collectif, ne se rapporte évidemment à aucune espèce de 
ﬁ nalité. Elle concerne uniquement l’égalité ontologique intrinsèque des 
ﬁ gures du sujet’ (C 356).44
The difference between Nancy and Badiou is not that Nancy’s justice 
is ontological whereas Badiou’s is not, but that Nancy’s ontological 
justice is universal in esse, the ontological condition of each singular 
without exception, whereas Badiou’s ontological justice is universal in 
posse, for though no human animals are in principle excluded from the 
collectivity bound to an equalitarian truth (save perhaps those incapa-
ble of understanding the truth), in practice not all human animals are 
incorporated in any such truth.
So what of the difference between Nancy’s ontological communism 
and Badiou’s communism of the Idea? For his part, Nancy’s critique 
of Badiou’s justice is couched in terms that we would now recognise 
as suggesting that it is an imitative atheism, an idolatry of the Idea. 
For Nancy the communist hypothesis generates forms which model 
a historical given that is itself pre-formed by the general motif of 
‘progress’ and the possibility of spicing up (arraisonner) the course 
of events with a ready Idea. He contrasts these objectives of such 
a hypothetical thinking (in addition to ‘communism’ these could 
include ‘man’ or ‘humanism’, ‘community’, ‘sense’ or ‘realisation’) 
to the in-principle excess (un outrepassement de principe) of his own 
understanding of communism, ethos and sense (VD 24/TD 11). As 
a pre-vision of a desired telos, the Idea is theologically abstracted 
from history. It is this difference between Badiou’s anticipatory pre-
vision and his own exposure that crystallises Nancy’s difference from 
Badiou:
230 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
C’est pourquoi le « communisme » doit être moins avancé comme une 
« hypothèse », ainsi que le fait Alain Badiou – et par conséquent moins 
comme une hypothèse politique à vériﬁ er par une action politique elle-même 
prise dans le schème d’une lutte classique – que posé comme une donnée, 
comme un fait: notre donnée première. (VD 24–5)45
A hypothesis or Idea will always prescribe and pre-judge what it posits 
as its ﬁ nal goal, but ontological exposure presents not a vision but 
a demand: ‘Tout d’abord, nous sommes en commun. Ensuite, nous 
devons devenir ce que nous sommes : la donnée est celle d’une exi-
gence, et celle-ci est inﬁ nie’ (VD 25).46 But this is a deﬁ cient reading 
of Badiou. Badiou’s Idea is more nuanced than Nancy’s account gives 
us to believe, in its tripartite structure of the political, historical and 
subjective. The political Idea of communism is no more pre-established 
than the ‘given demand’ of Nancy’s own ontological communism. 
Furthermore, the historical and subjective aspects of the Idea allow 
for just the sort of creative improvisations and compromises which 
Nancy seems to be suggesting Badiou’s Idea precludes. The charge that 
Badiou’s justice harbours an imitative atheism is not to be made at this 
point, but at the point of his equation of ontology with the Good (see 
Chapter 3).
In his comments on Nancy’s account of communism, Badiou strikes 
a more conciliatory tone. Communism means that each one of us is in 
common, together (communément), and given that Nancy’s ontological 
communism is an ontology not of what is but of being in so far as it is 
‘nothing of what is’, Badiou concludes ‘[l]à, nous sommes si proches 
que je ne nous distingue plus’ (OR 16).47 Though Nancy reports that 
Badiou expresses reservations at Nancy’s language of ‘community’, 
preferring his own ‘equality’ (see CA 42 n.1/CC 25), he recognises that 
Nancy’s community is not a substantialised homogeneity. Furthermore, 
Badiou is very happy to call the coming of being ‘in so far as it is 
nothing of what is’ an event, and the generic truth of an event might 
also be called ‘in-common’: ‘Alors, qu’en déﬁ nitive tout événement soit 
« communiste », c’est ce que Jean-Luc Nancy afﬁ rme, et qui est si vrai 
pour moi que j’y perds jusqu’au lexique de la malfaisance’ (OR 16).48 
Nevertheless, the difference between Idea and singular plural being, 
between eidos and ethos, does trace a fundamental fault line between 
Nancy’s and Badiou’s communism, not to mention that it seems impos-
sible to evoke the ‘event’ in both cases without equivocation. Exposure 
is not inexistence, and a fortiori the universal of the exposure which, 
in common, we do not have (which is ontological, and always-already) 
is not the universal of the event (which is a rupture with ontology, and 
contingent).
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
231
CO NC LU SI ON: JU STI C E B E Y O N D A TH E I S M
At the end of our case study we are in a position to make a number of 
comparative conclusions about the capacity of the three approaches 
to post-theological thinking under discussion to integrate a notion of 
universal justice. Meillassoux’s is certainly the most ambitious integra-
tion. His bold recognition of the scope of a justice which is universal 
in the sense of applying to all without exception, including justice for 
the dead, cedes nothing in extent to the theologian’s Final Judgment, 
but his justice predicated on belief in a God who does not exist comes 
at a price, namely a hyperchaotic virtuality which is light on justiﬁ ca-
tion and which relies on the argument that it can be brought about by 
human desire, an argument that, pending more detailed elaboration, 
as yet fails to convince. Meillassoux’s position requires the ontologi-
cal and the ethical jolts, or what we might call a ‘leap’ of integration, 
which remains far from straightforward or compelling. More than this 
though, Meillassoux’s justice does fail to integrate the redemption of 
past wrong: past injustice remains an offence. All Meillassoux offers 
is the consolation that injustice will not be continued, but he does not 
suggest that past injustice will be repaired. This would require the one 
hyperchaotic change he seems unwilling to contemplate, namely an 
(from the present point of view) unthinkable change in our understand-
ing of what is just and what is unjust. In this sense, his justice lacks uni-
versality. Meillassoux also has to sacriﬁ ce the notion of justice itself on 
the altar of post-theological thinking, for he cannot guarantee that our 
notion of what is ‘just’ will not change. Both Meillassoux and Badiou 
make justice contingent on a particular human faculty (for Badiou it 
is the capacity for truth and for Meillassoux the capacity to think the 
eternal and desire justice), which further renders problematic the uni-
versality of justice. Can justice truly be for everybody if it requires a 
certain capacity in the individual?
Meillassoux’s ambition to have everything in common with reli-
gion apart from the belief in an actually existing God labours under 
its own weight. The principle of universality itself may be beautifully 
simple – though by no means simplistic – but the evocation of the 
Child of Man and the desire for justice is baroque by comparison. 
‘L’Inexistence divine’ presents the least ascetic of the three positions we 
are considering, but its two ‘jolts’ require more good faith than many 
readers will be able to give. If we are not persuaded by the two jolts, 
however, let us not allow that to distract our attention from the crucial 
importance of his treatment of divine inexistence for the future course 
of post- theological integration. ‘L’Inexistence divine’ is important in 
232 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
the way that Meillassoux seeks aggressively to occupy religion’s terri-
tory, to have everything in common with religion apart from belief in 
an actually existing God. It opens new possibilities for post-theological 
integration that will no doubt be reﬁ ned and developed as Meillassoux 
continues to publish and as others follow his lead.
Nancy’s justice is universal in its application: the demand for justice 
issues from everyone, whoever they are and however they are suffer-
ing. This universality is the least conditional of the three positions, in 
that it does not require any capacity to be present in those for whom 
justice is demanded (though even here it could be argued that it is con-
tingent on a capacity to suffer, to feel or to be judged to be undergong 
physical or emotional pain in a way that is not, it might be argued, the 
case for all human beings at every moment), but it lacks the scope and 
ambition of Meillassoux’s justice even for the dead. All it promises is a 
greater demand for justice when humanity is denied, not the hope that 
such justice will in fact be done. Whereas Meillassoux’s justice (if we 
accept the jolts on which it relies) is universal in its application, Nancy’s 
is only universal in its demand. Nancy’s primary concern is to avoid 
parasitism, and his anarchic democracy repeats the move with which 
we are now familiar, whereby he resists the ‘Christmas projection’ of 
foundations and ends. Furthermore, ontological communism refuses to 
replace God with any idol of humanity, reason or human progress. His 
notion of justice without precondition and without model does open 
him to the criticism that his idea of justice is ascetic, in other words that 
the demand for justice lacks a compelling universalising of the passage 
à l’acte. This critique is in part mitigated by Nancy’s disruption of 
the dichotomy of theory and action in ethos, but his understanding of 
justice still does not sufﬁ ciently explain the conﬂ ation of ontology and 
normativity.
Badiou’s notion of justice is the most de facto restricted of the three. 
It is universal only in posse: all those incorporated in the subject of a 
political truth are equal, and the equalitarian maxim is on Badiou’s 
own admission rarely seized (AMP 115/MetP 101; EE 379/BE 344). 
The problematic nature of letting universality rest on a human capacity, 
the capacity for truth, further nuances his account of universal justice. 
Badiou’s justice shares with Meillassoux’s a future anterior focus, but 
Badiou’s ‘continuer!’ allows for an incremental series of steps towards 
justice which seem precluded by Meillassoux’s dice throw. Through 
coming to understand the ‘point’ at which a particular historical com-
munism failed, Badiou has a mechanism whereby the subject of a truth 
can learn from the mistakes of the past, whereas Meillassoux’s injunc-
tion to live now in the light of coming justice does not, it seems, have 
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
233
such a heuristic dimension. Badiou’s understanding of justice leaves him 
in relation to capital in the same position as what he calls the ‘ethics 
of victimhood’ occupies in relation to human suffering: the parallel 
between capitalism and mathematised ontology leaves him unable to 
reject capitalism consistently or, as Žižek suggests, to mount a critique 
of political economy.49 If Nancy is most preoccupied to avoid atheistic 
parasitism, then Badiou’s axiomatic account of justice sets itself against 
the asceticism that he perceives in the previous generation of ‘linguistic 
philosophers’. His recourse to axioms, however, leaves him once more 
with the problem of the ‘principle of intelligibility’ that we discussed in 
the previous chapter.
The notion of universal justice for each of our three thinkers encoun-
ters the problem of a latent or unexplained conﬂ ation of goodness and 
equality, or goodness and justice. For Nancy, justice and communism 
may be ontological, but it still remains to be shown why we should 
prefer an ethos that reﬂ ects or honours this ontological communism to 
one that does not. Blurring the boundary between ontology and ethics/
politics in ethos does not yet show why one particular ethos should be 
preferred over another. In other words, there is no reason to obey the 
demand issued by singular plural ontology if it is not a good demand, 
and there are no non-circular means to verify its goodness.
For Badiou, the problem can be expressed as follows: truths are 
necessarily universalising and equalitarian, and this universal equal-
ity can only be justiﬁ ed in terms of the inconsistent multiplicity that is 
retrojected from the counting-as-one of any situation, countings-as-one 
that introduce hierarchies, relations and divisions foreign to the void. A 
truth destroys such hierarchical divisions (for example: the three estates 
of pre-revolutionary France) and brings into being a new universal cat-
egory (for example: the universal human subject), that counts as one in 
a way more faithful to the retroactively apprehended non-hierarchised 
inconsistent multiplicity. There is no justiﬁ cation for privileging the 
stripping away of inequalities other than through an implicit appeal 
to privileging the equality of inconsistent multiplicity. For Badiou it 
is not ontology per se that justiﬁ es the equalitarian maxim, but incon-
sistent multiplicity. There can only be one reason for preferring truth 
and subjecthood over animality and the ‘get rich!’ maxim: inconsistent 
multiplicity is eo ipso Good.
For Meillassoux, the difﬁ culty comes down once more to trusting 
that our current understanding of justice is non-contingently ‘Good’, 
when there seems to be no basis in Meillassoux’s own thought for such 
a supposition, on pain of parasitic idolatry. For each of Badiou, Nancy 
and Meillassoux there is an unaccountable moment of ‘goodness’ (Why 
234 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
is inconsistent multiplicity good? Why obey the demand of the singular 
plural? Why is our current, contingent understanding of justice good?) 
that exposes each notion of justice to the charge of idolatry, of except-
ing one concept or moment of thinking from the need to be thought 
about. For each there is a necessary moment of circumspection (justice 
is universal only in posse; justice is universal only in its demand; 
justice for the dead is not redemptive) which exposes their notions of 
justice to the charge of asceticism. Finally, each notion of justice relies 
on a problematic moment that remains unjustiﬁ ed: (axiom, demand, 
intuition/jolt), and upon which the three notions of justice, as well as 
the three approaches to elaborating an post-theological integration, 
rely. It is to these problematic moments that we will turn as we draw 
our ﬁ nal conclusions.
NOTE S
 1. Pascal, Pensées [Lafuma] 60/[Brunschvicg] 294; ‘It is a funny kind of 
justice whose limits are marked by a river’, Pascal, Pensées, trans. A. J. 
Krailsheimer, p. 16.
 2. Critchley, Inﬁ nitely Demanding, p. 8.
 3. ‘this bastard absurdity, half religious and half atheist, of the hopeless 
perdurance of natural laws that are indifferent to our thirst for justice’ 
(author’s translation).
 4. ‘to give birth to God, like matter gave birth to life and life to thought’ 
(author’s translation).
 5. ‘God is precisely the appearing of the factical being through whom rebirth 
with a view to justice takes place’ (author’s translation).
 6.
being worthy of the child of man becomes the paradigm of my relation 
to the other: calling the other man back to his own humanity with a 
gesture, which comes down to being attentive to the possible singularity 
of the other; knowing how to respond with one’s own acts to the atten-
tive call of the other man, which comes down to being worthy of the 
one who knew how to make himself a man among men in an exemplary 
way. (Author’s translation)
 7. ‘Henceforth, God can designate the possibility of a philosophical life that 
is awakened and full of hope, beyond the religious belief in natural laws. 
A life, in short, with neither faith nor law’ (author’s translation).
 8. ‘so that, ultimately, philosophy is only distinguished from religion by the 
permanence in the latter of a currently existing God who can no longer be 
truly desired’ (author’s translation).
 9. ‘Thus the heart of factial ethics rests in the immanent knotting of 
 philosophical astonishment and messianic hope’ (author’s translation).
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
235
10. Crowley, L’Homme sans, p. 95.
11. ‘Nothing therefore can happen beyond man [. . .] the only possible novelty 
to succeed man is the renewal of man’ (author’s translation).
12. Whereas the term ‘general equivalence’ itself is borrowed from Marx to 
designate money and market in so far as they operate the levelling of 
distinctions and the reduction of excellence to mediocrity (VD 44/TD 
23).
13. Plato, Laws, 918b.
14. ‘The in-common ﬁ nds itself orphaned of all religion, whether religious 
or civil. And, as a conjunction of atheism and individualism, it is even 
orphaned, consequently and obviously, in regard to capitalism – which 
ought to make us reﬂ ect’ (DisDC 17).
15. Keynes, ‘Economic possibilities for our grandchildren’, The Collected 
Writings, vol. 9, p. 331. Quoted in French in ADC 120.
16. The discussion of ends and means here is not to be confused with the same 
terms in the passage from Keynes quoted above. Keynes’s ‘ends’ are the 
particular signiﬁ cations that appear in the ﬁ eld of the political, and his 
‘means’ are the instrumental measures deployed to achieve those ends. 
Nancy’s ‘means’ in Vérité de la démocratie by contrast is the disruption of 
such signiﬁ cations.
17. ‘all together, all and each one among all’ (TD 14).
18.
To create the world means: immediately, without delay, reopen each 
possible struggle for a world, that is, for what must form the contrary 
of a global injustice against the background of general equivalence. But 
this means to conduct this struggle precisely in the name of the fact that 
this world is coming out of nothing, that there is nothing before it and 
that it is without models, without principle and without given end, and 
that is precisely what forms the justice and the meaning of the world. 
(CWG 22)
19. ‘To enter into this thought is already to act. It is to be engaged in the praxis 
whereby what is produced is a transformed subject rather than a formed 
product, in inﬁ nite subject rather than a ﬁ nite object’ (TD 31; translation 
altered).
20.
The very high price is like the manifestation – impotent, gestural – of 
the absolute absence of a price: a da Vinci canvass is priceless (and in 
such a case, in fact, the literal and ﬁ gurative senses of this expression 
converge towards each other). We cannot say how much the Mona Lisa 
is worth, and yet we can, just, in the logic of insurance for example. 
(Author’s translation)
21. Tracy Strong translates the phrase incorrectly as ‘being insofar as it is a 
matter of that which is’ (Comp 378).
236 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
22.
not in the sense of theses and partisan projects, but rather in the sense 
that the political itself must completely ‘re-program’ itself, must inscribe 
a to-come that can be hidden by no concept or ‘political’ programme 
consubstantial with another ontology, with all our ontologies. (Comp 
87–8; translation altered)
23. In the discussion that follows we will be alternating the terms ‘atheology’ 
and ‘atheism’. Nancy equivocates on the term atheism, sometimes using 
it to refer to the sort of metaphysical rejection of God that his atheology 
avoids, and at other times employing it in a way synonymous with his own 
atheology.
24.
If politics is again to mean something, and mean something new, it can 
only be in touching this ‘essentiality’ of existence – which is itself its own 
‘essence,’ that is to say, which has no essence, which is ‘arch-essentially’ 
exposed to that very thing – and of an exposure that in its structure and 
nature contains at the same time the ﬁ nitude of all singularity and the 
in-common of its sharing. (Comp 390, translation altered)
25. ‘Before all else, we are in common. Then we must become what we are: the 
given is an exigency, and this exigency is inﬁ nite’ (TD 54).
26.
unique and incommensurable emergence of a singularity [. . .] that is 
not measurable in terms of any signiﬁ cation’ fraternity understood as 
‘the act of tying [. . .] the act of apportioning and interweaving that, 
as such, has no sense but gives place to every event of sense. (SW 
114–15)
27. See Bosteels, Alain Badiou, pp. 175–7.
28. Bosteels, Alain Badiou, p. 175.
29. Crowley includes the Badiou of L’Ethique among those who dismiss ﬁ nite 
thinking for this reason, along with Jacques Rancière in La Mésentente 
(Paris: Galilée, 1995) [Disagreement: Politics and Philosophy, trans. Julie 
Rose (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999)], Aux Bords du 
politique (Paris: La Fabrique, 1998) [On the Shores of Politics, trans. Liz 
Heron (London: Verso, 2007)], and ‘Who is the subject of the Rights of 
Man?’, South Atlantic Quarterly, 103: 2/3 (Spring/Summer 2004), pp. 
297–310.
30. Crowley, L’Homme sans, p. 18.
31. Crowley, L’Homme sans, p. 89. ‘Drawing no value from some lost 
paradise or some promised land, the political articulation of human 
incompleteness will ground itself against all odds in the only admissible 
universality: namely, in need’ (author’s translation).
32. Crowley, L’Homme sans, pp. 90–1.
 
The Politics of the Post-Theological II: Justice 
237
33. Marchant, ‘Nothing but a truth’, p. 113 n.32.
34. Beckett, Comment c’est, p. 150; ‘in any case we have our being in justice I 
have never heard anything to the contrary’ (Beckett, How it is, p. 135).
35.
The world of global and arrogant capitalism in which we live is taking 
us back to the 1840s and the birth of capitalism. Its imperative, as 
formulated by Guizot, was: ‘Get rich!’ We can translate that as ‘Live 
without an idea!’ We have to say that we cannot live without an idea. 
(CH 66–7)
36. ‘To whom must we be grateful to be delivered from the myth of Presence, 
the guarantee which it grants to the substantiality of the bonds and to 
the durability of essential relations, if not to the errant automaticity of 
capital?’ (Man 57; translation altered).
37. ‘desacralization is not in the least nihilistic, insofar as “nihilism” must 
signify that which declares that access to being and truth is impossible. On 
the contrary, desacralisation is a necessary condition for the disclosing of 
such an approach to thought’ (Man 56).
38. ‘how can we leave [. . .] romanticism without bowing to the nihilistic 
sophism whose pure present is the world market, the economy and the 
consensual automatism of capital? How do we avoid being caught in the 
alternative: Life (mytheme) or Stock Exchange (capital)’ (author’s transla-
tion).
39. Žižek, In Defense of Lost Causes, pp. 403–4.
40. ‘a regulatory hypothesis that envelops the variable ﬁ elds and novel organi-
sations of emancipatory politics’ (author’s translation).
41. ‘the communist Idea is the imaginary operation whereby an individual 
subjectivation projects a fragment of the political real into the symbolic 
narrative of a History’ (CH 239).
42. ‘In that sense, failure is nothing more that the history of the proof of the 
hypothesis, provided that the hypothesis is not abandoned’ (CH 7).
43. Beckett, Comment c’est, p. 150; ‘in any case we have our being in justice I 
have never heard anything to the contrary’ (Beckett, How it is, p. 135).
44. ‘The justice mentioned here, which is a judgment on collective being, obvi-
ously is not related to any sort of ﬁ nality. It uniquely concerns the intrinsic 
ontological equality of the ﬁ gures of the subject’ (Con 275).
45.
That is why ‘communism’ must not be put forward as a ‘hypothesis,’ as 
we see in Alain Badiou – and consequently less like a political hypoth-
esis to be veriﬁ ed by a political action that is itself caught in the schema 
of a classic struggle – but must instead be posited as a given, as a fact: 
our ﬁ rst given. (TD 54; translation altered)
46. ‘Before all else, we are in common. Then we must become what we are: the 
given is an exigency, and this exigency is inﬁ nite’ (TD 54).
238 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
47. ‘at that point, we are so close that I no longer distinguish between us’ 
(author’s translation).
48. ‘So, the fact that all events are at bottom “communist”, that is what Jean-
Luc Nancy afﬁ rms, and that is so true of my own thinking that at this 
point I shed even the language of wrongdoing’ (author’s translation).
49. Žižek, In Defense of Lost Causes, p. 404.
239
General Conclusion: 
How to Follow an ‘Atheism’ 
That Never Was
Was für eine Philosophie man wähle, hängt davon ab, was für ein Mensch 
man ist. Denn ein philosophisches System ist nicht ein toter Hausrat, den 
man ablegen könnte, wie es uns beliebt, sondern es ist beseelt durch die 
Seele des Menschen, der es hat.1
Chaque penseur dogmatique, en vertu d’une ﬁ ction dont il est dupe, et 
dont le public a pris l’habitude, parle, enseigne et décrète en se targuant 
de l’autorité d’une raison impersonnelle et d’une indubitable aperception 
du vrai, comme si l’expérience ne nous avait point appris que cette 
prétendu raison se contredit d’un philosophe à l’autre, et que, tant vaut 
la direction morale et intellectuelle de la personne, tant vaut la pensée, ni 
plus ni moins.2
We began this investigation by arguing that both imitative and residual 
atheisms are new moves in an old game and that their failure rigorously 
to think ‘after God’ is indicated by their systematic colonisation by 
‘postsecular’ theologians. The implicit complicity of imitative atheism 
with the theological notions it explicitly rejects has been exposed (by 
Blanchot and others), and the asceticism of residual atheism, its ceding 
to theology of truth and goodness along with its Romantic inability to 
consummate the death of God, is lamented by Badiou and Meillassoux. 
As a recognition of and reaction to the inadequacy of both imitative 
and residual atheisms, it is our argument that a consensus has emerged 
around a desire to move beyond both parasitism and asceticism to a 
post-theological integration that cuts the theological root of parasitism 
without renouncing its fruit.
The possibility of a post-theological integration is an important one 
for French thought more broadly, not least because it is, as we have 
shown, inextricable from the question of ethical and political action, 
justice and equality, but also because it takes us to the heart of what 
is at stake in the divergence of fundamental orientations in French 
240 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
thought today, the divergence between axiom and Idea, deconstruction 
and the ‘yet without’, demonstration and factiality. Furthermore, the 
possibility of a post-theological integration is an important question 
whose time, it appears, has come, as diverse philosophers today are 
each returning to the difﬁ culty of thinking and acting after God.
Engaging with this important current requires a double focus. First, 
in order to make sense of the similarities between Meillassoux, Nancy 
and Badiou it is important to see that what is common between them, 
namely seeking a post-theological thinking after atheism, is indicative 
of a shared new determination to grapple with the legacy of the death of 
God in a deeper way than every before, re-making philosophy from the 
ground up as a thinking ‘without God’. Secondly, in order to appreci-
ate both what is at stake for, and what is sought in, thinking after the 
death of God today, it is important to give full weight to the very dif-
ferent ways in which Meillassoux, Nancy and Badiou seek (and fail) to 
elaborate a post-theological integration.
For Nancy, post-theological thinking demands an atheology of the 
‘yet without’ that disengages from the logic of principles and ends, and 
from the dichotomies that perpetuate theological binaries, not least 
the dichotomy of theism and atheism itself. His singular plural spacing 
rejects the transcendent/immanent dichotomy that bedevils residual 
atheism, and the way he thinks sense and signiﬁ cation, faith and 
reason, allows him to resist an idolatrous self-sufﬁ ciency. However, he 
remains caught in the bind identiﬁ ed by Derrida in Le Toucher, namely 
the bind of the deconstruction of Christianity always threatening to 
reveal itself as a Christian hyperbole, a charge that his claim to be 
ﬁ nding something in Christianity of which God is only the ‘front man’ 
does not dispel. In addition, his recourse to ethos and the call fall short 
of providing the justiﬁ cation of equality that he requires.
For Badiou an atheism of the Idea must overcome the parasitic One 
and ascetic ﬁ nitude with an axiomatised mathematical ontology for 
which nothing is inaccessible, thereby avoiding an ascetic withdrawal 
behind the limit of ﬁ nitude. Nevertheless, the ‘Christmas projection’ of 
his account of philosophy, the uncertain status of inconsistent multi-
plicity and the unspoken good that motivates the event reintroduce the 
spectre of parasitism, while by the side of Meillassoux’s justice for the 
dead and the Christian Final Judgment, Badiou’s justice looks ascetic.
For Meillassoux, the attempt to demonstrate the principle of factial-
ity seeks to liberate him from imitative atheism, while the ‘philosophical 
divine’ seeks to found a radical hope for future justice on hyperchaos 
with an appeal to two ‘jolts’ in a way that cedes nothing to religious 
notions of justice. However, the hyperchaos which is so powerful in lev-
 
How to Follow an ‘Atheism’ That Never Was 
241
eraging his integral move beyond atheism also poses his project severe 
difﬁ culties that remain to be addressed: the principle of non-contradic-
tion is not exempt from hyperchaotic change, and the necessity of the 
two jolts compromises his pure demonstration of self-sufﬁ cient reason. 
These problems and difﬁ culties with each of the three approaches to 
thinking following the death of God indicate that, though a post-theo-
logical integration has been clearly deﬁ ned as a goal for contemporary 
thought, there is further work to be done in  elaborating a thinking that 
moves beyond both parasitism and asceticism.
There are two reasons that we can no longer use the term ‘atheism’ 
or even ‘atheisms’ to characterise this new direction in French philoso-
phy. First, the term is explicitly rejected by Nancy and emphatically 
rejected by Meillassoux, and to use it to characterise their thought 
would be unnecessarily to cut against its grain. Secondly, it designates 
one of the three approaches, namely Badiou’s, and to use it in both a 
local and global sense would risk causing unnecessary confusion. Nor 
will ‘thinking after God’ do (for Meillassoux’s philosophical divine is 
before God, not after him), nor for that matter ‘thinking without God’ 
(for Nancy uses the term ‘God’ freely in his writing, and Meillassoux’s 
philosophy not only concedes but requires the real possibility of God’s 
existence). The best way to understand and articulate what is hap-
pening in French tought today is to talk about the post-theological in 
general, and the goal of post-theological integration in particular. If we 
are to avoid a reductive approach to the current re-assessment of the 
West’s theological legacy we will henceforth need to circumscribe the 
term ‘atheism’ itself much more tightly and see it as but one possible 
response to the legacy of the death of God, alongside atheology and the 
philosophical divine.
Having acknowledged these differences, however, we must return to 
the question of to what extent we can in fact talk about ‘post-theolog-
ical integration’ as a coherent direction of thinking in the ﬁ rst place. 
Are Meillassoux, Badiou and Nancy showing three paths up the same 
mountain? To approach this question we must return one last time to 
that point at which our three thinkers diverge, namely the decision that 
chooses one fundamental philosophical orientation over another in the 
ﬁ rst place (why decision? why dis-enclosure? why demonstration?). 
Further work on post-theological thought needs to engage with the 
question of fundamental philosophical orientation, for the failure to 
account adequately for the disparity between dis-enclosure, decision or 
demonstration as approaches to post-theological thinking will always 
beg the question of any philosophy, whatever position it occupies 
in relation to the theological. Until this question is more adequately 
242 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
addressed no-one claim that they are following the death of God 
without a certain uncomfortable circularity in which any philosophy 
without God can be unmasked as a self-fulﬁ lling prophecy.3
This notion of a fundamental philosophical orientation appears 
under different guises in each of our three thinkers. Badiou argues that 
there is an ‘originary point of experience’ that the whole of didactic 
philosophy strives to reach and transmit (PE 143), which for Badiou’s 
thought is an intuition of subjective incorporation into a truth accom-
panied by an affect (PE 140–1) or, more personally, the experience of 
May ’68 (ONTS 361–2). In contrast to Nancy, however, this point 
is not an opening but must ﬁ t with the conviction that ‘real life’ can 
be experienced in immanence (PE 149). Evoking Plato’s agathon, to 
which Nancy also refers in the passage on philosophical blindspots 
from L’Oubli de la philosophie, Badiou argues for a principle of intel-
ligibility that cannot be reduced to the Idea itself (PE 141), a principle 
with Neoplatonist and Galilean interpretations that seem, pending 
L’Immanence des vérités, to be undecidable.
For his part, Meillassoux uses a similar form of reasoning to try to 
close this opening of the system to its outside, claiming to have found 
the anhypothetical principle searched for since Plato. He presents a list 
similar to Nancy’s in L’Oubli de la philosophie,4 this time with the 
accent on the formula of non-duplication – ‘only X cannot be X’ where 
X in Meillassoux’s case is Reason – and argues that this formula founds 
the exercise of reason in the impossibility of facticity itself being a fact. 
Nevertheless, his intellectual or dianoetic intuition re-introduces a nec-
essary moment in his thought that is neither demonstrated nor demon-
strable, a moment that resonates with Nancy’s opening of signiﬁ cation 
to sense and with Badiou’s ‘originary point of experience’. Subtending 
the fundamental disagreement whether to proceed by judgment, deci-
sion or demonstration, there is a shared recognition among all three 
thinkers that more is at stake in a fundamental philosophical orienta-
tion than a philosophical judgment, decision or demonstration alone.
There is an experience with which philosophy has to catch up and 
transmit, an intuition that it seeks to justify, a blind spot around which 
it turns or a god in its midst. Nancy, Badiou and Meillassoux provide 
three variations on this theme. But is the theme itself ‘without God’? 
Badiou admits that the rationalistic interpretation of the agathon is, at 
this stage in his thinking, undecidable from the apophatic; Nancy calls it 
on one occasion a mystery about God or the gods and on another occa-
sion the gesture of touching the limit of every worldview; Meillassoux’s 
discomfort is signaled in his move from intellectual to dianoetic intui-
tion in interventions that postdate Après la ﬁ nitude. This inaugural 
 
How to Follow an ‘Atheism’ That Never Was 
243
moment of thought stands as a witness to the need for ongoing work in 
the development of thinking without God, and leaves a question mark 
over the possibility of moving beyond the parasitism and asceticism 
that still haunt Nancy, Badiou and Meillassoux. It is a moment that 
shows, despite Badiou’s, Nancy’s and Meillassoux’s approaches to the 
post-theological, just how difﬁ cult atheism and its successors remain.
NOTES
 1. Fichte, Werke, vol 1, p. 434.
The kind of philosophy one chooses thus depends upon the kind of 
person one is. For a philosophical system is not a lifeless household item 
one can put aside or pick up as one wishes; instead, it is animated by 
the very soul of the person who adopts it. (Fichte, Introductions, p. 20)
 2. Renouvier, Esquisse, p. 357.
Every dogmatic thinker, by virtue of a ﬁ ction which deceives him and 
to which the public has grown used, speaks teaches and decrees while 
boasting of the authority of an impersonal reason and an indubitable 
apperception of the true, as if experience had never taught us that this 
so-called reason contradicts itself from one philosopher to the next and 
that, where the moral and intellectual direction of the person leads, 
their thinking will follow, nothing more and nothing less. (Author’s 
translation)
 3. This circularity is evident in Martin Hägglund’s treatment of Derrida 
in Radical Atheism. Hägglund’s arguments have force if Derrida’s fun-
damental orientation is taken for granted, but beg the question of that 
choice of orientation. For example, Hägglund argues that ‘For Derrida life 
is essentially mortal, which means that there can be no instance (such as 
God in Marion’s account) that is immortal’ (Hägglund, Radical Atheism, 
p. 8). It is the ‘for Derrida’ of this argument that needs interrogating, the 
criteriology of the choice for a philosophical orientation for which life is 
essentially mortal in the ﬁ rst place.
 4. Meillassoux includes Platonic ideas, the Cartesian cogito, Leibniz’ logical 
truths, Kant’s a priori forms of perception and Schopenhauerian will, 
whereas Nancy has Plato’s Good, Descartes’ evidence, Spinoza’s joy, 
Kant’s schematism, Hegel’s logic and Marx’s praxis.
Bibliography
Abel, Olivier, ‘Les temps de Dieu’, Critique, LXII: 704–5 (2006), 
pp. 129–41.
Adamek, Philip M., ‘The intimacy of Jean-Luc Nancy’s L’Intrus’, CR: The 
New Centennial Review, 2: 3 (2002), pp. 189–201.
Agamben, Giorgio, Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life, trans. 
D. Heller-Roazen (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998).
––, ‘Note liminaire sur le concept de démocratie’, in Giorgio Agamben et al., 
Démocratie, dans quel état? (Paris: La Fabrique, 2009), pp. 9–14.
––, The Coming Community, trans. M. Hardt (Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1993).
Agamben, Giorgio, Alain Badiou, Daniel Bensaïd, Wendy Brown, Jean-Luc 
Nancy, Jacques Rancière, Kristin Ross, and Slavoj Žižek, Démocratie, dans 
quel état? (Paris: La Fabrique, 2009).
Albert, Eliot, ‘Deleuze’s impersonal, hyzolic cosmology: the expulsion of the-
ology’, in Mary Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion (London: Routledge, 
2001), pp. 184–95.
Alliez, Eric, ‘Badiou: the grace of the universal’, Polygraph, 17 (2005), 
pp. 267–73.
Althusser, Louis, ‘Ideology and ideological state apparatuses (notes towards 
an investigation)’, in Slavoj Žižek (ed.), Mapping Ideology (London: Verso, 
1994), pp. 100–40.
Altizer, Thomas J. J. and William Hamilton, Radical Theology and the Death 
of God (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1968).
Ansell-Pearson, Keith, Germinal Life: The Difference and Repetition of 
Deleuze (London: Routledge, 1999).
––, ‘The simple virtual: Bergsonism and a renewed thinking of the one’, Pli, 11 
(2001), pp. 230–52.
Anselm, Saint, Monologion and Proslogion, trans. Thomas Williams 
(Cambridge: Hackett, 1996).
Armstrong, Philip, Jean-Luc Nancy and the Networks of the Political 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2009).
Aron, Raymond, The Opium of the Intellectuals (New Brunswick, NJ: 
Transaction Publishers, 2001).
 
Bibliography 
245
Atchley, J. Heath, ‘The silence of the secular’, Literature and Theology: An 
Interdisciplinary Journal of Theory and Criticism, 21: 1 (2007), pp. 66–81.
Augustine, Saint, The City of God, ed. R. W. Dyson, Cambridge Texts in 
the History of Political Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1998).
Badiou, Alain, Abrégé de métapolitique (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1998).
––, Ahmed le philosophe suivi de Ahmed se fâche (Paris: Actes du Sud, 1995).
––, ‘A propos du « et » entre être et événement’, in Écrits autour de la pensée 
d’Alain Badiou (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2007), pp. 103–4.
––, ‘Author’s preface’, in Being and Event, trans. Oliver Feltham (London: 
Continuum, 2007), pp. xi–xv.
––, ‘Author’s preface’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray Brassier and 
Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. xiii–xv.
––, Beckett: l’increvable désir (Paris: Hachette, 1995).
––, Being and Event, trans. Oliver Feltham (London: Continuum, 2007).
––, ‘Being by numbers [Interview with Lauren Sedofsky]’, Artforum, 33: 2 
(1994), pp. 84–90.
––, Brieﬁ ngs on Existence: A Short Treatise on Transitory Ontology, trans. 
Norman Madarasz (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2006).
––, Circonstances 1: Kosovo, 11 septembre, Chirac/Le Pen (Paris: Éditions Léo 
Sheer, 2003).
––, Circonstances 2: Irak, foulard, Allemagne/France (Paris: Éditions Léo 
Sheer, 2004).
––, Circonstances 3: Portées du mot « juif » (Paris: Éditions Léo Sheer, 2008).
––, Circonstances 4: De quoi Sarkozy est-il le nom? (Paris: Nouvelles Éditions 
Lignes, 2007).
––, Circonstances 5: L’hypothèse communiste (Paris: Lignes, 2009).
––, Conditions (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1992).
––, Conditions, trans. Steven Corcoran (London: Continuum, 2008).
––, Court Traité d’ontologie transitoire (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1998).
––, Deleuze: La Clameur de l’être (Paris: Hachette, 1997).
––, Deleuze: The Clamor of Being, trans. Louise Burchill, Theory Out of 
Bounds (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2000).
––, ‘Dix-neuf réponses à beaucoup plus de questions’, Cahiers du Collège 
International de Philosophie, 8 (1989), pp. 247–68.
––, ‘Drawing’, Lacanian Ink, 28 (2006), pp. 42–8.
––, ‘Eight theses on the universal’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray 
Brassier and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 143–52.
––, Ethics: An Essay on the Understanding of Evil (Wo es War) (London and 
New York: Verso, 2001).
––, ‘Fifteen theses on contemporary art’, trans. Peter Hallward (2005). 
Retrieved from: http://www.lacan.com/frameXXIII7.htm. Last accessed: 
July 2010.
––, Handbook of Inaesthetics, trans. Alberto Toscano (Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, 2004).
246 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
––, ‘Hegel and the whole’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray Brassier 
and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 221–32.
––, ‘Homage to Jacques Derrida’, in Costas Douzinas (ed.), Adieu Derrida 
(Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007), pp. 34–46.
––, Inﬁ nite Thought: Truth and the Return to Philosophy, trans. Oliver 
Feltham and Justin Clemens (London: Continuum, 2005).
––, ‘Kant’s subtractive ontology’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray 
Brassier and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 135–42.
––, L’Antiphilosophie de Wittgenstein (Paris: Nous, 2009).
––, L’Éthique: Essai sur la conscience du mal (Caen: Nous, 2003).
––, L’Être et l’événement, L’ordre philosophique (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 
1988).
––, ‘L’Humiliation ordinaire’, Le Monde, 15 November 2005.
––, L’Hypothèse communiste (Paris: Nouvelles Éditions Lignes, 2009).
––, ‘L’Investigation transcendantale’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: 
Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 7–20.
––, ‘L’Offrande réservée’, in François Guibal and Jean-Clet Martin (eds), Sens 
en tout sens: Autour des travaux de Jean-Luc Nancy (Paris: Galilée, 2004), 
pp. 13–24.
––, ‘La scène de deux’, in De L’amour (Paris: Flammarion, 1999), 
pp. 177–90.
––, ‘Language, thought, poetry’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray 
Brassier and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 233–41.
––, Le Concept de modèle (Paris: Fayard, 2007).
––, Le Nombre et les nombres (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1990).
––, Le Siècle (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 2005).
––, Logics of Worlds, trans. Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2009).
––, Logiques des mondes (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 2006).
––, Manifeste pour la philosophie (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1989).
––, Manifesto for Philosophy (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1999).
––, ‘Mathematics and philosophy: the grand style and the little style (translated 
from a previously unpublished manuscript)’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. 
and trans. Ray Brassier and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), 
pp. 3–20.
––, Metapolitics, trans. Jason Barker (London: Verso, 2005).
––, Monde contemporain et désir de philosophie (Reims: Noira, 1992).
––, ‘Notes sur Les Séquestrés d’Altona’, Revue Internationale de Philosophie, 
231 (2005), pp. 51–60.
––, ‘Notes toward a thinking of appearance’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and 
trans. Ray Brassier and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), 
pp. 177–88.
––, Number and Numbers, trans. Robin Mackay (Cambridge: Polity Press, 
2008).
––, On the Truth Process (2002) [cited February 2010]. Retrieved from: http://
www.lacan.com/badeurope.htm. Last accessed: January 2010.
 
Bibliography 
247
––, ‘On Simon Critchley’s Inﬁ nitely Demanding: Ethics of Commitment, 
Politics of Resistance’, Critical Horizons, 10: 2 (2009), pp. 154–62.
––, ‘On subtraction’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray Brassier and 
Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 103–18.
––, ‘One, multiple, multiplicities’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray 
Brassier and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 67–80.
––, ‘Ontology and politics: an interview with Alain Badiou’, in Inﬁ nite 
Thought: Truth and the Return to Philosophy, trans. Oliver Feltham and 
Justin Clemens (London: Continuum, 2005), pp. 127–45.
––, Petit Manuel d’inesthétique (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1998).
––, Petit Panthéon portatif (Paris: La Fabrique, 2008).
––, Peut-on penser la politique? (Paris: Seuil, 2008).
––, ‘Philosophy and mathematics: inﬁ nity and the end of romanticism’, in 
Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray Brassier and Alberto Toscano 
(London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 21–38.
––, ‘Philosophy and politics’, Radical Philosophy (1999), pp. 29–32.
––, ‘Philosophy, sciences, mathematics (interview)’, Collapse I (2006), 
pp. 11–26.
––, ‘Platonism and mathematical ontology’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and 
trans. Ray Brassier and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), 
pp. 49–58.
––, Pocket Pantheon: Figures of Postwar Philosophy, trans. David Macey 
(London: Verso, 2009).
––, Polemics, trans. Cécile Winter (London: Verso, 2006).
––, ‘Politics as truth procedure’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray 
Brassier and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 153–60.
––, ‘Politics: a non-expressive dialectics’, Urbanomic (2005), pp. 1–13. 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://blog.urbanomic.com/sphaleotas/archives/badiou- 
politics.pdf. Last accessed: July 2010.
––, ‘Préface: destin des ﬁ gures’, in Danielle Eleb, Figures du destin (Ramonville 
Saint-Ange: Éditions Erès, 2004), pp. 9–11.
––, ‘Preface’, in Quentin Meillassoux, Après la ﬁ nitude (Paris: Éditions du 
Seuil, 2006), pp. 9–11.
––, Saint Paul: La Fondation de l’universalisme (Paris: Presses Universitaires de 
France, 1997).
––, Saint Paul: The Foundation of Universalism, trans. Ray Brassier (Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 2003).
––, Second Manifeste pour la philosophie (Paris: Fayard, 2009).
––, ‘Some replies to a demanding friend’, ‘Afterword’, in Think Again, ed. Peter 
Hallward (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 232–7.
––, ‘Spinoza’s closed ontology’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray 
Brassier and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 81–93.
––, ‘The being of number’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray Brassier 
and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 59–66.
––, The Century, trans. Alberto Toscano (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2007).
248 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
––, The Communist Hypothesis, trans. David Macey and Steve Corcoran 
(London: Verso, 2010).
––, ‘The event as trans-being’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray 
Brassier and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 97–102.
––, ‘The formulas of L’Étourdit’, trans. Scott Sacaiano, Lacanian Ink, 27 
(2006), pp. 80–95.
––, The Meaning of Sarkozy, trans. David Fernbach (London: Verso, 2008).
––, ‘The question of being today’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray 
Brassier and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 39–48.
––, ‘The subject of art’, The Symptom, 6 (2005). Retrieved from: http://www.
lacan.com/symptom6_articles/badiou.html. Last accessed: January 2010.
––, ‘The transcendental’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray Brassier 
and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 189–220.
––, Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. Ray Brassier and Alberto Toscano 
(London: Continuum, 2004), pp. xiii–xv.
––, Thé orie de la contradiction (Paris: Maspero, 1975).
––, Théorie du sujet (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1982).
––, Theory of the Subject, trans. Bruno Bosteels (London: Continuum, 2009).
––, ‘Truth: forcing the unnameable’, in Theoretical Writings, ed. and trans. 
Ray Brassier and Alberto Toscano (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 119–34.
––, ‘Un, multiple, multiplicité(s)’, Multitudes (2000). Retrieved from: http://
multitudes.samizdat.net/Un-multiple-multiplicite-s. Last accessed: January 
2010.
Badiou, Alain, and Bruno Bosteels, ‘Can change be thought? A dialogue 
with Alain Badiou’, in Gabriel Riera, Alain Badiou: Philosophy and its 
Conditions (New York: SUNY Press, 2005), pp. 237–62.
––, and Bruno Bosteels, ‘Peut-on penser le nouveau en situation?’, Failles: 
Situations de la Philosophie, 2 (2006), pp. 62–93.
––, and Simon Critchley, ‘Ours is not a terrible situation’, Philosophy Today, 
51: 3 (2007), pp. 357–65.
––, and Peter Hallward, ‘Politics and philosophy: an interview with Alain 
Badiou’, Angelaki, 3: 3 (1998), pp. 113–36.
––, and Analía Hounie, ‘The question of democracy’, Lacanian Ink, 28 (2006), 
pp. 54–67.
––, and Fabien Tarby, La Philosophie et l’événement (Meaux: Germina, 
2010).
––, and A. Toscano, ‘Plato, our dear Plato!’, Angelaki, 11 (2006), pp. 39–41.
––, and Tzuchien Tho, ‘New horizons in mathematics as a philosophical condi-
tion: an interview with Alain Badiou’, Parrhesia, 3 (2007), pp. 1–11.
––, Peter Hallward and Bruno Bosteels, ‘Beyond formalisation: an interview 
with Peter Hallward and Bruno Bosteels’, trans. Bruno Bosteels and Alberto 
Toscano, Angelaki, 8: 2 (2003), 111–36.
Baldwin, Jon, and Nick Haeffner, ‘ “Fault Lines”: Simon Critchley in discus-
sion on Alain Badiou’, Polygraph, 17 (2005), pp. 295–307.
Balibar, Étienne, ‘« Histoire de la vérité »: Alain Badiou dans la philosophie 
 
Bibliography 
249
française’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: 
L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 497–524.
Balibar, Étienne, ‘ “The History of Truth” ’, Radical Philosophy, 115 (2002), 
pp. 16–28.
Bandres, Lenin, ‘Badiou et l’atomisme ancien’, in Bruno Bensana and Oliver 
Feltham (eds), Ecrits autour de la pensée d’Alain Badiou (Paris: L’Harmattan, 
2007), pp. 41–52.
Barker, Jason, Alain Badiou: A Critical Introduction (London: Pluto Press, 
2002).
––, ‘Topography and structure’, Polygraph, 17 (2005), pp. 93–104.
Bataille, Georges, É crits posthumes, 1922–1940. Œuvres complètes, vol. 2 
(Paris: Gallimard, 1970).
––, Guilty, trans. Bruce Boone (Venice, CA: Lapis Press, 1988).
––, L’histoire de l’érotisme, Le surréalisme, Au jour le jour, Conférence 
1951–1953, La souveraineté, Annexes. Œuvres complètes, vol. 8 (Paris: 
Gallimard, 1976).
––, La Somme athéologique I. L’Expérience intérieure, Méthode de médiation, 
Post-scriptum 1953, Le Coupable, l’Alleluiah. Œuvres complètes, vol. 5 
(Paris: Gallimard, 1973).
––, La Somme athéologique II. Sur Nietzsche, Mémorandum, Annexes. Œuvres 
complètes, vol. 6 (Paris: Gallimard, 1973).
––, ‘Un-knowing: laughter and tears’, trans. Annette Michelson, October, 36: 
Georges Bataille: Writings on Laughter, Sacriﬁ ce, Nietzsche, Un-Knowing 
(1986), pp. 89–102.
––, Visions of Excess: Selected Writings, 1927–1939, ed. Allan Stoekl, trans. 
Allan Stoekl with Carl R. Lovitt and Donald M. Leslie Jr (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1985).
Baumbach, Nico, ‘Something else is possible: thinking Badiou on philosophy 
and art’, Polygraph, 17 (2005), pp. 157–73.
Beckett, Samuel, Comment c’est (Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit, 1961).
––, How it is (London: John Calder, 1964).
Bell, Daniel M., Jr, ‘Badiou’s faith and Paul’s Gospel: the politics of indiffer-
ence and the overcoming of capital’, Angelaki, 12: 1 (2007), pp. 97–111.
Bensaïd, Daniel, ‘Alain Badiou et le miracle de l’événement’, in Essai de taupol-
ogie générale (Paris: Fayard, 2001), pp. 143–70.
––, ‘Alain Badiou and the miracle of the event’, in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think 
Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy (London: Continuum, 
2004), pp. 94–105.
Bensaïd, Daniel, ‘L’emblème démocratique’, in Giorgio Agamben et al., 
Démocratie, dans quel état? (Paris: La Fabrique, 2009), pp. 15–26.
Bergen, Véronique, ‘Pensée et être chez Deleuze et Badiou (Badiou lecteur de 
Deleuze)’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: 
L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 437–56.
Berger, Peter L., The Sacred Canopy: Elements of a Sociological Theory of 
Religion (New York: Anchor Books, 1990).
250 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Besana, Bruno, ‘One or several events? The knot between event and subject 
in the work of Alain Badiou and Gilles Deleuze’, Polygraph, 17 (2005), 
pp. 245–66.
––, ‘Quel multiple? Les conditions ontologiques du concept d’événement chez 
Badiou et Deleuze’, in Bruno Besana and Oliver Feltham (eds), Écrits autour 
de la pensée d’Alain Badiou (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2007), pp. 23–40.
Besana, Bruno, and Oliver Feltham (eds), Écrits autour de la pensée d’Alain 
Badiou (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2007).
Blanchot, Maurice, Faux pas (Paris: Gallimard, 1975).
––, Faux Pas, trans. Charlotte Mandell (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 
2001).
––, L’Entretien inﬁ ni (Paris: Gallimard, 1969).
Blanton, Ward, ‘Apocalyptic materiality: return(s) of early Christian motifs in 
Slavoj Žižek’s depiction of the materialist subject’, Journal for Cultural and 
Religious Theory, 6: 1 (2004), pp. 10–27.
Bogue, Ronald, ‘The betrayal of God’, in Mary Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and 
Religion (London: Routledge, 2001), pp. 9–29.
Borgeaud, Philippe, ‘Une rumeur bien entendue. Le retour de(s) Dieu(x)’, 
Critique, LXII: 704–5 (2006), pp. 59–68.
Bosteels, Bruno, Alain Badiou: Une trajectoire polémique (Paris: La Fabrique, 
2009).
––, ‘Badiou without Žižek’, Polygraph, 17 (2005), pp. 221–44.
––, ‘Force of nonlaw: Alain Badiou’s theory of justice’, Cardozo Law Review, 
29: 5 (2008), pp. 1905–26.
––, ‘Logics of antagonism: in the margins of Alain Badiou’s “The Flux and the 
Party” ’, Polygraph, 17 (2005), pp. 93–107.
––, ‘On the subject of the dialectic’, in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think Again: 
Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy (London: Continuum, 2004), 
pp. 150–64.
––, ‘Vérité et forçage: Badiou avec Heidegger et Lacan’, in Charles Ramond 
(ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), 
pp. 259–94.
Boulnois, Olivier, ‘Dieu, raison ou religion?’, Critique, LXII: 704–5 (2006), 
pp. 69–78.
Bradley, Arthur, ‘Thinking the outside: Foucault, Derrida and negative theol-
ogy’, Textual Practice, 16: 1 (2002), pp. 57–74.
Brassier, Ray, Nihil Unbound: Enlightenment and Extinction (Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2007).
––, ‘Nihil Unbound: remarks on subtractive ontology and thinking capital-
ism’, in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of 
Philosophy (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 50–8.
––, ‘Speculative realism: presentation by Ray Brassier’, Collapse III, Speculative 
Realism (Annex to Collapse II) (2007), pp. 308–33.
––, ‘Stellar void or cosmic animal? Badiou and Deleuze on the dice-throw’, Pli, 
10 (2000), pp. 200–16.
 
Bibliography 
251
––, ‘The enigma of realism: on Quentin Meillassoux’s After Finitude’, Collapse 
II (2007), pp. 15–54.
Breger, Claudia, ‘The leader’s two bodies: Slavoj Žižek’s postmodern political 
theology’, Diacritics, 31: 1 (2001), pp. 73–90.
Brown, Nathan, ‘On After Finitude: a response to Peter Hallward’. Retrieved 
from: http://nsrnicek.googlepages.com/Response_to_Hallward_on_Meillass
oux.pdf. Last accessed: March 2010.
Brown, Wendy, ‘Nous sommes tous démocrates, à présent’, in Giorgio 
Agamben et al., Démocratie, dans quel état? (Paris: La Fabrique, 2009), 
pp. 59–76.
Bryant, Levi R., ‘Symptomal knots and evental ruptures: Žižek, Badiou, and 
discerning the indiscernible’, International Journal of Žižek Studies, 1: 2 
(2007). Retrieved from http://www.zizekstudies.org/index.php/ijzs/article/
view/30/89. Last accessed June 2010.
Bryden, Mary (ed.), Deleuze and Religion (London: Routledge, 2001).
Bryden, Mary, ‘Introduction’, in Mary Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion 
(London: Routledge, 2001), pp. 1–6.
––, ‘Nietzsche’s arrow: Deleuze on D. H. Lawrence’s Apocalypse’, in Mary 
Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion (London: Routledge, 2001), pp. 101–14.
Buckner, S. Clark, and Matthew Statler (eds), Styles of Piety: Practicing 
Philosophy After the Death of God, Perspectives in Continental Philosophy, 
ed. John D. Caputo (New York: Fordham University Press, 2006).
Calcagno, Antonio. ‘Jacques Derrida and Alain Badiou’, Philosophy and Social 
Criticism, 30: 7 (2004), pp. 799–815.
Camus, Albert, Lettres à un ami allemand (Paris: Gallimard, 1945).
––, Resistance, Rebellion, and Death, ed. and trans. Justin O’Brien (New York: 
Vintage, 1974).
––, The Myth of Sisyphus, trans. Justin O’Brien (London: Hamish Hamilton, 
1955).
Caputo, John D., ‘Atheism, a/theology, and the postmodern condition’, 
in Kevin Vanhoozer (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Postmodern 
Theology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), pp. 267–83.
––, ‘On the power of the powerless: dialogue with Gianni Vattimo’, in Jeffrey 
W. Robbins (ed.), After the Death of God (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2007), pp. 114–62.
––, ‘Spectral hermeneutics: on the weakness of God and the theology of the 
event’, in Jeffrey W. Robbins (ed.), After the Death of God (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2007), pp. 47–88.
––, The Weakness of God: A Theology of the Event (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 2006).
Caputo, John D., and Gianni Vattimo, After the Death of God (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2007).
Chiesa, Lorenzo, and Alberto Toscano, ‘Agape and the anonymous religion of 
atheism’, Angelaki, 21: 1 (2007), pp. 113–25.
Classen, C. Joachim, ‘Poetry and rhetoric in Lucretius’, Transactions 
252 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
and Proceedings of the American Philological Association, 99 (1968), 
pp. 77–118.
Clay, Diskin, Lucretius and Epicurus (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1983).
Clemens, Justin, ‘Had we but worlds enough, and time, this absolute, phi-
losopher . . .’, Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social 
Philosophy, 2: 1–2 (2006), pp. 277–310.
––, ‘Platonic meditations: the work of Alain Badiou’, Pli, 11: 2 (2001), 
pp. 200–29.
––, The Romanticism of Contemporary Theory: Institution, Aesthetics, 
Nihilism, Studies in European Cultural Transition, gen. eds Martin Stannard 
and Greg Walker (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003).
Clemens, Justin, and Jon Roffe, ‘Philosophy as anti-religion in the work of 
Alain Badiou’, Sophia, 47 (2008), pp. 345–58.
Comte, Auguste, System of Positive Polity, trans. Henry Bridges (Bristol: 
Thoemmes, 2001).
Cousineau, Thomas, ‘The future of an illusion: Melville’s deconstruction of 
Deleuze’s a/theology’, in Mary Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion (London: 
Routledge, 2001), pp. 115–25.
Critchley, Simon, ‘A heroism of the decision, a politics of the event’, London 
Review of Books, 29: 18 (2 September 2007), pp. 33–4.
––, ‘Comment ne pas céder sur son désir (sur l’éthique de Badiou)’, in Charles 
Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), 
pp. 207–34.
––, ‘Demanding approval: on the ethics of Alain Badiou’, Radical Philosophy, 
100 (2000), pp. 16–27.
––, Inﬁ nitely Demanding: Ethics of Commitment, Politics of Resistance 
(London: Verso, 2007).
––, ‘Mystical anarchism’, Critical Horizons, 10: 2 (2009), pp. 272–306.
––, ‘On Alain Badiou’, Theory and Event, 3: 4 (2000). Retrieved from: http:
//muse.jhu.edu/journals/theory_and_event/v003/3.4critchley2.html. 
Last 
accessed: July 2010.
––, ‘Oscar Wilde’s faithless Christianity’, The Guardian, (15 January 2009). 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/belief/2009/
jan/14/religion-wilde. Last accessed: July 2010.
––, Very Little . . . Almost Nothing: Death, Philosophy, Literature (London: 
Routledge, 1997).
Crockett, Clayton, ‘St Paul and the event’, Journal for Cultural and Religious 
Theory, 6: 2 (2005), pp. 84–8.
Crowley, Martin, L’Homme sans: Politiques de la ﬁ nitude (Paris: Lignes, 
2009).
Crownﬁ eld, David, ‘Extraduction’, in Edith Wyschogrod, David Crownﬁ eld 
and Carl A. Raschke (eds), Lacan and Theological Discourse (New York: 
SUNY Press, 1989), pp. 161–9.
Cunningham, Conor, Genealogy of Nihilism: Philosophies of Nothing and the 
 
Bibliography 
253
Difference of Theology, Routledge Radical Orthodoxy, ed. John Milbank, 
Catherine Pickstock and Graham Ward (London: Routledge, 2002).
Dale, Catherine, ‘Knowing one’s enemy: Deleuze, Artaud and the problem of 
judgment’, in Mary Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion (London: Routledge, 
2001), pp. 126–37.
David-Ménard, Monique, ‘Être et existence dans la pensée d’Alain Badiou’, in 
Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 
2002), pp. 21–38.
Davies, Oliver, ‘Thinking difference: a comparative study of Gilles Deleuze, 
Plotinus and Meister Eckhart’, in Mary Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion 
(London: Routledge, 2001), pp. 76–86.
de Kesel, Marc, ‘Truth as formal Catholicism – on Alain Badiou, Saint Paul: 
La Fondation de l’universalisme’, International Journal of Žižek Studies, 
1: 2 (2004). Retrieved from: http://žižekstudies.org/index.php/ijzs/article/
view/25/86. Last accessed: July 2010.
de Vries, Hent, Religion and Violence: Philosophical Perspectives from Kant to 
Derrida (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001).
de Vries, Hent, and Lawrence Eugene Sullivan (eds), Political Theologies: 
Public Religions in a Post-secular World (New York: Fordham University 
Press, 2006).
Deleuze, Gilles, ‘Mathesis, science and philosophy’, Collapse III (2007), 
pp. 141–55.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari, Qu’est-ce que la philosophie? (Paris: 
Éditions de Minuit, 1992).
Depoortere, Frederiek, Badiou and Theology, Philosophy and Theology 
(London: Continuum, 2009).
––, Christ in Postmodern Philosophy: Gianni Vattimo, René Girard, and 
Slavoj Žižek (London: T&T Clark, 2008).
––, The Death of God: An Investigation into the History of the Western 
Concept of God (London: Continuum, 2008).
Deranty, Jean-Philippe, ‘Rancière and contemporary political ontology’, 
Theory And Event, 6: 4 (2003). Retrieved from: http://muse.jhu.edu/ 
journals/theory_and_event/v006/6.4deranty.html. Last accessed: July 2010.
Derrida, Jacques, De la Grammatologie (Paris: É ditions de Minuit, 1967).
––, Force de loi. Le ‘Fondement mystique de l’autorité’ (Paris: Galilée, 
1994).
––, ‘Force of Law: the mystical foundation of authority’, in Drucilla Cornell, 
Michel Rosenfeld and David Carlson (eds), Deconstruction and the 
Possibility of Justice (New York: Routledge, 1992), pp. 3–67.
––, ‘I have a taste for the secret’, in Jaques Derrida and Maurizio Ferraris, A 
Taste for the Secret, ed. Giacomo Donis and David Webb, trans. Giacomo 
Donis (Malden, MA: Polity, 2001), pp. 3–18.
––, Le Toucher, Jean-Luc Nancy (Paris: Galilée, 2000).
––, Negotiations: Interventions and Interviews, 1971–2001, ed. and trans. 
Elizabeth Rottenberg (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2002).
254 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
––, Of Grammatology, trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1997).
––, On Touching – Jean-Luc Nancy, trans. Christine Irizarry (Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 2005).
Derrida, Jacques, and Jean-Luc Nancy. ‘Responsabilité – du sens à venir’, in 
François Guibal and Jean-Clet Martin (eds), Sens en tout sens: Autour des 
travaux de Jean-Luc Nancy (Paris: Galilée, 2004), pp. 165–200.
Desanti, Jean-Toussaint, ‘Some remarks on the intrinsic ontology of Alain 
Badiou’, in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think Again: Alain Badiou and the Future 
of Philosophy (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 50–8.
Descartes, René, Œuvres de Descartes, vol. 1, ed. Charles Adam and Paul 
Tannery (Paris: Vrin, 1974).
––, The Philosophical Writings of Descartes: vol. 3, The Correspondence, ed. 
John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, Dugald Murdoch and Anthony Kenny 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).
Descombes, Vincent, Modern French Philosophy, ed. and trans. L. Scott-Fox 
and J. M. Harding (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980).
Dews, Peter (ed.), The Limits of Disenchantment: Essays on Contemporary 
European Philosophy (London: Verso, 1995).
––, ‘States of grace: the excess of the demand in Badiou’s ethics of truths’, 
in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of 
Philosophy (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 106–19.
––, ‘Uncategorical imperatives: Adorno, Badiou and the ethical turn’, Radical 
Philosophy, 111 (2002), pp. 33–7.
Dewsbury, J. D., ‘Unthinking subjects: Alain Badiou and the event of thought 
in thinking politics’, Transactions – Institute of British Geographers, 32: 4 
(2007), pp. 443–59.
Diderot, Denis, Œuvres complètes: Édition critique et annotée, vol. 7, ed. Jane 
Marsh Dieckmann (Paris: Hermann, 1976).
Douzinas, Costas (ed.), Adieu Derrida (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007).
Drozdek, Adam, ‘Beyond inﬁ nity: Augustine and Cantor’, Laval Théologique 
et Philosophique, 51: 1 (1995), pp. 127–40.
Düttmann, Alexander García, ‘What remains of ﬁ delity after serious thought’, 
in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of 
Philosophy (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 202–7.
Dufour, Dany-Robert, On achève bien les hommes: De quelques consequences 
actuelles et futures de la mort de Dieu (Paris: Éditions Denoël, 2005).
During, Élie, ‘How much truth can art bear? On Badiou’s “Inaesthetics” ’, 
Polygraph, 17 (2005), pp. 143–55.
––, ‘Le ciel, Dieu, le divin: jeux interdits’, Critique, LXII: 704–5 (2006), 
pp. 167–78.
Eagleton, Terry, ‘Ideology and its vicissitudes in Western Marxism’, in Slavoj 
Žižek (ed.), Mapping Ideology (London: Verso, 1994), pp. 179–226.
––, Reason, Faith and Revolution: Reﬂ ections on the God Debate (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009).
 
Bibliography 
255
Ebguy, Jacques-David, ‘Le travail de la vérité, la vérité au travail: usages de la 
littérature chez Alain Badiou et Jacques Rancière’, Fabula LHT (Littérature, 
Histoire, Théorie) (2006). Retrieved from: http://www.fabula.org/lht/1/
Ebguy.html. Last accessed: July 2010.
Eliot, Thomas Stearns, ‘Leçon de Valéry’, Cahiers du Sud (1946), pp. 74–81.
Esposito, Roberto, ‘Chair et corps dans la déconstruction du christianisme’, in 
François Guibal and Jean-Clet Martin (eds), Sens en tout sens: Autour des 
travaux de Jean-Luc Nancy (Paris: Galilée, 2004), pp. 153–64.
Feltham, Oliver, Alain Badiou, Live Theory (London: Continuum, 2008).
––, ‘And being and event and . . .: philosophy and its nominations’, Polygraph, 
17 (2005), pp. 27–40.
––, ‘Et l’être et l’événement et: la philosophie et ses nominations’, in Besana, 
Bruno, and Oliver Feltham (eds), Écrits autour de la pensée d’Alain Badiou 
(Paris: L’Harmattan, 2007), pp. 107–24.
Feuerbach, Ludwig, The Essence of Christianity, trans. George Eliot (New 
York: C. Blanchard, 1855).
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, Introductions to the Wissenschaftslehre and Other 
Writings, 1797–1800. ed. and trans. Daniel Breazeale (Cambridge: Hackett, 
1994).
––, Werke, vol. 1 (Berlin: W. de Gruyter, 1971).
Ford, Russell, ‘Book review: Ian James, The Fragmentary Demand: An 
Introduction to the Philosophy of Jean-Luc Nancy’, Continental Philosophy 
Review, 40 (2007), pp. 107–11.
Fóti, Véronique M., Vision’s Invisibles: Philosophical Explorations (New 
York: SUNY Press, 2003).
Foucault, Michel, ‘Des espaces autres’ (1984). Retrieved from: http://foucault.
info/documents/heteroTopia/foucault.heteroTopia.fr.html. Last accessed: 
June 2010.
––, Les Mots et les choses: Une Archéologie des sciences humaines (Paris: 
Gallimard, 1990).
––, ‘Of other spaces’ (1984). Retrieved from: http://www.foucault.info/ 
documents/heteroTopia/foucault.heteroTopia.en.html. Last accessed: July 
2010.
––, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences, trans. Alan 
Sheridan (London: Tavistock, 1970).
Fraser, Giles, Redeeming Nietzsche: On the Piety of Unbelief (London: 
Routledge, 2002).
Fynsk, Christopher, ‘Foreword’ In Jean-Luc Nancy (ed.), Inoperative 
Community (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1991), pp. vii–
xxxv.
Gall, Robert S., ‘Of/from theology and deconstruction’, Journal of the 
American Academy of Religion, 58: 3 (1990), pp. 413–37.
García-Düttmann, Alexander, ‘L’évidence même’, in François Guibal and Jean-
Clet Martin (eds), Sens en tout sens: Autour des travaux de Jean-Luc Nancy 
(Paris: Galilée, 2004), pp. 143–52.
256 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Gauchet, Marcel, Le Désenchantement du monde: Une Histoire politique de la 
religion, Bibliothèque des Sciences Humaines (Paris: Gallimard, 1985).
––, The Disenchantment of the World: A Political History of Religion, trans. 
Oscar Burge (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999).
Gaudemar, Martine de, ‘Dieu le père ? (Histoire de la philosophie et psychana-
lyse)’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: 
L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 235–58.
Gaynesford, Maximilian de, ‘Bodily organs and organisation’, in Mary Bryden 
(ed.), Deleuze and Religion (London: Routledge, 2001), pp. 87–98.
Geroulanos, Stefanos, An Atheism that is not Humanist Emerges in French 
Thought (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2010).
Gibson, Andrew, ‘Badiou and Beckett: actual inﬁ nity, event, remainder’, 
Polygraph, 17 (2005), pp. 175–203.
––, ‘Badiou, Beckett et le postmodernisme’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain 
Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 421–36.
––, Beckett and Badiou: The Pathos of Intermittency (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2006).
Gibson, A., ‘The rarity of the event: on Alain Badiou’, New Formations (2004), 
pp. 136–42.
Gillespie, Sam, The Mathematics of Novelty: Badiou’s Minimalist Metaphysics 
(Melbourne: Re.Press, 2008).
Gillespie, Stuart, and Philip Hardie (eds), The Cambridge Companion to 
Lucretius (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007).
Gillespie, Stuart, and Philip Hardie, ‘Introduction’, in Gillespie, Stuart, and 
Philip Hardie (eds), The Cambridge Companion to Lucretius (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2007), pp. 1–15.
Glendenning, Simon, In the Name of Phenomenology (Oxford: Routledge, 
2007).
Glucksmann, André, La troisième mort de Dieu (Paris: NiL Éditions, 2000).
Goddard, Michael, ‘The scattering of time crystals: Deleuze, mysticism and 
cinema’, in Mary Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion (London: Routledge, 
2001), pp. 53–64.
Goldenberg, Mario, A Conversation with Alain Badiou. Lacanian Ink, 23 
(2004), pp. 100–1.
Goodchild, Philip, Capitalism and Religion: The Price of Piety (London: 
Routledge, 2002).
––, ‘Why is philosophy so compromised with God?’, in Mary Bryden (ed.), 
Deleuze and Religion (London: Routledge, 2001), pp. 156–66.
Grant, Iain Hamilton, ‘Prospects for post-Copernican dogmatism: the antino-
mies of transcendental naturalism’, Collapse V (2009), pp. 413–51.
Grenz, Stanley James, Renewing the Center: Evangelical Theology in a Post-
Theological Era (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2000).
Guibal, François, ‘Ouverture’, in François Guibal and Jean-Clet Martin (eds), 
Sens en tout sens: Autour des travaux de Jean-Luc Nancy (Paris: Galilée, 
2004), pp. 9–12.
 
Bibliography 
257
––, ‘Sans retour et sans recours’, in François Guibal and Jean-Clet Martin (eds), 
Sens en tout sens: Autour des travaux de Jean-Luc Nancy (Paris: Galilée, 
2004), pp. 59–104.
Guibal, François, and Jean-Clet Martin (eds), Sens en tout sens: Autour des 
travaux de Jean-Luc Nancy (Paris: Galilée, 2004).
Hägglund, Martin, Radical Atheism: Derrida and the Time of Life (Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 2008).
––, ‘The challenge of radical atheism: a response’, New Centennial Review, 9: 
1 (2009), pp. 227–52.
Hair, Lindsey, ‘ “I Love (U)”: Badiou on love, logic, and truth’, Polygraph, 17 
(2005), pp. 127–42.
Hallett, Michael, Cantorian Set Theory and Limitation of Size, Oxford Logic 
Guides: 10 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984).
Hallward, Peter, ‘Alain Badiou et la déliaison absolue’, in Charles Ramond 
(ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002),  pp. 295–
312.
––, ‘Anything is possible: review essay on Quentin Meillassoux, After Finitude’, 
Radical Philosophy, 52 (2008), pp. 51–7.
––, Badiou: A Subject to Truth (Minneapolis and London: University of 
Minnesota Press, 2003).
––, ‘Depending on inconsistency: Badiou’s answer to the “Guiding Question of 
All Contemporary Philosophy” ’, Polygraph, 17 (2005), pp. 11–25.
––, ‘Generic sovereignty: the philosophy of Alain Badiou – Badiou bibliogra-
phy’, Angelaki, 3: 3 (1998), pp. 87–112.
––, ‘Introduction: Consequences of abstraction’, in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think 
Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy (London: Continuum, 
2004), pp. 1–20.
––, Out of This World: Deleuze and the Philosophy of Creation (London: 
Verso, 2006).
Hallward, Peter (ed.), Think Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy 
(London: Continuum, 2004).
––, ‘Translator’s introduction’, in Alain Badiou, Ethics: An Essay on the 
Understanding of Evil (London: Verso, 2001), pp. vii–xlvii.
Hamacher, Werner, ‘Ou, séance, touche de Nancy, ici (3)’, in François Guibal 
and Jean-Clet Martin (eds), Sens en tout sens: Autour des travaux de Jean-
Luc Nancy (Paris: Galilée, 2004), pp. 119–42.
Hamilton Grant, Iain, ‘Speculative realism: presentation by Iain Hamilton 
Grant’, Collapse III, Speculative Realism (Annex to Collapse II) (2007), 
pp. 334–66.
––, ‘Psychoanalysis and the post-political: an interview with Slavoj Žižek’, 
New Literary History, 32 (2001), pp. 1–21.
Hantaï, Simon, Jacques Derrida and Jean-Luc Nancy, La Connaissance des textes, 
lecture d’un manuscrit illisible (Correspondances) (Paris: Galilée, 2001).
Harman, Graham, ‘On the horror of phenomenology: Lovecraft and Husserl’, 
Collapse IV (2008), pp. 333–64.
258 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
––, ‘On vicarious causation’, Collapse II (2007), pp. 171–206.
––, ‘Quentin Meillassoux: a new French philosopher’, Philosophy Today, 51 
(2007), pp. 104–17.
––, ‘Speculative realism: presentation by Graham Harman’, Collapse III, 
Speculative Realism (Annex to Collapse II) (2007), pp. 367–407.
Harpham, Geoffrey Galt, ‘Doing the impossible: Slavoj Žižek and the end of 
knowledge’, Critical Inquiry, 29: 3 (2003), pp. 453–85.
Hartley, Anthony (ed.), The Penguin Book of French Verse: 4, The Twentieth 
Century (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1959).
Hebblethwaite, Brian, Philosophical Theology and Christian Doctrine, 
Exploring the Philosophy of Religion (Malden, MA, and Oxford: Blackwell, 
2005).
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, Hegel’s Logic, trans. William Wallace 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975).
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, and J. Carrère, Correspondance, vol. 1 (Paris: 
Gallimard, 1962).
Heidegger, Martin, Being and Time, trans. John Macquarrie and Edward 
Robinson (Oxford: Blackwell, 1973).
––, Contributions to Philosophy (From Enowning), trans. Parvis Emad and 
Kenneth Maly (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999).
––, ‘Letter on humanism’, in Basic Writings: From Being and Time (1927) to 
The Task of Thinking (1964), ed. David Farrell Krell (London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, 1978), pp. 189–242.
––, The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays, ed. and trans. 
William Lovitt (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1977).
Heine, Heinrich, The Romantic School and Other Essays, ed. and trans. Jost 
Hermand and Robert C. Holub (London: Continuum, 1985).
Henry, Michel, L’Essence de la manifestation (Paris: Presses Universitaires de 
France, 1963).
Herbrechter, Stefan, ‘Badiou, Derrida, and The Matrix: cultural criticism 
between objectless subjects and subjectless objects’, Polygraph, 17 (2005), 
pp. 205–20.
Hewlett, Nick, ‘Engagement and transcendence: the militant philosophy of 
Alain Badiou’, Modern and Contemporary France, 12: 3 (2004), pp. 335–52.
Holbo, John, ‘Critical discussion: on Žižek and Trilling’, Philosophy and 
Literature, 28 (2004), pp. 430–40.
Hölderlin, Friedrich, Selected Poems and Fragments, trans. Michael Hamburger, 
ed. Jeremy Adler (London: Penguin, 1998).
Hollier, Denis, and Hilari Allred, ‘The dualist materialism of Georges Bataille’, 
Yale French Studies, 78: On Bataille (1990), pp. 124–39.
Hollywood, Amy, ‘ “Beautiful as a Wasp”: Angela of Foligno and Georges 
Bataille’, Harvard Theological Review, 92: 2 (1999), pp. 219–36.
Hume, David, A Treatise of Human Nature, ed. Ernest Campbell Mossner 
(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1985).
Husserl, Edmund, Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a 
 
Bibliography 
259
Phenomenological Philosophy, 1, General Introduction to a Pure 
Phenomenology, trans. F. Kersten (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1982).
––, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology: An 
Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy, ed., trans. and with an intro-
duction by David Carr (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1970).
Hutchens, Benjamin C., Jean-Luc Nancy and the Future of Philosophy 
(Chesham: Acumen, 2005).
Imbert, Claude, ‘Où ﬁ nit le platonisme?’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain 
Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 357–74.
Jackson, Ken, ‘The great temptation of “religion”: why Badiou has been so 
important to Žižek’, International Journal of Žižek Studies, 1: 2 (2007). 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://zizekstudies.org/index.php/ijzs/article/view/29/76. 
Last accessed: January 2010.
James, Ian, The Fragmentary Demand: An Introduction to the Philosophy of 
Jean-Luc Nancy (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2006).
––, ‘Incarnation and inﬁ nity’, in Ignaas Devis Alena Alexandrova, Laurens 
ten Kate and Aukje van Rooden (eds), Retreating Religion: Deconstructing 
Christianity with Jean-Luc Nancy (New York: Fordham University Press, 
2010).
Jameson, Fredric, ‘Postmodernism and the market’, in Slavoj Žižek (ed.), 
Mapping Ideology (London: Verso, 1994), pp. 278–95.
Jané, Ignacio, ‘The role of the absolute inﬁ nite in Cantor’s conception of set’, 
Erkenntnis, 42 (1995), pp. 375–402.
Janicaud, Dominique, Le Tournant théologique de la phénoménologie 
française, ed. Jean-Pierre Cometti, Tiré à Part (Combas: Éditions de l’Eclat, 
1991).
––, Phenomenology and the ‘Theological Turn’: The French Debate New 
York: Fordham University Press, 2000).
Jenkins, F., ‘Humorous commitments and non-violent politics: a response to 
Simon Critchley’s Inﬁ nitely Demanding’, Critical Horizons, 10: 2 (2009), 
pp. 257–71.
Jennings, Theodore W., Reading Derrida/Thinking Paul, Cultural Memory in 
the Present , ed. Mieke Bal and Hent de Vries (Stanford: Stanford University 
Press, 2006).
Joeri Schrijvers, ‘What comes after Christianity? Jean-Luc Nancy’s deconstruc-
tion of Christianity’, Research in Phenomenology, 39: 2 (2009), pp. 266–91.
Johnson, Alan, ‘The reckless mind of Slavoj Žižek’, Dissent, 56: 4 (2009), 
pp. 122–7.
Johnston, Adrian, ‘From the spectacular act to the vanishing act: Badiou, 
Žižek, and the politics of Lacanian theory’, International Journal of Žižek 
Studies, 1 (2007), pp. 1–40. Retrieved from: http://www.zizekstudies.org/
index.php/ijzs/article/viewFile/1/1. Last accessed: January 2010.
––, ‘Jason Barker, Alain Badiou: A Critical Introduction’, Theory And Event, 
6: 2 (2002).
––, ‘There is Truth, and then there are truths – or, Slavoj Žižek as a reader of 
260 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Alain Badiou’, International Journal of Žižek Studies, 1 (2007), pp. 141–85. 
Retrieved from: www.zizekstudies.org/index.php/ijzs/article/viewFile/10/26. 
Last accessed: January 2010.
Joubert, Claire, ‘Badiou and the ethics of prose: revaluing Beckett’ (Paris: 
Polart – Université Paris 8, 2004).
Kant, Immanuel, Critique of Pure Reason, ed. and trans. Paul Guyer and 
Allen W. Wood, The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
––, Critique of the Power of Judgment, trans. Paul Guyer and Eric Matthews, 
ed. Paul Guyer (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
––, Lectures on Ethics, trans. Louis Inﬁ eld (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1980).
Kay, Sarah, Žižek: A Critical Introduction, Key Contemporary Thinkers 
(Cambridge: Polity, 2003).
Kearney, Richard, Anatheism: Returning to God after God (New York 
Columbia University Press, 2010).
Kendall, Stuart, ‘Unlimited assemblage: Editor’s introduction’, in Georges 
Bataille, The Unﬁ nished System of Nonknowledge (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 2001), pp. xi–xliv.
Kenney, E. J., ‘Lucretian texture: style, metre and rhetoric in De Rerum Natura’, 
in Stuart Gillespie and Philip Hardie (eds), The Cambridge Companion to 
Lucretius (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), pp. 92–110.
Kenny, Anthony, The God of the Philosophers (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1979).
Kerszberg, Pierre, Critique and Totality (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1997).
Kervégan, Jean-François, ‘Un hégélianisme sans profondeur’, in François 
Guibal and Jean-Clet Martin (eds), Sens en tout sens: Autour des travaux de 
Jean-Luc Nancy (Paris: Galilée, 2004), pp. 25–38.
Keynes, John Maynard, The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, vol. 
9 (London: Cambridge University Press for the Royal Economic Society, 
1972).
Kierkegaard, Søren, Concluding Unscientiﬁ c Postscript to Philosophical 
Fragments, trans. Howard Vincent Hong and Edna Hatlestad Hong 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992).
Kirsch, Adam, ‘The deadly jester’, The New Republic (2008). Retrieved 
from: http://www.tnr.com/article/books/the-deadly-jester. Last accessed: 
December 2009.
Kosky, Jeffrey, ‘Georges Bataille’s Religion without Religion: a review of 
the possibilities opened by the publication of The Unﬁ nished System of 
Nonknowledge’, Journal of Religion, 84: 1 (2004), pp. 78–87.
Kotsko, Adam, Žižek and Theology, Philosophy and Theology (London: T&T 
Clark, 2008).
––, ‘Žižek’s ﬂ awed “magnum opus” ’, Journal for Cultural and Religious 
Theory, 8:1 (2006), pp. 106–13.
Koyré, Alexandre, and Raïssa Tarr, Du Monde clos à l’univers inﬁ ni, Collection 
Tel 129 (Paris: Gallimard, 1973).
 
Bibliography 
261
Lacan, Jacques, ‘A theoretical introduction to the functions of psychoanalysis 
in criminology’, trans. M. Bracher, R. Grigg and R. Samuels, JPCS: Journal 
for the Psychoanalysis of Culture and Society, 1: 2 (1996), pp. 13–25.
––, Écrits (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1966).
––, Le Séminaire, livre XVII, L’Envers de la psychanalyse, ed. Jacques-Alain 
Miller (Paris: Seuil, 1991).
––, Le Triomphe de la religion précédé de Discours aux Catholiques, ed. 
Jacques-Alain Miller and Judith Miller, Camp Freudien (Paris: Éditions du 
Seuil, 2005).
––, The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis, ed. Jacques-Alain 
Miller, trans. A Sheridan (New York: Norton, 1981).
Laclau, Ernesto, ‘An ethics of militant engagement’, in Peter Hallward 
(ed.), Think Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy (London: 
Continuum, 2004), pp. 120–37.
Lacoue-Labarthe, Philippe, ‘Poésie, philosophie, politique’, in Jacques Rancière, 
La Politique des Poètes (Paris: Albin Michel, 1992), pp. 39–63.
––, Untitled discussion of Alain Badiou’s L’Être et l’événement, Cahiers du 
Collège International de Philosophie, 8 (1989), pp. 201–10.
Lacoue-Labarthe, Philippe, and Jean-Luc Nancy, L’Absolu littéraire: Théorie 
de la littéraire du romantisme allemand (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1978).
Lacoue-Labarthe, Philippe, and Jean-Luc Nancy, Le Mythe Nazi (Paris: 
Éditions de l’Aube, 1991).
Lacoue-Labarthe, Philippe, and Jean-Luc Nancy, ‘Le « retrait » du politique’, 
in Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe, Jean-Luc Nancy et al., Le Retrait du politique 
(Paris: Galilée, 1983), pp. 183–200.
Lacoue-Labarthe, Philippe, and Jean-Luc Nancy, Le Titre de la lettre: Une 
Lecture de Lacan (Paris: Galilée, 1990).
Lacoue-Labarthe, Philippe, and Jean-Luc Nancy, Retreating the Political, ed. 
Simon Sparks (London: Routledge, 1997).
Lacoue-Labarthe, Philippe, and Jean-Luc Nancy, The Literary Absolute: The 
Theory of Literature in German Romanticism, trans. Philip Barnard and 
Cheryl Lester (Albany, NY: SUNY, 1988).
Laffoucrière, Odette, Le Destin de la pensée et ‘la mort de Dieu’ selon 
Heidegger, Phaenomenologica (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1968).
Lalande, André, Vocabulaire technique et critique de la philosophie (Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France, 1956).
Landes, Donald A., ‘Le Toucher and the corpus of tact: exploring touch and 
technicity with Jacques Derrida and Jean-Luc Nancy’, L’Esprit Créateur, 47: 
3 (2007), pp. 80–92.
Laruelle, François, ‘La Décision philosophique’, Cahiers du Collège 
International de Philosophie, 8 (1989), [loose inserted leaf].
Lavaud, Claudie, ‘Badiou lecteur de Saint Paul’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), 
Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 375–90.
Lawlor, Leonard, The Implications of Immanence: Toward a New Concept of 
Life (New York: Fordham University Press, 2006).
262 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Lazarus, Sylvian, ‘La politique entre singularité et multiplicité’, in Charles 
Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), 
pp. 191–206.
Lecercle, Jean-Jacques, Badiou and Deleuze Read Literature (Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 2010).
Lecercle, Jean-Jacques, ‘Badiou’s poetics’, in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think 
Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy (London: Continuum, 
2004), pp. 218–31.
––, ‘Cantor, Lacan, Mao, Beckett, même combat’, Radical Philosophy, 93 
(1999), pp. 6–13.
Lennon, Thomas M., ‘Theology and the God of the philosophers’, in The 
Cambridge Companion to Early Modern Philosophy, ed. Donald Rutherford 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), pp. 274–98.
Lévinas, Emmanuel, De Dieu qui vient a l’idée (Paris: J. Vrin, 1982).
––, Of God who Comes to Mind, trans. Bettina Bergo (Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, 1998).
––, Sur Maurice Blanchot (Paris: Fata Morgana, 1975).
––, Totalité et inﬁ ni: Essai sur l’extériorité (La Haye: M. Nijhoff, 1961).
––, Totality and Inﬁ nity: An Essay on Exteriority, trans. Alphonso Lingis 
(Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, 1969).
Locke, John, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. Pauline 
Phemister (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008).
Lyotard, Jean-François, Untitled discussion of Alain Badiou’s L’Être et 
l’événement, Cahiers du Collège International de Philosophie, 8 (1989), 
pp. 227–46.
Macherey, Pierre, ‘Le Mallarmé d’Alain Badiou’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), 
Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 397–406.
Mackenzie Jr., Louis A., ‘To the brink: the dialectic of anxiety in the Pensées’, 
Yale French Studies, 66, The Anxiety of Anticipation (1984), pp. 57–66.
Maddy, Penelope, ‘Believing the axioms’, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 53: 2 
(1988), pp. 480–511.
Magnard, Pierre, Le Dieu des philosophes (Paris: Éditions de la Table Ronde, 
2006).
Malabou, Catherine, ‘Pierre aime les horranges’, in François Guibal and Jean-
Clet Martin (eds), Sens en tout sens: Autour des travaux de Jean-Luc Nancy 
(Paris: Galilée, 2004), pp. 39–58.
Maniglier, P., and D. Rabouin, ‘A quoi bon l’ontologie? Les mondes 
selon Badiou Alain Badiou, Logiques des mondes’, Critique, 63 (2007), 
pp. 279–94.
Manoussakis, John Panteleimon, God after Metaphysics (Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 2007).
Marchant, Oliver, ‘Nothing but a truth: Alain Badiou’s ‘Philosophy of Politics’ 
and the left Heideggerians’, Polygraph, 17 (2005), pp. 105–25.
––, Post-Foundational Political Thought: Political Difference in Nancy, Lefort, 
Badiou and Laclau (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2007).
 
Bibliography 
263
Marion, Jean-Luc, Being Given: Toward a Phenomenology of Givenness, 
trans. Jeffrey L. Kosky (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2002).
––, ‘De la « mort de Dieu » aux noms divins: l’itinéraire théologique de la méta-
physique’, Laval théologique et philosophique, 41: 1 (1985), pp. 25–41.
––, Dieu sans l’être (Paris: Fayard, 1982).
––, Étant donné: Essai d’une phénoménologie de la donation (Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1998).
––, God without Being, trans. Thomas A. Carlson (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1995).
––, L’Idole et la distance: Cinq études (Paris: B. Grasset, 1977).
––, Reduction and Givenness: Investigations of Husserl, Heidegger, and 
Phenomenology, trans. Thomas A. Carlson (Evanston: Northwestern 
University Press, 1998).
––, Réduction et donation (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1989).
––, The Idol and Distance: Five Studies, trans. Thomas A. Carlson (New York: 
Fordham University Press, 2001).
––, Constellation de la philosophie (Paris: Éditions Kimé, 2007).
Martin, Jean-Clet, ‘Le murmure des pierres’, in François Guibal and Jean-Clet 
Martin, Sens en tout sens: Autour des travaux de Jean-Luc Nancy (Paris: 
Galilée, 2004), pp. 105–18.
Martin, Stewart, ‘Cul de sac, review of Jacques Rancière, The Politics of 
Aesthetics and Alain Badiou, Handbook of Inaesthetics’, Radical Philosophy, 
131 (2005), pp. 39–44.
May, Todd, ‘Badiou and Deleuze on the one and the many’, in Peter Hallward 
(ed.), Think Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy (London: 
Continuum, 2004), pp. 67–76.
––,Reconsidering Difference: Nancy, Derrida, Lévinas, and Deleuze (University 
Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1997).
Meillassoux, Quentin, After Finitude: An Essay on the Necessity of Contingency, 
ed. and trans. Ray Brassier (London: Continuum, 2008).
––, Après la ﬁ nitude (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 2006).
––, ‘Contingence et absolutisation de l’un’, Métaphysique, ontologie,  hénologie, 
Université de Paris I (2008).
––, ‘Deuil à venir, dieu à venir’, Critique, LXII: 704–5 (2006), pp. 105–15.
––, ‘Histoire et événement chez Alain Badiou’, Marx au XXIe siècle: L’Esprit 
& la lettre, Université de Paris I (2 February 2008). Retrieved from: 
http://www.marxau21.fr/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id
=83:histoire-et-evenement-chez-alain-badiou&catid=39:badiou-alain&Item
id=62. Last accessed February 2010.
––, ‘L’Inexistence divine: Essai sur le dieu virtuel’, thèse de doctorat, Paris I 
(1997).
––, ‘Métaphysique et ﬁ ction des mondes hors-science’, Le Mois de la science-
ﬁ ction de l’ENS, ENS Paris (November 2006).
––, ‘Nouveauté et événement’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser 
le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 39–64.
264 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
––, ‘Potentiality and virtuality’, Collapse II (2007), pp. 55–82.
––, ‘Spectral dilemma’, Collapse IV (2008), pp. 261–75.
––, ‘Speculative realism: presentation by Quentin Meillassoux’, Collapse III, 
Speculative Realism (Annex to Collapse II) (2007), pp. 408–49.
––, ‘Subtraction and contraction: Deleuze’s remarks on Matter and Memory’, 
Collapse III (2007), pp. 63–107.
––, ‘Temps et surgissement ex nihilo’, Colloque: Autour de ‘Logiques des 
mondes’, ENS Paris (November 2006).
––, ‘Time without becoming’, CRMEP Research Seminar, Middlesex University, 
London (8 May 2008).
Melzer, Sara E., ‘Codes of space in the Pensées’, French Review, 51: 6 (1978), 
pp. 816–23.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, Le Primat de la perception et ses conséquences 
philosophiques: Précédé de Projet de travail sur la nature de la perception 
(1933); et La nature de la perception (1934) (Grenoble: Cynara, 1989).
––, Le Visible et l’invisible. Suivi de Notes de travail (Paris: Gallimard, 1964).
––, Signs, trans. Richard C. McCleary (Evanston: Northwestern University 
Press, 1964).
––, The Primacy of Perception, and other Essays on Phenomenological 
Psychology, the Philosophy of Art, History and Politics, ed. James M. Edie 
(Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1964).
––, The Visible and the Invisible: Followed by Working Notes, ed. Claude Lefort, 
rans. Alphonso Lingis (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1968).
Michal, Thomas, ‘Book review: Opposed to blurring on every level’, 
International Journal of Baudrillard Studies, 3: 1 (January 2006). Retrieved 
from: http://www.ubishops.ca/baudrillardstudies/vol3_1/mical.htm. Last 
accessed: July 2010.
Michel, Andreas, ‘Differentiation vs. disenchantment: the persistence of 
modernity from Max Weber to Jean-Francois Lyotard’, German Studies 
Review, 20: 3 (1997), pp. 343–70.
Michon, Cyrille, ‘Il nous faut bien un concept de Dieu’, Critique, LXII: 704–5 
(2006), pp. 92–104.
Milbank, John, ‘Only theology saves metaphysics: on the modalities of terror’, 
in Connor Cunningham and P. M. Candler Jr (eds), Belief and Metaphysics 
(London: SCM Press, 2007), pp. 452–99.
––, ‘The shares of being or gift, relation and participation: an essay on the met-
aphysics of Emmanuel Lévinas and Alain Badiou’. Retrieved from: http://the
ologyphilosophycentre.co.uk/papers/Milbank_Metaphysics-LevinasBadiou.
pdf. Last accessed January 2010.
Miller, Adam, ‘An interview with Alain Badiou: “Universal Truths and the 
Question of Religion” ’, Journal of Philosophy and Scripture, 3: 1 (2005). 
Retrieved from: http://www.philosophyandscripture.org/Issue3-1/Badiou/
Badiou.html. Last accessed: January 2010.
––, Badiou, Marion and St Paul: Immanent Grace, Continuum Studies in 
Continental Philosophy (London: Continuum, 2008).
 
Bibliography 
265
Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat, baron de, The Persian Letters, ed. and 
trans. J. Robert Loy (New York: Meridian Books, 1961).
Moreau, Pierre-François, ‘Alain Badiou lecteur de Spinoza’, in Charles 
Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), 
pp. 391–6.
Mount, B. Madison, ‘The Cantorian revolution: Alain Badiou on the  philosophy 
of set theory’, Polygraph, 17 (2005), pp. 41–91.
Mullarkey, John, Post-Continental Philosophy, Transversals , ed. Keith Ansell-
Pearson (London: Continuum, 2006).
Nancy, Jean-Luc, A Finite Thinking, ed. Simon Sparks (Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, 2003).
––, A l’Écoute (Paris: Galilée, 2002).
––, À plus d’un titre, Sur un portrait de Valerio Adami (Paris: Galilée, 2007).
––, ‘Answering for sense’, trans. Jean-Christophe Cloutier, in James J. Bono, 
Tim Dean and Ewa Płonowska Ziarek (eds), A Time for the Humanities: 
Futurity and the Limits of Autonomy (New York: Fordham University Press, 
2008), pp. 84–93.
––, ‘Ascoltando’, in Peter Szendy (ed.), Écoute: Une Histoire de nos oreilles 
(Paris: Minuit, 2001), pp. 7–12.
––, Au Fond des images (Paris: Galilée, 2003).
––, Being Singular Plural, trans. Robert D. Richardson and Anne E. O’Byrne 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2000).
––, ‘Between story and truth’, Little Magazine (2001). Retrieved from: http://
www.littlemag.com/jul-aug01/nancy.html. Last accessed: July 2010.
––, ‘Chromatic atheology’, Journal of Visual Culture, 4: 1 (2005), pp. 123–8.
––, Chroniques philosophiques (Paris: Éditions Galilée, 2004).
––, ‘Church, State, resistance’, Journal of Law and Society, 34: 1 (1997), 
pp. 3–13.
––, ‘Conloquium’, in Roberto Esposito, Communitas: Origine et destin de la 
communauté (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2000), pp. 3–10.
––, Corpus (Paris: Seuil, 1992).
––, Corpus, ed. and trans. Richard A. Rand (New York: Fordham University 
Press, 2008).
––, ‘Corpus’, in J. F. MacCannell and L. Zakarin (eds), Thinking Bodies 
(Irvine; CA: Stanford University Press, 1990), pp. 17–31.
––, ‘Démocratie ﬁ nie et inﬁ nie’, in Giorgio Agamben et al., Démocratie, dans 
quel état? (Paris: La Fabrique, 2009), pp. 77–96.
––, Des Lieux divins: Suivi de Calcul du poè te (Mauvezin: Trans-Europ-
Repress, 1987).
––, ‘Dies irae’, in La Faculté de juger (Paris: Minuit, 1985), pp. 9–54.
––, Dis-Enclosure: The Deconstruction of Christianity, trans. Bettina Bergo, 
Gabriel Malenfant and Michael B. Smith (New York: Fordham University 
Press, 2008).
––, Ego sum, La Philosophie en Effet (Paris: Flammarion, 1979).
––, Être singulier pluriel, La Philosophie en Effet (Paris: Galilée, 1996).
266 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
––, Hegel: L’inquiétude du négatif (Paris: Hachette, 1997).
––, Hegel: The Restlessness of the Negative, trans. Jason Smith and Steven 
Miller (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2002).
––, ‘Identité et tremblement’, in Hypnoses (Paris: Galilée, 1984), pp. 14–47.
––, Juste impossible: Petite conférence sur le juste et l’injuste (Paris: Bayard, 
2007).
––, L’‘il y a’ du rapport sexuel, Incises (Paris: Galilée, 2001).
––, L’Adoration, Déconstruction du christianisme 2 (Paris: Galilée, 2010).
––, ‘L’Espèce d’espace pensée. Préface’, in Benoît Goetz (ed.), La Dislocation: 
Architecture et philosophie (Paris: Éditions de la Passion, 2002), pp. 11–13.
––, L’Expérience de la liberté (Paris: Galilée, 1988).
––, L’Impératif catégorique, La Philosophie en Effet (Paris: Flammarion, 
1983).
––, L’Intrus, Lignes Fictives (Paris: Galilée, 2000).
––, L’Oubli de la philosophie, La Philosophie en Effet (Paris: Galilée, 1986).
––, La Communauté affrontée, La Philosophie en Effet (Paris: Galilée, 
2001).
––, La Communauté désœuvrée, nouvelle édition révisée et augmentée, Détroits 
(Paris: Christian Bourgois, 1999).
––, La Comparution (politique à venir), Détroits (Paris: Christian Bourgeois, 
1991).
––, ‘La Comparution /The compearance: from the existence of “communism” 
to the community of “existence” ’, trans. Tracy B. Strong, Political Theory, 
20: 3 (1992), pp. 371–98.
––, La Création du monde, ou, La Mondialisation, La Philosophie en Effet 
(Paris: Galilée, 2002).
––, La Déclosion: Déconstruction du christianisme 1 (Paris: Galilée, 2005).
––, La Pensée dérobée (Paris: Galilée, 2001).
––, La Remarque spéculative, La philosophie en effet (Paris: Galilée, 1973).
––, ‘Laïcité monothéiste’, Le Monde, 2 January 2004.
––, Le discours de la syncope I, Logodaedalus (Paris: Aubier-Flammarion, 
1976).
––, Le Partage des voix, Débats (Paris: Galilée, 1982).
––, Le Poids d’une pensée, l’approche (Strasbourg: Éditions de la Phocide, 
2008).
––, Le Poids d’une pensée, Trait d’Union (Sainte-Foy, Quebec: Éditions Le 
Griffon d’Argile, 1991).
––, ‘Le Portrait (dans le décor)’, in Cahiers Philosophie de l’art (Paris: Institut 
d’Art Contemporain, 1999).
––, Le Regard du portrait (Paris: Galilée, 2000).
––, Le Sens du monde, La Philosophie en Effet (Paris: Galilée, 1993).
––, Les Muses, La Philosophie en Effet (Paris: Galilée, 1994).
––, ‘Mad Derrida: ipso facto cogitans ac demens’, in Costas Douzinas (ed.), 
Adieu Derrida (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007), pp. 17–33.
––, ‘Mad Derrida’, Adieu, Derrida: A series of lectures held in commemora-
 
Bibliography 
267
tion of Jacques Derrida, marking the launch of the Birkbeck Institute for the 
Humanities, Birkbeck, University of London, Friday, 6 May 2005.
––, Noli me tangere: Essai sur la levée du corps (Paris: Bayard, 2003).
––, Noli me tangere: On the Raising of the Body, trans. Sarah Clift, Pascale-
Anne Brault and Michael Naas (New York: Fordham University Press, 
2008).
––, ‘Of divine places’, in The Inoperative Community, ed. Peter Connor, 
trans. Lisa Garbus, Peter Connor, Michael Holland and Simona Sawhney 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1991), pp. 110–50.
––, Philosophical Chronicles, trans. Franson Manjal (New York: Fordham 
University Press, 2008).
––, ‘Philosophie sans conditions’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: 
Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), 65–79.
––, ‘Philosophy without conditions’, in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think Again: 
Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy (London: Continuum, 2004), 
pp. 39–49.
––, ‘Postface’, in Martin Crowley, L’Homme sans (Paris: Lignes, 2009), 
pp. 181–4.
––, Sur le commerce des pensées, Écritures/Figures, ed. Michel Delorme (Paris: 
Galilée, 2005).
––, ‘Technique du présent: essai sur On Kawara’, Paper presented at the 
Cahiers-Philosophie de l’art, 1997.
––, The Birth to Presence, trans. Brian Holmes et al. (Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, 1993).
––, ‘The calculation of the poet’, in Aris Fioretos (ed.), The Solid Letter: 
Readings of Friedrich Hölderlin (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999), 
pp. 44–73.
––, ‘The confronted community’, trans. Jason Kemp Winfree, in Andrew 
J. Mitchell and Jason Kemp Winfree (eds), The Obsessions of Georges 
Bataille: Community and Communication (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 
2009), pp. 19–30.
––, The Creation of the World, or, Globalization, trans. Franç ois Raffoul and 
David Pettigrew (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2007).
––, The Experience of Freedom, trans. Bridget McDonald (Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, 1993).
––, The Gravity of Thought, trans. Franç ois Raffoul and Gregory Recco 
(Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1997).
––, The Ground of the Image, trans. Jeff Fort (New York: Fordham University 
Press, 2005).
––, The Inoperative Community, ed. Peter Connor, trans. Lisa Garbus, Peter 
Connor, Michael Holland and Simona Sawhney (Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1991).
––, The Muses, trans. Peggy Kamuf (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1996).
––, The Self-Deconstruction of Christianity: An Open Discussion with Jean-
Luc Nancy. European Graduate School EGS, August 2000 [cited 30 
268 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
August 2005]. Retrieved from: http://www.egs.edu/faculty/nancy/nancy-
self- deconstruction-of-christianity-2000.html. Last accessed: January 2010.
––, The Sense of the World, trans. Jeffrey S. Librett (Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1997).
––, The Truth of Democracy, trans. Pascale-Anne Brault and Michael Naas 
(New York: Fordham University Press, 2010).
––, Tombe de sommeil (Paris: Galilée, 2007).
––, ‘Tout est-il politique?’, Actuel Marx, 28 (2000), pp. 77–82.
––, ‘Un Jour, les dieux se retirent . . .’, Pharmacie de Platon (Bordeaux: William 
Blake, 2001).
––, ‘Une Pensée au partage des eaux’, Le Monde, 11 March 2005.
––, Une Pensée ﬁ nie (Paris: Galilée, 1990).
––, Vérité de la démocratie (Paris: Galilée, 2008).
––, Visitation (de la peinture chrétienne), Lignes ﬁ ctives (Paris: Galilée, 2001).
Nancy, Jean-Luc, and Jean-Claude Conésa, Être, c’est être perçu (Paris: 
Éditions des Cahiers Intempestifs, 2000).
––, and Thomas Ferenczi, ‘Un entretien avec Jean-Luc Nancy’, Le Monde, 29 
March 2005.
––, and B. C. Hutchens, ‘The future of philosophy. Interview’, in B. C. 
Hutchens, Jean-Luc Nancy and the Future of Philosophy (Chesham: 
Acumen, 2005), pp. 161–6.
––, and Abbas Kiarostami, L’Évidence du ﬁ lm (Brussels: Yves Gevaert, 2001).
––, and François Martin, NIUM (Valence: École Régionale des Beaux Arts, 
1998).
––, and Jérôme-Alexandre Nielsberg, ‘L’athéisme, essence des monothéismes’, 
L’Humanité, 24 May 2005.
Nault, François, ‘La déconstruction et le jeu de l’athéologie (Nietzsche, Bataille, 
Derrida)’, Studies in Religion, 27: 3 (1998), pp. 277–94.
Newman, S., ‘Polemics Alain Badiou’, Contemporary Political Theory, 7 
(2008), pp. 225–8.
Nicolacopoulos, Toula, and George Vassilacopoulos, ‘Philosophy and revo-
lution: Badiou’s inﬁ delity to the event’, Cosmos and History: The Journal 
of Natural and Social Philosophy, 2: 1–2 (2006). Retrieved from: http://
www.cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/viewFile/35/69. Last 
accessed: January 2011.
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, The Anti-Christ, Ecce Homo, Twilight of the 
Idols, and other writings, ed. Aaron Ridley and Judith Norman, trans. 
Judith Norman (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005).
––, The Gay Science: With a Prelude in Rhymes and an Appendix of Songs, 
trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York: Vintage Books, 1974).
Noys, Benjamin, ‘The provocations of Alain Badiou’, Theory Culture Society, 
20: 1 (2003), pp. 123–32.
Nussbaum, Martha Craven, The Therapy of Desire: Theory and Practice in 
Hellenistic Ethics (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009).
O’Donnell, Liam A., ‘Saint Paul: apostle, militant, communist’, Cosmos and 
 
Bibliography 
269
History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, 2: 1–2 (2006), 
pp. 345–9.
Osborn, Eric Francis, Tertullian, First Theologian of the West (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1997).
Osborne, Peter, ‘Alain Badiou’s Being and Event’, Radical Philosophy, 142 
(2007), pp. 19–29.
Pascal, Blaise, Pensées, trans. A. J. Krailsheimer (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 
1986).
Pearson, Keith Ansell, ‘Pure reserve: Deleuze, philosophy, and immanence’, 
in Mary Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion (London: Routledge, 2001), 
pp. 141–55.
Peperstraten, Frans van, ‘Displacement or composition? Lyotard and Nancy on 
the trait d’union between Judaism and Christianity’, International Journal 
for Philosophy of Religion, 65: 1 (2009), pp. 29–46.
Pinson, Jean-Claude, ‘De l’athéisme poétique aujourd’hui’, Noesis 7, La 
 philosophie du XXe siècle et le déﬁ  poétique (2004), pp. 255–70.
Plato, Laws, ed. Benjamin Jowett (New York: Dover, 2006).
Plato, The Republic, ed. G. R. F. Ferrari, trans. Tom Grifﬁ th (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000).
Pluth, Ed, ‘The Pauline event: review of Saint Paul: La Fondation de 
l’universalisme’, Theory and Event, 3: 3 (1999). Retrieved from: http://muse.
jhu.edu/journals/theory_and_event/v003/3.3r_pluth.html. 
Last 
accessed: 
July 2010.
Pluth, Ed, and Dominiek Hoens, ‘What if the other is stupid? Badiou and Lacan 
on “logical time” ’, in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think Again: Alain Badiou and 
the Future of Philosophy (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 182–90.
Popper, Karl R., Unended Quest: An Intellectual Autobiography (London: 
Routledge, 2002).
Power, N., ‘Which anarchism? On the advantages and disadvantages of inﬁ n-
ity for (political) life: a response to Simon Critchley’s Inﬁ nitely Demanding’, 
Critical Horizons, 10: 2 (2009), pp. 225–40.
Poxton, Judith, ‘Embodied anti-theology: the body without organs and the 
judgment of God’, in Mary Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion (London: 
Routledge, 2001), pp. 42–50.
Protevi, John, ‘The organism as the judgment of God: Aristotle, Kant and 
Deleuze on nature (that is, on biology, theology and politics)’, in Mary 
Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion (London: Routledge, 2001), pp. 30–41.
Quadrio, P. A., ‘Speaking to the people: Critchley, Rousseau and the deﬁ cit in 
practical rationality’, Critical Horizons, 10: 2 (2009), pp. 209–24.
Ramond, Charles (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple, Actes du Colloque de 
Bordeaux 21–23 octobre 1999 (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002).
Ramond, Charles, ‘ Système et traduction chez Alain Badiou’, in Charles 
Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), 
pp. 525–40.
Rancière, Jacques, ‘Aesthetics, inaesthetics, anti-aesthetics’, in Peter Hallward 
270 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
(ed.), Think Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy (London: 
Continuum, 2004), pp. 218–31.
––, ‘Esthétique, inesthétique, anti-esthétique’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain 
Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 477–96.
––, ‘Les démocraties contre la démocratie’, in Giorgio Agamben et al., 
Démocratie, dans quel état? (Paris: La Fabrique, 2009), pp. 95–100.
––, Untitled discussion of Alain Badiou’s L’Être et l’événement, Cahiers du 
Collège International de Philosophie, 8 (1989), pp. 211–25.
Redfern, Walter, ‘Introduction to Michel Tournier, “Gilles Deleuze” ’, in 
Mary Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion (London: Routledge, 2001), 
pp.  199–200.
Regnault, François, ‘Logique de l’assentiment’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain 
Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 339–54.
Renouard, Maël, ‘Les mondes crepusculaires. Alain Badiou et la melancolie’, 
Critique, 63 (2007), pp. 295–308.
Renouvier, Charles, Esquisse d’une classiﬁ cation systématique des doctrines 
philosophiques (Paris: Bureau de la Critique Philosophique, 1885).
Reul, Sabine, Thomas Deichmann and Slavoj Žižek, ‘The one measure of true 
love is: you can insult the other’, spiked, 15 November 2001. Retrieved 
from: 
http://www.spiked-online.com/articles/00000002D2C4.htm. 
Last 
accessed: January 2010.
Reynhout, Kenneth A., ‘Alain Badiou: hidden theologian of the void?’ 
Heythrop Journal, July (2008), pp. 140–62.
Ricœur, Paul, Le Conﬂ it des interprétations: Essais d’herméneutique (Paris: 
Seuil, 1969).
––, The Conﬂ ict of Interpretations: Essays in Hermeneutics, ed. Don Ihde 
(London: Continuum, 2004).
Robbins, Jeffrey W. (ed.), After the Death of God (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2007).
Robbins, Jeffrey W., ‘Introduction: after the death of God’, in Jeffrey 
W. Robbins (ed.), After the Death of God (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2007), pp. 1–26.
––, ‘The politics of Paul’, Journal for Cultural and Religious Theory, 6: 2 
(2005), pp. 89–94.
Rorty, Richard, ‘Anticléricalisme et théisme’, in Santiago Zabala (ed.), 
L’Avenir de la religion. Solidarité, charité, ironie (Paris: Bayard, 2005), 
pp. 45–66.
––, ‘Feminism, ideology, and deconstruction: a pragmatist view’, in Slavoj 
Žižek (ed.), Mapping Ideology (London: Verso, 1994), pp. 227–36.
Rorty, Richard, Gianni Vattimo and Santiago Zabala, ‘Quel avenir pour la 
religion après la métaphysique?’, in Santiago Zabala (ed.), L’Avenir de la 
religion. Solidarité, charité, ironie (Paris: Bayard, 2005), pp. 87–136.
Ross, Kristin, ‘Démocratie à vendre’, in Giorgio Agamben et al., Démocratie, 
dans quel état? (Paris: La Fabrique, 2009), pp. 101–22.
Rothenberg, Molly Anne, Sennis Foster and Slavoj Žižek (eds), Perversion and 
 
Bibliography 
271
the Social Relation, The Universal Exception: Selected Writings, Volume 
Two (London and Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003).
Salanskis, Jean-Michel, ‘Les mathématiques chez x avec x = Alain Badiou’, in 
Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 
2002), pp. 81–106.
Sartre, Jean-Paul, Being and Nothingness: An Essay on Phenomenological 
Ontology (London: Routledge, 1969).
––, Critique de la raison dialectique; précédé de, Questions de méthode, ed. 
Arlette Elkaï m-Sartre (Paris: Gallimard, 1985).
––, Critiques littéraires: Situations 1 (Paris: Gallimard, 1947).
––, L’Être et le néant: Essai d’ontologie phénoménologique (Paris: Gallimard, 
1996).
––, ‘Existentialism and humanism’, in Stephen Priest (ed.), Basic Writings 
(London: Routledge, 2000), pp. 26–57.
––, The Problem of Method, trans. Hazel E. Barnes (London: Methuen, 1963).
Schmitt, Carl, Political Theology (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985).
Schneider, Laurel C., Beyond Monotheism: A Theology of Multiplicity 
(London: Routledge, 2008).
Schoder, Raymond V., ‘Lucretius’ poetic problem’, Classical Journal, 45: 4 
(1950), pp. 177–82.
Schrift, Alan D., ‘Nietzsche’s French legacy’, in Bernd Magnus and Kathleen 
M. Higgins (eds), The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996), pp. 323–55.
Schürmann, Reiner, Meister Eckhart, Mystic and Philosopher: Translations 
with Commentary (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978).
Sharpe, M., ‘ “Critchley is Žižek”: in defence of critical political philosophy’, 
Critical Horizons, 10: 2 (2009), pp. 180–96.
Sharpe, Matthew, Slavoj Žižek: A Little Piece of the Real, Ashgate New 
Critical Thinking in Philosophy (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004).
Sheppard, Darren, Simon Sparks and Colin Thomas, On Jean-Luc Nancy: The 
Sense of Philosophy (London: Routledge, 1997).
Simont, Juliette, ‘Critique de la représentation et ontologie chez Deleuze et 
Badiou (Autour du « virtuel »)’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: 
Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 457–76.
Sinnerbrink, R., ‘Neo-anarchism or neo-liberalism? Yes, please! A response to 
Simon Critchley’s Inﬁ nitely Demanding’, Critical Horizons, 10: 2 (2009), 
pp. 163–79.
Sinnerbrink, R., and P. A. Quadrio, ‘Ethics of commitment, politics of resist-
ance: Simon Critchley’s Inﬁ nitely Demanding’, Critical Horizons, 10: 2 
(2009), p. 153.
Smith, Daniel W., ‘Badiou and Deleuze on the ontology of mathematics’, 
in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of 
Philosophy (London: Continuum, 2004), pp. 77–93.
––, ‘Mathematics and the theory of multiplicities: Badiou and Deleuze  revisited’, 
Southern Journal of Philosophy, 41: 3 (2003), pp. 411–50.
272 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
––, ‘The doctrine of univocity: Deleuze’s ontology of immanence’, in Mary 
Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion (London: Routledge, 2001), p. 167–83.
Smith, James K. A., Who’s Afraid of Postmodernism?: Taking Derrida, 
Lyotard, and Foucault to Church, The Church and Postmodern Culture 
(Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2006).
Stiegler, Barbara, ‘Réceptions de la mort de Dieu’, Critique, LXII: 704–5 
(2006), pp. 116–28.
Stone, Gregory B., ‘The nameless wild one: the ethics of anonymous subjectiv-
ity – medieval and modern’, Common Knowledge, 12: 2 (2006), pp. 219–51.
Stramignoni, Igor, ‘Badiou’s nocturnal jurisprudence’, Cardozo Law Review, 
29: 5 (2008), pp. 2361–93.
Strathausen, Carsten, ‘A critique of neo-left ontology’, Postmodern 
Culture, 16: 3 (2006). Retrieved from: http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/pmc/
v016/16.3strathausen.html. Last accessed: July 2010.
––, ‘The Badiou-event’, Polygraph, 17 (2005), pp. 275–93.
Szczeciniarz, Jean-Jacques, ‘L’Être ou la structure’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), 
Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 107–48.
Tarby, Fabien, La Philosophie d’Alain Badiou (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2005).
Taubes, Jacob, The Political Theology of Paul, ed. Aleida Assmann and Jan 
Assmann, trans. Dana Hollander (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 
2004).
Taylor, Charles, A Secular Age (London: Harvard University Press, 2007).
Taylor, Mark C., Erring: A Postmodern A/theology (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1984).
––, ‘Non-negative negative atheology: review of How to Avoid Speaking: 
Denials by Jacques Derrida’, Diacritics, 20: 4 (1990), pp. 2–16.
Thury, Eva M., ‘Lucretius’ poem as a simulacrum of the Rerum Natura’, 
American Journal of Philology, 108: 2 (1987), pp. 270–94.
Tiles, Mary, The Philosophy of Set Theory: An Historical Introduction to 
Cantor’s Paradise (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1989).
Toscano, Alberto, ‘A plea for Prometheus’, Critical Horizons, 10: 2 (2009), 
pp. 241–56.
––, ‘Against speculation, or, a critique of the critique of critique . . . a remark on 
Quentin Meillassoux’s After Finitude (after Colletti)’, Speculative Realism, 
Centre for the Study of Invention and Social Process, Goldsmiths, University 
of London, 27 April 2007.
––, ‘Communism as separation’, in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think Again: 
Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy (London: Continuum, 2004), 
pp. 138–49.
––, ‘To have done with the end of philosophy’, Pli, 9 (2000), pp. 200–38.
Toscano, Alberto, and Nina Power. ‘Editors’ introduction – think pig!’, 
in Alain Badiou, On Beckett, ed. Alberto Toscano and Nina Power 
(Manchester: Clinamen, 2003).
Tournier, Michel, ‘Gilles Deleuze’, in Mary Bryden (ed.), Deleuze and Religion 
(London: Routledge, 2001), pp. 201–4.
 
Bibliography 
273
Vahanian, Gabriel, ‘The death of God: an afterword’, in Jeffrey W. Robbins 
(ed.), After the Death of God (New York: Columbia University Press, 2007), 
pp. 163–78.
Vahnhoozer, Kevin, and Martin Warner (eds), Transcending Boundaries in 
Philosophy and Theology: Reason, Meaning and Experience (Aldershot: 
Ashgate, 2007).
Vainqueur, Bernard, ‘De quoi « sujet » est-il le nom pour Alain Badiou ?’, in 
Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 
2002), pp. 313–38.
van Rompaey, Chris, ‘Book review: a question of ﬁ delity’, Cosmos and History: 
The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, 2: 1–2 (2006), pp. 350–8.
Vanhoozer, Kevin, ‘Once more into the borderlands: the way of wisdom in 
philosophy and theology after the “Turn to Drama” ’, in Kevin Vanhoozer 
and Martin Warner (eds), Transcending Boundaries in Philosophy and 
Theology: Reason, Meaning and Experience (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2007), 
pp. 31–54.
Vattimo, Gianni, ‘A prayer for silence: dialogue with Gianni Vattimo’, in 
Jeffrey W. Robbins (ed.), After the Death of God (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2007), pp. 89–113.
––, After Christianity, trans. Luca D’Isanto (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2002).
––, ‘L’Ère de l’interprétation’, in Santiago Zabala (ed.), L’Avenir de la religion. 
Solidarité, charité, ironie (Paris: Bayard, 2005), pp. 67–86.
––, ‘Toward a nonreligious Christianity’, in Jeffrey W. Robbins (ed.), After the 
Death of God (New York: Columbia University Press, 2007), pp. 27–46.
Verstraeten, Pierre, ‘L’Apport de Badiou à la considération de la 8ème 
hypothèse du Parménide’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain Badiou: Penser le 
multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 149–68.
Vining, Joseph, From Newton’s Sleep (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1995).
von der Luft, Eric, ‘Sources of Nietzsche’s “God is Dead!” and its meaning for 
Heidegger’, Journal of the History of Ideas, 45: 2 (1984), pp. 263–76.
Wahl, François, ‘Le soustractif’, in Alain Badiou, Conditions (Paris: Éditions 
du Seuil, 1992), pp. 9–54.
––, ‘Présentation, représentation, apparaître’, in Charles Ramond (ed.), Alain 
Badiou: Penser le multiple (Paris: L’Harmattan, 2002), pp. 169–87.
Ward, Graham, True Religion (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2003).
Watkin, Christopher, Phenomenology or Deconstruction?: The Question of 
Ontology in Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Paul Ricœur, and Jean-Luc Nancy 
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2009).
Weber, Max, Max Weber: Readings and Commentary on Modernity, ed. 
Stephen Kalberg (Malden, MA; Oxford: Blackwell, 2005).
Weiss, Allen S., ‘Impossible sovereignty: between “The Will to Power” and 
“The Will to Chance” ’, October 36: Georges Bataille: Writings on Laughter, 
Sacriﬁ ce, Nietzsche, Un-Knowing (1986), pp. 128–46.
274 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Wilkens, Matthew, ‘Introduction: the philosophy of Alain Badiou’, Polygraph, 
17 (2005), pp. 1–9.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, ed. David Francis 
Pears, Brian McGuinness and Bertrand Russell, Routledge Classics (London: 
Routledge, 2001).
Woodiwiss, Ashley, ‘Philosophy at the end of the world: the gospel accord-
ing to Slavoj Žižek’, Books and Culture, November/December 2006. 
Retrieved from: http://www.booksandculture.com/articles/2006/novdec/5.
30.html. Last accessed: July 2010.
Wright, C., ‘Resurrection and reaction in Alain Badiou: towards an 
evental historiography’, Culture Theory and Critique, 49: 1 (2008), 
pp. 73–92.
Zabala, Santiago, ‘Christianity and the death of God’, Common Knowledge, 
11: 1 (2005), pp. 33–40.
Zabala, Santiago (ed.), L’Avenir de la religion. Solidarité, charité, ironie (Paris: 
Bayard, 2005).
Zimmermann, Jens, Recovering Theological Hermeneutics: An Incarnational-
Trinitarian Theory of Interpretation (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 
2004).
Žižek, Slavoj, ‘A glance into the archives of Islam’. Retrieved from: http://
www.lacan.com/zizarchives.htm . Last accessed: January 2010.
––, ‘A plea for “passive aggressivity” ’, in The Universal Exception: Selected 
Writings, Volume Two (London and New York: Continuum, 2006), 
pp. 209–26.
––, ‘Attempts to escape the logic of capitalism’, in The Universal Exception: 
Selected Writings, Volume Two (London and New York: Continuum, 
2006), pp. 137–50.
––, ‘Badiou: notes from an ongoing debate’, International Journal of Žižek 
Studies, 1: 2 (2007). Retrieved from: http://www.zizekstudies.org/index.
php/ijzs/article/view/26/85. Last accessed: January 2010.
––, ‘De la démocratie à la violence divine’, in Giorgio Agamben et al., 
Démocratie, dans quel état? (Paris: La Fabrique, 2009) pp. 123–49.
––, ‘Foreword: Halward’s ﬁ delity to the Badiou event’, in Peter Hallward, 
Badiou: A Subject to Truth (Minneapolis, MI; London: University of 
Minnesota Press, 2003), pp. ix–xiv.
––, ‘From proto-reality to the act: a reply to Peter Dews’, Angelaki, 5: 3.1 
(2000), pp. 141–8.
––, ‘From puriﬁ cation to subtraction: Badiou and the real’, in Peter Hallward 
(ed.), Think Again: Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy (London: 
Continuum, 2004), pp. 165–81.
––, In Defense of Lost Causes (London: Verso, 2008).
––, ‘Move the underground: what’s wrong with fundamentalism? Part II’. 
Retrieved from: http://www.lacan.com/zizunder.htm. Last accessed: January 
2010.
––, ‘Multiculturalism, or, the cultural logic of multinational capitalism’, in The 
 
Bibliography 
275
Universal Exception: Selected Writings, Volume Two (London and New 
York: Continuum, 2006), pp. 151–82.
––, ‘Neighbors and other monsters: a plea for ethical violence’, in Slavoj Žižek, 
Eric L. Santner and Kenneth Reinhard (eds), The Neighbor (Chicago and 
London: University of Chicago Press, 2005), pp. 134–90.
––, ‘Nobody has to be vile’, London Review of Books, 28: 7 (6 April 2006), 
p. 10. Retrieved from: http://www.lrb.co.uk/v28/n07/slavoj-Žižek/nobody-
has-to-be-vile. Last accessed: July 2010.
––, On Belief, Thinking in Action (London: Routledge, 2001).
––, ‘Only a suffering God can save us. Section 1: Hegel’, Lacanian Ink (2007). 
Retrieved from: http://www.lacan.com/zizshadowplay.html. Last accessed: 
July 2010.
––, ‘Only a suffering God can save us. Section 2: Kierkegaard’, Lacanian Ink 
(2007). Retrieved from: http://www.lacan.com/zizmarqueemoon.html. Last 
accessed: July 2010.
––, ‘Psychoanalysis in post-Marxism: the case of Alain Badiou’, South Atlantic 
Quarterly, 97: 2 (1998), pp. 235–61.
––, ‘Religion between knowledge and jouissance’, Lacanian Ink (2007). 
Retrieved from: http://www.lacan.com/zizsmokeonthewater.html. Last 
accessed: July 2010.
––, ‘The antinomies of tolerant reason: a blood-dimmed tide is loosed’. 
Retrieved from: http://www.lacan.com/zizantinomies.htm. Last accessed: 
January 2010.
––, The Fragile Absolute, or, Why is the Christian Legacy Worth Fighting For?, 
Wo es War (London and New York: Verso, 2000).
––, ‘The ignorance of chicken, or, who believes what today’, autraumaton, 
Spring (2007), pp. 47–61.
––, The Metastases of Enjoyment: Six Essays on Woman and Causality 
(London: Verso, 1995).
––, ‘The parallax view’, in Interrogating the Real: Selected Writings (New York 
and London: Continuum, 2005), pp. 231–46.
––, The Parallax View (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006).
––, ‘The prospects of radical politics today’, in The Universal Exception: 
Selected Writings, Volume Two (London and New York: Continuum, 
2006), pp. 237–58.
––, The Puppet and the Dwarf: The Perverse Core of Christianity, Short cir-
cuits (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003).
––, ‘The Real of sexual difference’, in Interrogating the Real: Selected Writings 
(New York and London: Continuum, 2005), pp. 330–55.
––, ‘The rhetorics of power’, Diacritics, 31: 1 (2001), pp. 91–108.
––, The Sublime Object of Ideology (London: Verso, 1999).
––, ‘The three faces of Bill Gates’, in The Universal Exception: Selected Writings, 
Volume Two (London and New York: Continuum, 2006), pp. 227–36.
––, The Ticklish Subject: The Absent Centre of Political Ontology (London: 
Verso, 2000).
276 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
––, ‘The two totalitarianisms’, London Review of Books, 27: 6 (2005). 
Retrieved from: http://www.lrb.co.uk/v27/n06/slavoj-Žižek/the-two-total
itarianisms. Last accessed: July 2010.
––, ‘Welcome to the desert of the Real’, in The Universal Exception: Selected 
Writings, Volume Two (London and New York: Continuum, 2006), 
pp. 267–88.
––, ‘Why is Wagner worth saving?’, in Interrogating the Real: Selected Writings 
(New York and London: Continuum, 2005), pp. 307–30.
––, ‘With or without passion: what’s wrong with fundamentalism? Part 
I’. Retrieved from: http://www.lacan.com/zizpassion.htm. Last accessed: 
January 2010.
Žižek, Slavoj, and Joshua Delpech-Ramey, ‘An Interview with Slavoj Žižek 
“On Divine Self-limitation and Revolutionary Love” ’, Journal of Philosophy 
and Scripture, 1: 2 (2004), pp. 32–8.
––, Doug Henwood and Charlie Bertsch, ‘I am a ﬁ ghting atheist: interview with 
Slavoj Žižek’, Bad Subjects, 59 (2002). Retrieved from: http://bad.eserver.
org/issues/2002/59/zizek.html. Last accessed: January 2010.
––, and Milbank, John, The Monstrosity of Christ, ed. Slavoj Žižek, Short 
Circuits (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009).
Zupancˇicˇ, Alenka, ‘The ﬁ fth condition’, in Peter Hallward (ed.), Think Again: 
Alain Badiou and the Future of Philosophy (London: Continuum, 2004), 
pp. 191–201.
––, The Shortest Shadow: Nietzsche’s Philosophy of the Two, ed. Slavoj Žižek, 
Short Circuits (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003).
277
Index
Absenthéisme, 111, 113, 114
Absolute inﬁ nite, 27, 146
Actual inﬁ nite, 24, 25, 27–8, 30–1, 
32, 47, 62, 68, 76, 77, 81, 86–7, 
99–100, 104, 217, 226
Adoration, 13, 80, 81, 145, 181, 184, 
192, 219–20
Agape¯, 10, 13
Agathon, 119, 156, 179, 242
Altizer, Thomas, 120
Anselm of Canterbury, 100, 145–6
Aquinas, Thomas, 210
Arche¯, 35, 38, 65, 108, 112, 114, 116, 
216–17
Aristotle, 24, 141, 158, 179
Aron, Raymond, 3
Ascetic atheism see residual atheism
Ataraxia, 110–11, 120, 122–3, 128n72
a/theism, 15, 38, 41, 42, 43, 47, 112, 
114, 115, 120, 135, 140, 147, 
162, 207, 215
Atheology, 12, 15, 21n63, 21n64, 
51n29, 96, 111, 114–21, 123, 
132–4, 168, 176, 178, 180, 196, 
198n2, 213, 215, 216, 218, 
236n23, 240, 241
Augustine, 27, 210
Axioms, 15, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 45, 47, 
48, 52n38, 66–7, 82, 86, 87, 95, 
96–111, 113, 117, 120, 121–3, 
127n56, 132, 155, 157–62, 189, 
191–2, 196, 197, 222–3, 224, 
229, 233, 240
 Axiom of choice, 107–8, 127n56
 Axiom of inﬁ nity, 100
 Axiom of the empty set, 30, 100, 
159
Bad inﬁ nity see Good/Bad inﬁ nity
Bataille, Georges, 118, 216
Beckett, Samuel, 88n9, 223, 229
Bensaïd, Daniel, 96
Blanchot, Maurice, 4, 114, 120–1, 192, 
239
Bosteels, Bruno, 97, 103, 183, 221
Brown, Nathan, 144, 174–6
Call, the, 181–5, 190, 196–7
Camus, Albert, 3–4
Cantor, Georg, 25–8, 31–2, 47, 106, 
146
Capital, 15, 81, 191, 213–15, 216, 
217–18, 221, 223–6, 233
Caputo, John D, 10, 42, 56n80,
97–8
Child of Man, 13, 208–10, 220, 231
Christmas projection, 37, 39–40, 47, 
81, 85, 87, 118, 216, 232, 240
Clemens, Justin, 103
Communism, 3, 15, 191, 213, 217–22, 
224, 226–31, 233
Comte, Auguste, 2, 14
Contingency (in Meillassoux), 135, 
139–40, 141–6, 149–62, 163n4, 
165n18, 166n37, 173–5, 176, 
208–9, 212–13, 224, 230–4
Correlationism, 140–1, 142, 150, 151, 
158, 161
278 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Critchley, Simon, 124n17, 168, 183–5, 
191–2, 200n34, 201n60, 191, 
192, 194–6, 206
Crowley, Martin, 77, 182–5, 212, 
221–2, 236n29
Cunningham, Connor, 42
De Kesel, Marc, 108
Deconstruction, 8, 12, 13, 14, 34, 36, 
38–47, 53n49, 58, 61, 73, 75, 80, 
83, 85, 95–6, 112, 116, 120, 148, 
217, 240
Deconstruction of Christianity, 12–14, 
38–47, 61, 73, 75, 80, 82, 85, 95, 
112, 116, 240
Dedekind, Richard, 31
Deleuze, Gilles, 28, 39–40, 46–7, 97, 
105
Democracy, 99, 148, 167, 193, 213, 
215–18, 226, 232
Demonstration, 15, 106, 155–61, 171, 
172, 190, 241–3
Derrida, Jacques, 7–8, 28, 46–7, 73, 
83, 85, 115, 120, 221, 240, 243n3
Descartes, René, 2, 4, 24, 25, 49n9, 70, 
83, 122, 143n4, 156
Disenchantment see Enchantment/
disenchantment
Disenclosure, 73, 82, 86, 95, 116
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 169
Empty set, 29, 30
Enchantment/disenchantment, 58, 60, 
62, 64, 112, 224–5
Epicurus, 64, 110
Equality, 108–9, 182–4, 193, 197, 211, 
214, 220, 221–3, 227, 229, 230, 
232, 233, 239–40
Eschatology, 4, 5, 37, 185, 193–4,
197
Eternity, 24, 26, 64, 69–70, 71, 83, 
143, 153, 190, 208, 210–11,
212
Ethos, 13, 177–85, 188, 197, 202n63, 
217, 218, 229–30, 232, 233, 240
Event, 30, 52n38, 65, 71, 83, 90n40, 
96–100, 106–8, 117, 140, 185–8, 
189–93, 194–6, 204n87, 223, 
228–9, 240
Ex nihilo, 143, 149, 173–4, 192, 208
Exhaustion of metaphysics, 35–6
Factiality, 135, 140–2, 143, 144–6, 
147, 149, 150–3, 154, 155, 
157–8, 159–61, 165n16, 171, 
174–5, 207, 210–11, 240
Faith, 5, 7, 9, 15, 40, 66, 98, 107, 
115–17, 120, 122, 123, 134, 
136–7, 139, 145, 155–62, 188, 
190–1, 193, 196, 197, 202n63, 
227, 233, 240
Feuerbach, Ludwig, 2, 14, 25, 120–1
Finitude, 44, 61, 114, 179, 182
Foucault, Michel, 54n51, 141
Freedom, 109, 176, 179–81, 197, 227
Galilei, Galileo, 24–5, 106
Gauchet, Marcel, 112
Generic, the, 30, 43, 47, 52n38, 108, 
110, 124n20, 222, 227, 230
Gibson, Andrew, 194
Globalisation, 214
Glucksmann, André, 42, 56n80
Good, the, 103, 106, 107–8, 109, 115, 
170–1, 174, 179, 183, 207, 215, 
230, 233
Good/Bad inﬁ nity, 27, 46, 68, 72, 
75–6, 80, 113–14, 217
Grace, 32, 71, 97–8, 99, 195
Granel, Gérard, 116
Guibal, Francis, 120
Hägglund, Martin, 128n72, 243n3
Hallward, Peter, 23, 29, 45, 46, 51n32, 
99, 102, 103, 108, 110–11, 
143–4, 149, 175
Harman, Graham, 51n34, 144, 154–5, 
163n3, 163n4
Hegel, Georg Friedrich Wilhelm, 38, 
44, 46, 58, 59, 68, 75–6, 86, 
88n4, 102, 114, 137, 145, 189, 
209, 210, 243n4
Heidegger, Martin, 4, 5, 6, 8, 22, 34–5, 
59, 62, 63, 67, 73, 74, 85, 87, 
133, 137, 141, 159, 178–80, 195
Hermeneutics, 102, 120
Heterotopia, 33–4, 37, 48, 54n51
Historicism, 26, 31, 34, 36–7, 148
 
Index 
279
Hölderlin, Friedrich, 58–9, 73, 81
Human animal, 66, 71, 72, 82, 84, 
189, 190, 229
Hume, David, 141, 153–5, 161, 169
Husserl, Edmund, 7, 10, 122, 140
Hutchens, Ben, 119
Hyperchaos, 144, 149–53, 154, 157, 
166n37, 170, 172, 174–6, 195, 
197, 199n14, 207–8, 231, 240–1
Idea, the, 3, 5–7, 15, 36, 60–72, 73, 
78, 79, 82, 86, 87, 106, 115, 170, 
226–30, 240, 242
Imitative atheism, 1–3, 5, 11, 22–3, 33, 
37, 39–40, 42, 43, 46, 47, 61, 70, 
73, 74, 76, 80, 82, 85, 87, 95, 96, 
98, 107, 111, 114–18, 120, 134, 
140, 141, 145, 147, 168, 169, 
170, 178, 206, 210, 218, 220, 
225, 229, 230, 233, 239, 241
Immanence, 6, 7, 28, 68, 72, 80, 
105, 106–9, 110, 115, 119, 121, 
133–5, 142, 148–9, 156, 209–11, 
220, 240, 241
Immortality (in Badiou), 71–2, 169, 
207–8, 211, 212, 222, 243n3
Inaccessibility, 15, 28, 50n28, 51n33, 
51n54, 52n38, 60, 73, 82, 102–3, 
114, 117, 118, 119, 122–3, 
125n31, 126n32, 134, 135–6, 
142, 149, 159, 171, 192, 225, 240
Inaesthetics, 63–7, 78, 79
Incarnation, 13, 59, 60–1, 67–73, 
82–6, 112, 209, 224
Incommensurability, 1, 14, 37, 41, 79, 
80, 84, 86, 152, 153, 180, 214, 
217–18, 219–21, 223
Inconsistent multiplicity, 28–30, 41, 
44, 45, 47, 51n34, 72, 110, 138, 
159, 233–4, 240
Inexistence, 70, 144, 149, 155, 
166n37, 172, 230–1
Inﬁ nity, 8, 22, 23–5, 26–8, 30–2, 
41, 46–8, 48n7, 49n11, 52n40, 
59–60, 61–9, 70–7, 79, 80–1, 82, 
86–7, 95, 100–2, 103–4, 107–8, 
110, 113, 114–15, 117–18, 
127n56, 145–6, 173, 179–80, 
185, 191, 207, 209, 214–17, 220
Intuition, 29–30, 104, 105, 160–2, 
174, 209, 211, 234, 241
James, Ian, 84
Janicaud, Dominique, 10, 220
Justice, 2, 5–6, 8, 13, 15–16, 60, 162, 
168, 170–6, 190, 194, 197–8, 
206–9, 211–13, 216, 220–1, 
222–3, 227, 229–30, 231–4,
240
Kant, Immanuel, 7, 24, 105, 115, 117, 
122, 133, 140–1, 147, 154, 156, 
160, 178–9, 185–6, 189, 192, 
201n60, 243n4
Keynes, John Maynard, 215, 235n16
Lacan, Jacques, 28, 44, 49n14, 67n93, 
126n32, 169, 188
Lecercle, Jean-Jacques, 66, 109, 
201n60
Leibniz, Gottfried, 24, 156, 243n4
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 49n14
Lévinas, Emmanuel, 8, 10, 45, 46, 
183, 185–6, 188, 192, 201n60, 
220
Lucretius, 63–4, 109–10, 119
Lyotard, Jean-François, 11, 28, 98, 
103, 105, 108, 126n32
Mao Zedong, 46, 102
Marion, Jean-Luc, 9–10, 100–2, 117, 
243n3
Marx, Karl, 3, 109, 122, 175, 170, 
193–4, 213, 225–7, 235n12, 
243n4
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 9, 83
Metaphysics, 7, 10, 23–5, 27, 33–7, 
41, 43, 48, 63, 117, 135–41, 143, 
145, 162, 177, 183, 215–16
Milbank, John, 51n33, 103, 108
Miracle, 3, 25, 96–7, 99–100, 103, 
111, 122, 149–50, 170, 191, 193, 
199n14
Monotheism, 30, 41–3, 53n49, 74, 
111–14, 117, 120, 142
Mullarkey, John, 108
Mysticism, 7, 9, 32, 60, 62, 96, 119, 
149, 160, 215
280 
Difﬁ cult Atheism
Necessity (in Meillassoux), 135, 
137–47, 150–2, 154, 155–60, 162, 
174, 209, 211
Newton, Isaac, 171
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 5–7, 9, 10, 16, 
22, 26, 31, 49n13, 58, 59, 82–3, 
93n67, 115, 118, 195
Non-contradiction, principle of, 141, 
146, 150, 152, 153–4, 158, 
165n15, 207, 241
Occupation, atheism of see post-
theological integration
One, the, 23–5, 27–30, 31–2, 41, 44, 
45, 47, 51n33, 52n38, 99, 100, 
103, 109–10, 138–40, 146, 159, 
191, 225
Open, the, 59, 60, 61–7, 73–82, 86, 
121
Osborne, Peter, 96
Parasitic atheism see imitative atheism
Pascal, Blaise, 22, 49n9, 96, 98, 103, 
132, 172–3, 190–1, 193, 197,
207
Paul the Apostle, 12, 20n61, 32, 38, 
99, 108, 139, 190, 193–4
Plato, 2, 5, 6, 7, 11, 14, 25–6, 36, 38, 
41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 59, 62, 63, 65, 
72, 103, 105, 106, 107, 111, 115, 
122, 143, 156, 157, 170–1, 193, 
214, 222, 242, 243n4
Platonism of the multiple, 14, 41, 66, 
69
Postsecular, the, 1, 10, 12, 14, 112, 
117, 239
Post-theological, the, 12–13, 45, 59, 
60, 63, 65, 69, 77, 80, 112, 115, 
116, 119, 155, 181, 187, 198, 
231–2, 239, 240, 241
 Post-theological integration, 13, 23, 
40, 48, 70, 71, 72, 79, 81–2, 86, 
95, 98, 116, 133, 135, 148, 162, 
196–7, 206, 210, 232, 240
Principle of insufﬁ cient reason, 117, 
145, 146
Rancière, Jacques, 98, 103, 191, 
192–3, 236n29
Rationality, 7–8, 11–12, 74, 102, 
106–7, 136–7, 142–4, 146–8, 
150–2, 154, 156–8, 160–2, 171, 
173, 209, 212
Reason, 115–17, 135–7, 147–8, 155–6, 
161, 178, 210, 241
 Hypothetical/anhypothetical reason, 
157–9, 161, 242
Relativism, 135, 137, 138, 145, 211
Residual atheism, 3–11, 23, 28, 31, 
40, 47, 58, 59, 60, 67, 70, 72, 73, 
74, 75, 77, 79, 80, 81, 86, 87, 95, 
99, 109, 113, 114, 117, 120, 133, 
134, 145, 148, 149, 168, 184, 
194, 197, 206, 225, 231, 233, 
234, 239, 240, 241
Resurrection, 172, 174, 176, 190, 
206–8
Revelation, 96–7, 111, 121–2, 136–7, 
139–40, 155
Ricœur, Paul, 134
Rimbaud, Arthur, 186
Romantic inﬁ nite, 59–60, 79, 102
Romanticism, 23, 58–61, 67–9, 70, 
72–4, 76, 78, 82–3, 87, 102, 159, 
171, 225, 239
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 187, 188
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph, 68
Schmitt, Carl, 170
Sense (in Nancy), 15, 44–5, 77–8, 79, 
85, 177, 179, 181, 219
 Badiou’s critique of, 186–7
Singular plural, the, 45–6, 48, 61, 80, 
84, 139, 177–81, 183, 196–7, 
219–21, 224, 230, 233–4, 240
Spacing, 73–86, 95, 118–19, 121–2, 
177, 212, 214, 216, 218, 240
Spinoza, Baruch, 105, 122, 137, 179, 
243n4
Subject (in Badiou), 66, 70–2, 117, 
227, 232
Tarby, Fabien, 105
Taylor, Mark C., 120
Techne¯, 83–5
Theological turn, 8, 10, 13, 220
Transﬁ nite, 27, 47, 146
Trinity, 51n33, 103, 112
 
Index 
281
Truths (in Badiou), 30, 52n38, 61–2, 
64–72, 86–7, 90n40, 95–7, 99, 
102, 105–6, 108, 117, 188–96, 
223–4, 226–33
Valéry, Paul, 63–5
Vattimo, Gianni, 10, 26
Violence, 66, 87, 101–2, 115, 117, 
122, 160, 190, 201n60, 224, 228
Void, 29–30, 61, 64, 67, 95–6, 100, 
103–4, 109, 123n6, 133, 159, 
188, 233
Wager, 103, 107, 172–3, 185, 190–1, 
197
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 7, 26, 126n32
‘yet without’, 15, 74, 80–2, 86–7, 
91n44, 240
ZFC Set theory, 28, 30–1, 50n27, 
52n38, 99–100, 110, 145, 158, 
226
Žižek, Slavoj, 12, 20n62, 93n67, 96, 
194, 226, 233
