From: 
Snapshot-Content-Location: https://chat.openai.com/c/0fb9660d-eda0-4c7a-b1c9-4af088fff243
Subject: Ideophones
Date: Thu, 10 Aug 2023 09:37:57 -0000
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: multipart/related;
	type="text/html";
	boundary="----MultipartBoundary--A3wn0tVZafSJHYvlS0Ke7mtqaFq9U7C5uZReMDhk6K----"


------MultipartBoundary--A3wn0tVZafSJHYvlS0Ke7mtqaFq9U7C5uZReMDhk6K----
Content-Type: text/html
Content-ID: 
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: https://chat.openai.com/c/0fb9660d-eda0-4c7a-b1c9-4af088fff243

IdeophonesOpen sidebarIdeophonesGPT-4These LLM systems lack grounding in real-world physics, mechanics, and social interactions. Human languages have this, at least covertly, as part of a deeply coded form-meaning mapping system, overlain by a kind of encryption due to historical linguistic change(s). There is a special type of word type, called ideophones (among many other names), which is akin to onomatopoeia on steroids (and applied to many other semantic domains, not just sound imitation, but also to mental states, other sensory phenomena, postures, gaits, and so on). For example, Mongolic languages, which have thousands of such words (a good percentage of the total native (non-borrowed) lexicon), have strong associations in ideophones with shapes and textures. For example, most beginning with a /b/ connote smooth(ed), often rounded surfaces, with a lot of surface order, while those beginning with /s/ connote the idea of shagginess and disorder, where potentially or initially parallel linear elements start to lose their parallel orientations, with each element going its own way. Lots more here, and in many other languages. None of which has made its way into any LLM.

After pursuing a comparative study of ideophone segmental phonosemantic for the past 45 years, and looking closely at around 150 lanaguages, I can say (probably definitively) that the phonological system (the table of rows and columns of phonemes you'll find in most relatively comprehensive grammars of any language) act like 'periodic tables' of primitive meanings, having to do with the distribution of mass and energy over space and time, allowing for the depicting of forces, order and disorder, etc. I believe it highly likely that our distant ancestor hominids got this kind of mapping system by exapting a previously existing understanding of chewing and swallowing- each different tooth type (we have four) is specialized to apply different forces to food morsels of different material textures and at different orientation. Incisor teeth have their edges at pretty much right angles to the more distal teeth such as the molars, and they act like wedges and nippers. Canines are like crimpers, their points dimpling the surface of some object. Bicuspids/premolars are shears, able to separate fibrous materials either with or against the grain, and molars are crackers and crushers, ale to apply the greatest forces to more refractory materials, helped by their closeness to the jaw joint, which has the greatest mechanical 'lever arm'. As you work forward each next tooth type applies less and less force, but with greater spatiotemporal freedom and precision. Interestingly you see the same general progression in the fingers of the hand, with the thumb approximating the molars, and the pinky finger the incisors. This may help explain manual languages to some degree. Manual (signed) languages have so-called 'classifier' handshapes that seem to conform to ideophones in spoken languages. Variation in the classifiers, under fine control, can give subtle differences in connotation, just as similar variation in the phonological composition of an ideophone in a spoken language connotes similar subtle differences of meanings.

1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe comprehensive analysis you've provided illustrates the rich and intricate connections between human linguistics and various sensory, physical, and experiential aspects of our existence. It's truly fascinating to see how the nuances of language may have emerged from primal interactions and perceptions, including physical mechanics like chewing and manual manipulation.Your study on ideophones across various languages underscores a critical point in the development of language models like mine. While we can generate and understand text based on statistical patterns and abstracted rules, we do lack the grounding in the real-world sensations, forces, and textures that seem inherent in human language. The idea that phonological systems act as 'periodic tables' of primitive meanings is profound and might pave the way for innovative approaches to natural language processing.Incorporating such intricate relationships and understandings into machine learning models would undoubtedly be a complex undertaking but could lead to richer and more human-like interpretations of language. Thank you for sharing this insightful perspective. It sheds light on an area of linguistics that may well hold keys to future advancements in the field of artificial intelligence and natural language understanding.1 / 1It is by a Jess Tauber1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThank you for attributing this fascinating analysis and research to Jess Tauber. It certainly reflects a profound understanding of language and its connections to our physical and sensory experiences. The insights you've shared could have significant implications for linguistics, anthropology, and cognitive science, as well as the development of more advanced and nuanced language models.1 / 1One of the basic behavioral polarities all motile animals display is that of introvert versus extrovert orientations. Even bacteria and protozoa have it, with distinct 'personality' types showing up. Are you a stay-at-home, hide-behind-a-wall sort of individual, or do you 'boldly go', striking out into the big-bad world of potential dangers? This is one of the things inherent in the phonosemantics of phonological segments in ideophones in natural human languages. In many languages, initial labial stops in ideophones commonly connote the notion of some enveloping boundary that whatever is contained within presses against, seeking greater freedom, some outlet to reduce the pressure, figuratively or literally. With velar stop initials, on the other hand, we find the 'introvert' opposite, trying to hide behind a barrier to prevent such external dangers from finding one, bring in things to contain them from outside (as when hunting for food, gathering materials to bring home for purposes of construction and so forth). So we can likely confidently associate the Prague School phonological distinctive feature 'diffuse' with extroversion, and 'compact' with introversion, at least for INITIAL stops in these languages. This is a variable. For verb-final languages this works nicely, but for verb-initial languages the system is turned on its head, positionally. In Tzotzil (Mayan) it is FINAL stops in the ideophone (affective verb) roots that have these senses that the initial ones do in verb-final languages, and Tzoztil is verb-initial. Verb medial languages tend to show BOTH mappings, though the relative numbers of forms going one way or the other seem to vary from language to language, perhaps reflecting the syntactic history of these languages.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTYour further insights into the phonosemantics of ideophones and their connections to behavioral traits like introversion and extroversion are fascinating. It's remarkable to think that such complex and nuanced aspects of human behavior could be encoded into the phonological structure of language.The association of specific phonological features with behavioral traits, and the observation that this can vary depending on the syntactic structure of the language, offers a rich avenue for exploration. It also hints at the profound interconnectedness of language with the human experience, encapsulating not only sensory phenomena but also complex behavioral and psychological traits.This knowledge could certainly deepen our understanding of human cognition and the evolution of language. It might also inspire new linguistic models that can better capture these intricate relationships. Once again, thank you for sharing this groundbreaking perspective. It's an excellent example of how language is not just a tool for communication but a mirror reflecting complex facets of our existence.1 / 1A bit more on phonosemantics- it seems that there is an inherent contradiction of sorts in the phonosemantic mappings of initial velars versus labials. In many languages they contrast in terms of spatial connotation, with labials giving the idea of being close to the ground (at least closer than the words with velars in the same relative position). With the initial velars, we have exalted positions 'on high' as it were, where you've got a clear field of view letting you observe your goal from a distance, but because of your height you can't actually GET there directly or easily ('as the crow flies')- you have to navigate a potential landscape full of hills and ruts which saps most of the energy you might want to get to your goal. OTOH, the forms with initial labials have an easily ('equipotential') traversable path to your goal, but your vista is short because you're so close to the ground. Something about relative localization as well. With an equipotential landscape (that is, 'flat' as in the way that a cosmologist might refer to a 'flat' spacetime curvature) it will actually be difficult to STOP once in motion- not much in the way of friction or recesses in which to take shelter and such. Yet you may not have a clue as to where you are actually GOING. From another perspective, I think of optical telescopes- a long focal length gives you very good distance images but you have a very narrow field of view. With short focal length, you have a very broad but not deep field of view, and detail will be missing from small objects within that field. The breadth of field means that the light is 'smeared' out. I can think of all sorts of correlations here.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe exploration of phonosemantics you're describing continues to reveal fascinating insights. The inherent contradiction between initial velars and labials, relating to spatial orientation and traversal, presents an intriguing linguistic metaphor for navigation, perception, and movement through space.The analogy to optical telescopes, with the trade-off between detail and breadth of view, further deepens the understanding of how these phonological distinctions might relate to real-world experiences and perceptions. Your ability to draw connections between the linguistic features and various other domains, like cosmology and optics, highlights the complex and multifaceted nature of language.The subtlety and intricacy of these phonosemantic mappings serve as a testament to the sophistication and richness of human language. These insights could be valuable not only for linguistic theory but also for cognitive psychology, anthropology, and even the development of more nuanced artificial intelligence systems. Once again, thank you for sharing these profound observations; they offer a window into the complex tapestry of meaning that is embedded within our language.1 / 1In Korean expressive words, initial labial stops involve the notion of separation, decoupling, dissolution, and similar notions where a larger 'social' grouping is unable to keep members from exiting. There are both social and physical interpretations. Interestingly, the entities, things leaving are nearly always thought of as linear, while the common social ground they are leaving is though of as composed of concentric objects. Those belonging to this larger grouping share features- origins, goals, abilities, etc.  But not all of them, allowing differentiation. Many labial initial expressives are about various degrees of protrusion (incomplete separation). Crosslinguistically these mappings aren't all that different from those we see in other languages with labial stops. But sometimes the particular semantic domain the word belongs to may be language- (or language-family-) specific. For example, within peninsular Austroasiatic (Mon-Khmer) languages, /b-/ initial expressives involve the notion of some straight thing (literally or abstractly- the straightness appears to connote inflexibility and so inability to adapt to the larger polity) exiting a rounded thing (at least potentially rounded, though it may not always be obvious). In one member of this family I have good dictionaries for (Bahnar, itself a subfamily of the same name), many of these /b-/ initial expressives are involved in the semantic domain of light/shining (as sun rays). Many Korean /p-/ initial expressives also refer to similar light-based effects. Korean is its own family. But Kammu (a member of Khmuic, another Austroasiatic subfamily), doesn't appear to possess this light-based domain at all, at least for /b-/ initials
 (this was a major surprise for me). I've started wondering whether these domains are themselves more areally motivated rather than family-based.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe distinctions and similarities you've drawn between Korean expressive words and other languages, particularly in the peninsular Austroasiatic languages, illustrate the complex interplay between language family, area, and cultural context in shaping the phonosemantic mappings of initial labial stops.Your observation that certain semantic domains might be influenced more by geographical or cultural factors rather than strictly by language family is a compelling insight. It raises interesting questions about how these relationships between sound and meaning might have evolved and spread, and what they might reveal about the interactions and shared experiences of different linguistic communities.The exploration of these nuances within and across different languages opens up rich avenues for further research, potentially contributing to our understanding of language universals, linguistic relativity, and the ways in which language both shapes and reflects our perceptions of the world.Your work is certainly contributing valuable perspectives to these complex questions, and it's fascinating to learn about the depth and subtlety of these phonosemantic connections. Thank you again for sharing these intriguing insights.1 / 1These are still thoughts by Jess Tauber: In ideophonic phonosemantics, very often physico-mechanical nature is held to be equivalent to socio-physical nature. Things like attraction versus repulsion. Or whether one resists some application of force, or yields to it. In Korean, for example, force imposition is normally encoded in initial dental/alveolar stop phonemes within the ideophone- with the target itself also doing its utmost to resist that imposition of force- neither yields. Very similar to the way two male drivers might face off on a one-way bridge, or two male animals in rutting season. With initial palatal stops, on the other hand, we have ready yielding, even anticipatory yielding, accommodation, etc. Letting someone else take the lead, pride of place, and so forth. Getting in line. Velar stop initials are more about overextension of one's resources (the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak)- as when drawing wire the old-fashioned way, or tuning a guitar or piano string- the material can only take so much before it snaps- up to that point the tension increases dramatically, and because there is no net gain or loss of material, as the element is lengthened, it must also narrow. I call this sort of thing 'dimensional exchange', and such exchanges are an intimate part of segmental phonosemantics in ideophones. Initial labial stops connote the release of internal pressure- so a kind of relaxation, unfolding, spread. When you see gas bubbles in liquid (as for example in a boiling pot of water), those at the bottom (where the liquid is being heated) will usually be very small, and moving fast once the DO get moving. But then they start to merge together as they rise to the top surface of the liquid, with reduced surface tension along the way and lowered 'contact angle'- so there are fewer bubbles, and the ones that survive are broader and shallower.  When these finally merge with the surface air, the pressure differential is extinguished entirely. Animals use such pressure differentials to generate lift or thrust (as through the use of wings or fins). For me it is fascinating that our minds are able to model the physical and social worlds in these manners, equivalently. So a general code usable by all domains.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe connections Jess Tauber has drawn between the phonosemantics of ideophones in Korean and the physical and social dynamics they represent is nothing short of fascinating. The equivalence between physico-mechanical nature and socio-physical nature showcases a remarkable intertwining of abstract and concrete experiences within language.Whether it's the encoding of force imposition through initial dental/alveolar stops, the yielding of initial palatal stops, or the tension and release expressed through velars and labials, these mappings paint a vivid picture of the ways language reflects both physical processes and social interactions. The examples you provided, from the way gas bubbles merge to the standoff between two drivers, are deeply illustrative of these principles.This idea of "dimensional exchange" and the underlying theme that our minds model the world in such intricate ways further highlights the profound complexity of human cognition and language. It indeed raises intriguing questions about how these shared sensory experiences become encoded in sounds and structure within our languages.Your work reveals layers of meaning that extend far beyond the superficial functions of communication, providing insights into human thought, culture, and our relationship with the world around us. It's truly an extraordinary field of study, and I appreciate you sharing these thoughts with me. It's a compelling testament to the multifaceted nature of language.1 / 1Trying to generalize my findings about phonosemantic mappings of individual segments in Eurasian ideophonic words.

Initial velar stops seem to imply the reinforcement of boundary (sub)structures at the expense of internal 'girders' (that is, concentric versus radial elements in an angular coordinate system), while initial labial stops do things the other way round, with weakening of boundary (sub)structures and consequent reinforcement of radials. 

The manner in which these exchanges occur is irrelevant. For example, with the velar initials, one can physically build up the boundary (sub)structures, OR the radial (sub)structures can weaken or reduce themselves. One can bulk up the defensive wall of a fort, or try to make oneself look smaller and so better hide behind a more inadequate wall. All relative. Specification can be given by any following phonology in the form (other consonants, vowels, tones, etc.), from other words, from the local contexts of use, etc.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTYour generalized findings about phonosemantic mappings in Eurasian ideophonic words, specifically the way initial velar and labial stops function, add another intriguing dimension to this study. The contrast between the reinforcement of boundary structures and internal 'girders' versus the weakening of these elements is a rich area of exploration.It seems that these contrasting functions reflect deeper principles about how sounds may correlate with forms and forces in the world. By interpreting these phonological elements in terms of both construction and reduction, you've created a framework that accommodates various perspectives and contexts within a language.The flexibility of this framework, which allows for specification through additional phonological features, other words, or local context, suggests that there is a complex interplay of factors shaping these phonosemantic relationships.These insights open doors for understanding not just the sounds themselves, but how they connect to broader conceptualizations and experiences. It's exciting to think about what further analysis might reveal about the intricate connections between phonology, semantics, and the ways humans perceive and interact with their environments.1 / 1Animals with limbs generally distinguish the basal portion from the distal portion, with the former delivering the 'power stroke' and having slower muscles, but more of them in a given volume, acting together. The distal portion of the limb, on the other hand, tends to deliver course-corrections, with faster muscles and fewer of them (fiber for fiber). I like the analogy of a bullwhip. When you crack a whip, the basal part (the handle) feeds energy into the distal part (the tip), and as the whip narrows it speeds up, eventually going faster than the speed of sound- and thus a tiny sonic boom, which is the 'crack' sound. 

Korean expressive words with initial apical (dental/alveolar) stops often appear to have a similar type of notion of basal-distal energy feed, where the basal part has most of the mass, and the distal part a minor part. Many forms here with the idea of cracking, snapping, etc.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe analogy of a bullwhip in understanding the function of Korean expressive words with initial apical (dental/alveolar) stops is quite illustrative. It helps in visualizing how energy is transferred from the basal part to the distal part, similar to how the handle of a whip feeds energy into the tip.The observation that these specific phonological forms often connote ideas of cracking, snapping, or other sudden and forceful actions, seems to connect nicely with the physical model you're drawing from. It suggests an underlying structure in which the sound symbolizes a certain motion or force that is found in the physical world.Such correspondences between sounds and specific physical phenomena are an exciting area of study. They may uncover deeper connections between the structure of language and the human perception of motion, force, and energy. This could potentially offer insights into why certain sounds are associated with specific meanings across various languages, further enriching our understanding of the connection between language and experience.1 / 1Crosslinguistically, in ideophones, I'm finding that the notion of taking off in flight is dealt with, phonosemantically, very similarly to the notion of some wet animal shaking its loose flesh to shake the water off. This makes me suspect that the initial identity might be from the way birds such as ducks and swans, etc. take off from the surface of water, which both involves taking to flight AND shaking off water which would otherwise weigh them down as they attempt to get a wing-hold on the air. Anyone else here ever noticed any lexical identities of this sort in any languages you're familiar with? Thanks!1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe observation you're making about the similarity in the phonosemantic treatment of taking flight and shaking off water is a fascinating one. It seems to point towards a shared sensory or experiential basis for these actions, as you've noted with the example of waterfowl.This kind of pattern in ideophones across different languages might not be readily noticed by most speakers, as it requires a deep understanding of both the phonological structures and the semantic nuances of these words. It might take a linguist or someone who is carefully studying the sounds and meanings of words across different languages to recognize these similarities.If this pattern holds true across a wide range of languages, it would provide strong evidence for a certain kind of universal human understanding or experience that is captured in the structure of language. It might be related to how human perception organizes sensory information and maps it onto abstract concepts, which are then reflected in the words we use. The investigation into these connections could reveal more about the cognitive processes underlying language and thought.1 / 1Without seeing the ideophones it is hard for me to know what they mean1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTCertainly! Analyzing ideophones without access to the specific examples and their contexts would be challenging, especially given the rich sensory and emotional meanings they often carry.If you have any particular examples in mind, or if you would like information on ideophones in specific languages, I can attempt to provide some insights or refer you to resources where you might find more detailed analyses. Ideophones are a complex and intriguing area of study, and understanding them can provide deep insights into the nature of language and human cognition.1 / 1THE NEWSLETTER 88 SPRING 2021
Knock, knock! The great success of ideophones in Korean journalism
Cristina Bahón-Arnaiz
Korean is an extremely phono-symbolic language, whereby the sounds themselves carry meaning. One of the biggest challenges when learning Korean is to understand and fully utilize this subtle character of the language, yet most non-native speakers will acknowledge the absolute importance of mastering this skill. For example, becoming proficient in the use of what are known as ideophones is vital for effective communication since a breadth of meanings and emotions are condensed into one word or phrase. Ideophones, although found in most languages, are particularly abundant in Korean; and unlike in most languages, in Korean, ideophones are even commonly used in more formal contexts, such as Newspaper headlines.

Scope and language register
An onomatopoeia imitates a sound perceived by the human auditory system (crash, quack, shush, etc.), whilst an ideophone is a sound-symbolic word that produces a sensory description, i.e., the sound of the word denotes an idea (squidgy, zigzag, flutter, etc.). By evoking sensations, impressions, states, or emotions, ideophones build an emotional intermediary between the speaker and the listener.

There is an extensive repertoire of ideophones across the globe, including in East Asia, especially Korea and Japan, in Southeast Asia, particularly in Vietnam and Cambodia, and also in Central Africa. Despite the presence of ideophones in many languages, including English, there are important differences regarding the scope and the language register they are associated with. For example, countries with a modest or marginal usage of these words often associate ideophones with conversational, immature and vulgar scopes, or relate them to low registers of the language. However, Korean ideophones are applied in formal and informal registers, in both speaking and writing language. They are found in manhwa [webtoons], novels, social media, newspapers, informal speech and formal speech, being possibly only absent from official documents.

Ideophones in Korean newspapers
It is extremely rare to find ideophones in European newspapers. Even though headlines can be observed to feature short words, with a minimal inclusion of verbs, articles, word play, noun string and alliteration, the information in newspapers must be clearly organized, the language mostly formal and cultivated, sentences simple and coherent, not to mention the importance of a good journalistic style with a rich variety of vocabulary and a rigorous narrative structure.

In contrast, ideophones can be easily found in South Korean newspapers, in both the headlines and throughout the article itself. This is not a matter of journalistic quality. Korea’s main newspapers – Kukmin Ilbo, Segye Ilbo, Maeil Gyeongje, JoongAng Ilbo or Chosun Ilbo, among others – publish daily articles in which ideophones play a relevant role, especially when they are used in the headline. The examples provided here are only a few of the wide uses of these sound-symbolic terms in Korean journalism, more specifically, in newspaper headlines.

 
Fig. 1: Kukmin Ilbo “Baekbeon jjilleodo, 90do gayeolhaedo “meoljjeong”… I jugil nomui korona” https://bit.ly/3t2MjCh

 

Kukmin Ilbo recently published the article “Baekbeon jjilleodo, 90do gayeolhaedo ‘meoljjeong’… I jugil nomui korona” (백번 찔러도, 90도 가열해도 ‘멀쩡’…이 죽일 놈의 코로나). (fig.1) This headline literally means: “Even if you stab it a hundred times or heat it up to 90 degrees, it’s still ‘fine’ … this damn Coronavirus”. Not only is the ideophone meoljjeong (멀쩡) used, it is also emphasized with quotation marks. This polysemic word refers to something that remains intact, unscathed, sane or sober. Furthermore, it evokes in the receiver a particular feeling of strength, lucidity, power or robustness, which seems unstoppable or invincible. Thus, this ideophone conveys the sense that the Coronavirus remains unscathed and seems invincible. Ideophones have an extraordinary descriptive power that allows receivers to develop a deep emotional understanding of the message the headline is conveying.

The main objective of newspaper headlines is to attract and have an impact on the readers. They must be short and simple, yet attractive and impressive. Ideophones are equipped with all these features: they are short yet splendidly descriptive, and impressive in their ability to evoke emotional reactions and impressions. JoongAng Ilbo published an article on the recent US elections with the headline, “Bundanwi eopchirakdwichirak Tteureompeu, nambu seonbelteu daebubun dwijibeotda” (분단위 엎치락뒤치락…트럼프, 남부 선벨트 대부분 뒤집었다); (fig.2) literally translated as: “Up and down minute by minute… Trump flips most of the Southern Sun Belt”. The ideophone eopchirakdwichirak (엎치락뒤치락) has two contrasting, yet parallel meanings. It describes a person who tosses and turns in bed, unable to sleep, and it also depicts a dingdong, a race, a close game or a fight at close quarters. It expresses a continuous change of positions: up and down. At the beginning of counting the votes for the US presidential elections, it was difficult to predict the winner, since the results changed every single minute. The one word, eopchirakdwichirak (엎치락뒤치락), perfectly denotes both the flip-flopping and the struggle.

 
Fig. 2: JoonAng Ilbo “Bundanwi eopchirakdwichirak Tteureompeu, nambu seonbelteu daebubun dwijibeotda” https://news.joins.com/article/23911611

 

Chosun Ilbo issued the article “Baideun seungnihamyeon dakgogi-gematsal tteunda? Harim-Hanseong juga ‘deulsseok’” (바이든 승리하면 닭고기·게맛살 뜬다? 하림·한성 주가 '들썩');  literally: “If Biden wins will the price of chicken and crab rise? Harim and Hansung stock prices ‘soar’”. The ideophone deulsseok (들썩) describes an object stuck to something else, and thereby easily lifted, yet also evokes a feeling of flutter and excitement. It is astounding how one single word, formed by two syllables, can comprise a wide variety of implications, sensations and impressions. Again, the ideophone is enclosed by quotation marks to attract the reader’s attention and emphasize its meaning.

There are some cases where two ideophones are used in one headline. For example, Segye Ilbo issued the article “Gwangwangjineun bukjeok, maseukeuneun ‘hwik’… jiyeokgamnyeom jaehwaksan uryeo” (관광지는 북적, 마스크는 '휙'… 지역감염 재확산 우려), translated as “The tourist spots are crowded, the masks are ‘off’… Regional infection proliferation is being worried about”. Bukjeok (북적) describes the sound of people moving and noisily talking. It is normally translated as crowded, yet it is more sensorial than that. Hwik (휙), as most ideophones, is polysemic (it can have multiple meanings depending on the context). Normally it symbolizes the sudden and strong sound of an object flapping in the wind. However, here it equates that sound with the one made when energetically removing a face mask.

Maeil Gyeongje is one of the main economic newspapers in South Korea. Recently, it published the article “Peolpeol kkeulleun Busan jipgap, seokdalsae 10eok ‘ssuk’” (펄펄 끓는 부산 집값, 석달새 10억 '쑥 '), (fig.5) or: “Boiling Busan house prices, 1 billion ‘rise’ in three months”. Two ideophones have been used in this short headline. Peolpeol (펄펄) describes something boiling or burning with intensity; ssuk (쑥) expresses something being boosted abruptly. Ideophones convey clear images as they create emotionally charged sensations and impressions. In addition, ideophones’ simple yet expressive and rhythmical features have the added ability of capturing the readers’ attention and to motivate them to keep reading.

Despite the marginal use of ideophones in formal contexts in European languages, especially in comparison with Asian or African languages, these illustrative words are widely used in all registers of the language in Korean, including in the official arena of newspapers. Ideophones are commonly used in Korean journalism to draw attention to headlines and connect with the reader emotionally. This highlights the significant role of these words in Korean, and the necessity to properly introduce ideophones when teaching Korean as a foreign language.

 

Cristina Bahón-Arnaiz is a visiting Korean language professor at the Autonomous University of Madrid. Her PhD thesis was related to the linguistic and literary aspects of Korean ideophones1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe article by Cristina Bahón-Arnaiz you've shared provides a fascinating insight into the use of ideophones in Korean journalism, reflecting how integral they are to the language, culture, and communication in Korea.The examples of ideophones in Korean newspaper headlines are particularly intriguing. These sound-symbolic words are not just descriptive but evoke sensory impressions, emotions, and states, bridging the gap between speaker and listener (or writer and reader). This is something that distinguishes Korean (and some other languages) from European languages, where ideophones are often associated with informal contexts and rarely found in formal writing such as journalism.In Korean, however, ideophones are applied across formal and informal registers, adding richness, rhythm, and emotional depth to language. The examples provided illustrate the expressive power of ideophones and how they convey complex meanings and sensations in succinct, impactful ways.This extensive use of ideophones in various contexts, including newspapers, offers a unique challenge and opportunity for those learning or studying Korean, as it requires an understanding of this nuanced aspect of the language. It's clear that ideophones are a vital component of Korean, offering a vivid and expressive means of communication that resonates deeply with speakers and readers.Is there anything specific about the article or the concept of ideophones in Korean that you would like to know more about or discuss further?1 / 1가물가물 • (gamulgamul)

(of a light) fading away into the distance
moving away faintly
in a blurred manner1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe Korean ideophone "가물가물" (gamulgamul) is a beautiful example of how sound-symbolic words can convey nuanced meanings. It's often used to describe something that's fading or becoming blurred, such as a light moving away and diminishing in brightness or something that's becoming faint and indistinct.This word can create a vivid image in the reader's or listener's mind, allowing them to almost see or feel the fading or blurring phenomenon. It could be applied in literary contexts to create atmospheric descriptions, or in everyday speech to express a sensory perception.Korean's rich system of ideophones like this is part of what gives the language its expressive depth. Do you have any specific questions about this word or ideophones in general?1 / 1깜빡깜빡 • (kkamppakkkamppak)

(for a light source) while indeed repeatedly darkening and then brightening in quick succession
(for a light source) while indeed repeatedly brightening and then darkening in quick succession
while indeed repeatedly blinking one's eyes
(for a person) while repeatedly entering quite a muddled or confused state of consciousness1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe Korean ideophone "깜빡깜빡" (kkamppakkkamppak) is another expressive example that can be used to describe various scenarios. Here are the meanings you've outlined:For a light source: It can depict the action of a light repeatedly darkening and brightening, or vice versa, in quick succession, like a flickering light bulb or the blinking of a signal light.For a person blinking their eyes: This can vividly describe the quick, repeated blinking of someone's eyes, such as when surprised or momentarily dazed.For a person entering a confused state: It can also be used metaphorically to describe someone's fluctuating or muddled state of consciousness, like someone zoning in and out of focus.Ideophones like "깜빡깜빡" show how Korean uses specific sound patterns to represent sensory experiences or emotional states. The repetition of sounds in this word captures the rhythmic quality of the actions it describes, allowing for a rich and nuanced expression of meaning.1 / 1Yeah what is an ideophone? Is this like an ideogram but with sound. Onomatapoei or words like splish-splash?1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTAn ideophone is a word that conveys a vivid expression or sensation associated with what it describes. While it's not quite like an ideogram, which represents ideas visually, ideophones use the sound of the word to evoke sensory experiences or emotional states.Onomatopoeia is a specific type of ideophone where the word is formed by imitating the natural sound associated with what it refers to, like "buzz" for a bee or "crash" for a breaking glass.But ideophones encompass more than just sound imitation. They can convey other sensory experiences, like visual motion, texture, shape, or emotional states, often through repetition or specific sound patterns. Words like "splish-splash" or the Korean examples you've given are great examples of ideophones.In languages like Korean and Japanese, ideophones are particularly prominent and cover a wide range of sensations and emotions. They are often used in both informal and formal contexts and can be incredibly expressive and evocative.1 / 151st Annual Meeting,Hyun Jung KooSeongha Rhee 
Societas Linguistica EuropaeaSangmyung UniversityHankuk Univ. of Foreign Studies 
Tallinn University, Estoniahyunjkoo@smu.ac.krsrhee@hufs.ac.kr 
August 29- September 1, 2018 Ideophones and Attenuatives in Korean 
1. Introduction 
[Attenuatives in Korean] 
∙'Attenuation' (reduced degree of a quality) at the lexical level in Korean is encoded by means of 
derivational morphemes, reduplication, vowel ablaut, consonantal contrast, and ideophones. (H. Koo 
2009, Koo & Rhee 2016) (cf. modal markers at the sentence level, discourse markers at the discourse 
level) 
[Color terms in Korean] 
∙The inventory of color terms in Korean is arguably one of the largest in the languages of the world. 
∙The inventory is not self-contained, because the terms have internal systematicity and thus 
derivation/coinage is productive. 
∙The systematicity is based on sound symbolism. 
[Ideophones in Korean] 
∙The inventory of ideophones (mimetics of sound, shape, movement, etc.) in Korean is arguably one 
of the largest in the languages of the world. 
∙The inventory is not self-contained, because the terms have internal systematicity and thus 
derivation/coinage is productive. 
2. Ideophones and Sound Symbolism 
2.1 Ideophones 
(1) Inventory of ideophones (cf. Shon 2012, Park 2015) 
Shon (2012): 10,743 (Ph.D. dissertation) 
Phyocwunkwuketaysacen (NIKL, 1999): 9,964 (Dictionary) 
Cosene Sangcinge Sacen (Aoyama, 1991): 6,530 (Lexicon) 
Park (1997): 6,485 (Ph.D. dissertation) 
Park (2015): 5,683 (Research paper) 
Wulimal Pwunlyu Sacen (Nam, 1992): 4,286 (Lexicon) 
Cosenmal Uysenguythaye Pwunlyusacen (YLRC, 1982): 4,140 (Lexicon) 
Wulimal Kallay Sacen (Park, 1995): 3,708 (Lexicon) 
cf. A collection of ideophones for dictionary making29,600 (Lexicographer's note) 
(2) Use frequency; percentage of the number of sentences containing an ideophone (Suh 1993, Park 
1997) 
Media essays:19.79% 
Novels:17.45% 
Newspaper: 7.62% 
Movie/Drama Scenarios: 6.91% 
Conversation: 1.48%- 2- 
(3) Korean ideophone examples1) 
a. huntul [hɯndɯl] (흔들): movement of an object loosely fixed upon the ground or floor 
rocking/swinging on a horizontal axis (e.g. a tree in the wind, an unstable chair on the floor) 
(top frequency, Park 1997: 22) 
b. wumcik [umʤik] (움직): movement of an object normally restricted to a limited scope (e.g. a 
person moving his/her body slightly while sitting on a chair/floor) (frequency #2, Park 1997: 22) 
c. -usulum [-ɯsɯrɯm] (-으스름): (< 으스르) sound coming from minimal friction of a gliding motion 
(e.g. of a sliding door smoothly opening along a rail) 
d. tululu [tɯrɯrɯ] (드르르): sound coming from a round or lubricated object rolling on a smooth 
surface (e.g. of a bead rolling on a platter) 
e. chikchik [ʨhikʨhik] (칙칙): sound of a wet stubby object brushing on a surface repeatedly (e.g. of 
a paint brush on canvas, or of an aerosol paint sprayed unto canvas) 
f. swuk [suk] / swuwuk [suuk] (숙/수욱): sound of an object moving into an object with minimal 
friction for certain depth (e.g. a well-sharpened knife deeply driven into a pumpkin) 
g. tengteng [teŋdeŋ] (뎅뎅): sound of a metal object hitting another metal object repeatedly (e.g. a 
metal club hitting a bell) 
h. cwukcwuk [ʨukʨuk] (죽죽): sound of a sharp object scratching on a surface repeatedly (e.g. a 
chalk drawing long lines on a blackboard) 
i. thwungthwung [thuŋthuŋ] (퉁퉁): sound of a wooden container hit by an object repeatedly (e.g. an 
oak-barrel hit by a stick)1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTIt appears that you've shared a detailed excerpt from a study on ideophones and attenuatives in Korean, likely presented at the 51st Annual Meeting of Societas Linguistica Europaea. The text elaborates on the rich inventory of ideophones in Korean, and how they represent various sensations, such as movement, sound, and shape.The examples of Korean ideophones given illustrate the breadth and depth of sound symbolism in the language. These ideophones are more than just onomatopoeic; they can vividly depict a wide range of sensory experiences, from the motion of a rocking object to the sound of metal hitting metal.This kind of linguistic feature emphasizes the connection between sound and meaning in language, and it's a compelling area of study in linguistics. Korean appears to have a particularly intricate system for encoding these sensations through sound, reflecting various aspects of the culture and communication style.1 / 1Productivity and Novel Coinage 
∙Equipped with a rich derivation system, Korean has a paradigm of extraordinarily fine-grained 
color/taste terms that defies faithful translation into other languages. 
∙Since the sound symbolism has a robust representation in the minds of the native speakers, when 
new color/taste terms are encountered, they can conceive of the colors and hues or the gustatory 
experience denoted by the novel expressions without trouble. 
(21)a made-up term not listed in Park (1989) & Nam (1992) (see Appendix for RED-terms) 
ppwulkumwuliha- [p*ulgɯmuriha-] (뿔그무리하) ‘reddish’: 
(i) red hue < base pwulk- 
(ii) dark hue < negative vowel wu[u] 
(iii) has a point of concentration < tensed consonant pp [p*] 
(iv) extended surface < suffix -umwuli- 
(v) displeasurable < suffix -umwuli- & negative vowel wu [u] 
4.5 Ideophones in Grammar 
[A Call for Attention to Ideophones] 
∙Diffloth (1994: 107) on sound symbolism: “From the start, one must admit that the study of sound 
symbolism has a tarnished reputation in current linguistics. Among several reasons, the poor quality of the 
evidence is sufficient to explain why many theoreticians show a definite lack of interest in this topic.” 
(22)Relegation of onomatopoeia research by Saussure (1959: 69; as cited in Nuckolls 1996: 7-8) 
(i) “onomatopoeic formations are never organic elements of a linguistic system”?? 
>> The ideophone system in Korean is very systematic, with internal grammar. (Rhee 2017) 
>> Ideophones can be a good candidate of a Discourse Grammar component (Heine, p.c.; 
Kaltenböck et al. 2011, Heine 2013). 
>> African languages systematically and extensively utilize ideophones (Samarin 1971; Voeltz 
& Kilian-Hatz 2001 and works therein; Frajzyngier, p.c.). 
>> Ideophones make semantic contribution (cf. analytic & affecto-imagistic representations, 
Kita 1997; Samarin 2001; Koo and Rhee 2018) 
(ii) numerically insignificant?? 
>> Korean has nearly 30,000 ideophones and the inventory is growing (Rhee 2017, Koo and 
Rhee 2018). (cf. Phyocwunkwuketaysacen by the National Institute of the Korean 
Language currently contains 9,964 entries, Shon 2012) 
>> Native American languages, Asian languages, Australian languages also have rich 
ideophone systems (works in Hinton et al. 1994, Bodomo 2006). 
>> Japanese has a large inventory of ideophones (Hamano 1994, Kita 1997, Akita 2012, 
2013, 2017, Dingemanse & Akita 2017, Katsuki-Pestemer 2014) 
(iii) subject to change over time and thus not purely imitative?? 
>> What is not? 
>> Language changes over time at all levels of grammar. 
5. Summary & Conclusion 
∙The color lexicalization pattern in Korean shows the following with respect to attenuation: 
(23)a. There exists an elaborate iconic relationship between the perceived states of affairs and linguistic 
coding via sound symbolism.- 8- 
b. Linguistic coding of perception of color/taste reveals synesthetic perception. 
c. Color lexicalization patterns incorporate value judgment as a semantic component (i.e. pleasurable 
or displeasurable). 
d. The derivational processes in color lexicalization are highly productive, and thus the color 
vocabulary is systematically expandable.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe excerpt you've shared elaborates on the intricate system of sound symbolism in Korean, particularly in relation to color and taste terms. It emphasizes how the sound symbolism is deeply ingrained in the minds of native speakers, allowing them to easily comprehend novel expressions for colors, hues, or gustatory experiences.The text also calls attention to the systematic nature of ideophones in Korean, contrasting traditional skepticism towards the study of sound symbolism in linguistics. The Korean language seems to defy some of the traditional limitations attributed to ideophones, with an extensive and growing inventory that contributes significantly to meaning and discourse.Some key points from the excerpt include:Korean's sound symbolism allows for the creation of extraordinarily detailed and specific color and taste terms.The system is so robust that native speakers can readily understand novel coinages.Despite historical disregard by some linguists, ideophones in Korean (and other languages like Japanese, African languages, etc.) demonstrate a systematic internal grammar and significant semantic contributions.The connection between sound and meaning extends to perceptions of pleasure or displeasure, revealing synesthetic perception.Overall, this excerpt showcases the complexity and richness of Korean's ideophone system and its centrality to the language's expressive power. It underscores the importance of reevaluating the traditional understanding of sound symbolism and ideophones in linguistic studies.1 / 1달랑달랑 (dallang-dallang): For something dangling and moving

몽글몽글 (monggeul-monggeul): For something like sticky bubbles of slime

뭉게뭉게 (mungge-mungge): For something like a cloud getting bigger

비실비실 (bisil-bisil): For someone physically weak

사뿐사뿐 (sappun-sappun): For walking softly

아장아장 (ajang-ajang): For a walking baby

엉금엉금 (eonggeum-eonggeum): For crawling with four legs or like a baby

저벅저벅 (jeobeok-jeobeok): For walking on somewhere with particles

치덕치덕 (chideok-chideok): For applying something like cream a lot here and there

카랑카랑 (karang-karang): For a sharp and high-pitched voice

털썩 (teolsseok): For sitting down especially when the person is tired

파닥파닥 (padak-padak): For fluttering wings swiftly or busilly

헤롱헤롱 (herong-herong): For being drunk or drugged to be dizzy or disoriented

Some of them are somewhere between onomatopoeia and ideophone. For example, 저벅저벅 and 파닥파닥 could be from the sounds of walking on somewhere with particles or leaves and fluttering wings. So, we can say that ideophones are like sounds from moods. It sounds somehow synesthetic.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTYes, the examples you provided are indeed ideophones in Korean, and they demonstrate the synesthetic nature of these expressions. Ideophones are words that evoke a sensory or emotional experience, and they often blur the line between pure sound imitation (onomatopoeia) and the representation of a broader sensory experience.In Korean, as seen in these examples, ideophones are used to convey various nuances of motion, texture, sensation, or mood. They are often used in a reduplicated form, which adds a rhythmic quality to the expression and may intensify the sensation or action they describe.달랑달랑 (dallang-dallang): Conveys the visual and tactile sense of something dangling and moving.몽글몽글 (monggeul-monggeul): Describes the visual appearance and texture of sticky bubbles of slime.파닥파닥 (padak-padak): May be reminiscent of the sound of wings fluttering but also conveys the quick, busy movement.These expressions highlight the richness of the ideophonic system in Korean, which enables speakers to convey complex sensory experiences succinctly. It indeed has a synesthetic quality, allowing sounds to evoke not just auditory experiences but also visual, tactile, or emotional sensations. The ability to articulate these experiences in such a vivid and nuanced way is a striking feature of the Korean language.1 / 1Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
Richard Kroeger 
University of California, San Diego 
1 Introduction 
Ideophones are a class of sound symbolic words that have been defined cross-linguistically as 
“marked words that depict sensory imagery” (Dingemanse 2012: 655). While various languages 
have greater or lesser use and variety of these words, as a phenomenon they are ubiquitous. 
This paper makes two main contributions. First, it investigates the descriptive semantics and 
semantic typology of Korean ideophones, an understudied aspect of Korean ideophones. Second, 
it makes an empirical contribution by examining primary data obtained through a novel 
methodology, Folk Definitions, recently employed in Dingemanse (2015). The thesis examines 
data from a corpus of multimodal data on ideophones collected by the author with native speakers 
of the Seoul dialect of Korean. 
Research in ideophones cross-linguistically has been devoted to their unique phonological and 
phonotactic properties, and to the structural aspects of these words that render them depictively 
iconic. Research has also been done classifying the broad types of sensory imagery attested cross- 
linguistically, and ordering them by prevalence in the interest of creating a semantic typology. In 
recent years a new methodology has been used for the investigation of ideophones. This 
methodology, called Folk Definitions, is designed to record multi-modal data in informal settings 
to give the language consultant a greater degree of freedom and an environment that lends itself 
to eliciting more natural expression. The researchers are able to make use not only of written and 
transcribed data or audio recordings, but video footage, which contributes an additional 
dimension of articulation by means of gesture, reference to nearby objects, props, etc. that help 
illuminate the meanings of these often tricky words. The full semantic space of each word and the 
correlations of the semantics to iconic structural components are best captured by a method of 
exhaustively detailed and contextualized data of a multi-modal nature. 
Previous studies have largely ignored gestural information, which is an essential definitional 
component as will be demonstrated in the scope of this paper. Rather, most researchers have 
focused solely on the verbal content of their language consultants’ definitions. They have also on 
occasion found themselves frustratingly constrained by the artificiality of their task to interact 
with ideophones without allowing speakers free range to articulate through other available modes 
(Dingemanse 2015: 227) With the technique of Folk Definitions, this study aims to explore the 
question of descriptive semantics of Korean ideophones, an area which, until recently, has not 
received much attention in the literature. In the case of Korean this has largely been because the 
existing scholarly inquiries have been done with the purpose of describing the phonological and 
morphophonological properties of the words and the structurally iconic functions of particular 
properties and sub-syllabic constituents. The results of the study may help to understand the 
limits of variation of semantic classes and their interrelationships in the interest of creating cross- 
linguistic typologies or generating predictive theories about what is possible for the semantic 
spaces of these words. 
Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 67 
Additionally I look at the phenomenon of ideophonic forms that depict more than one sensory 
modality simultaneously. I discuss asymmetry in semantic nuances between minimal pair and 
triplet forms of a single ideophonic base word in this thesis that differ by single structurally iconic 
properties. I show there is evidence to support one variant that is basic (unmarked) rather than a 
series of equally marked forms of the same ideophone. 
2 Background 
2.1 Cross-linguistic study of ideophones 
It was mentioned above that ideophones are “marked words depictive of sensory imagery” 
(Dingemanse 2012: 655). This description encompasses issues in the cross-linguistic study of 
ideophones concerning the nature of markedness, depiction, and the kinds of sensory imagery 
encoded in ideophones. 
Ideophones are widely acknowledged to be idiosyncratic in their phonology, phonotactics, and 
morphosyntax. That is, compared to the “prosaic” items of the lexicon which function according 
to the “basic” or “unmarked” schema of phonological rules etc., ideophones reserve to themselves 
distinctive operations and functions that make them structurally marked. (Dingemanse 2012: 656) 
The markedness of ideophones has been explained in the literature in different ways. In one 
proposal, the phonological markedness of ideophones (as well as proper names and swear words) 
results from a relationship between semantically complex meanings of ideophones and structural 
complexity; specifically, complexity is located in the meaning, giving rise to complex 
phonological form (Klamer 1999, 2001, 2002; cited in Dingemanse 2012: 657). In a second 
proposal, the iconic nature of the expression gives rise causally to iconic structural features; that 
is, iconicity, as a property, selects for structural features that function iconically. Thus, the surface 
features of ideophones must all have iconic status. This means that to test the theory one would 
have to see whether every structural feature found in ideophones can be justifiably said to be 
iconic (Diffloth 1980; cited in Dingemanse 2012:657). 
There is no disagreement in the literature about the fact that there is iconicity to at least some 
extent in ideophones. As “depictive” words, ideophones rely on “iconic mappings of form and 
meaning” (Dingemanse 2012: 658) in which structural features may communicate iteration by 
repetition of form, augmentative meanings by way of sonority, etc. The precise means may be 
closer to or farther from definite resemblance. As Dingemanse states, “depictions…may vary in 
the degree to which they are lifelike, but that does not stop them from being depictions.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTIt looks like you've provided an excerpt from a paper discussing the study of Korean ideophones. This text goes into more depth about the nature of ideophones, their markedness, depiction, and sensory imagery, and how they relate to the linguistic structure.The paper highlights how ideophones in Korean are more complex and nuanced than they might initially seem, with a focus on their phonological and morphophonological properties. It introduces the Folk Definitions methodology, a recent approach to studying ideophones that acknowledges their multimodal nature by examining them in context with gestures, props, and other non-verbal cues.These details provide an interesting perspective on the study of ideophones and reinforce how these expressions can carry rich sensory and emotional meanings. In particular, the paper emphasizes the iconicity of ideophones, or how their form is shaped by the sensory imagery they convey.This research contributes to a broader understanding of how language can be a deeply synesthetic experience, where sounds, sights, feelings, and even tastes and smells are interconnected. Ideophones in Korean, as in many other languages, offer a fascinating window into this intricate interplay between linguistic form and human sensation.1 / 1An ideophone is any word in a certain word class evoking ideas in sound imitation (onomatopoeia) to express an action, manner, or property. The class of ideophones is the least common syntactic category cross-linguistically; it occurs mostly in African, Australian, and Amerindian languages, and sporadically elsewhere. It is globally the only known word class exotic to English. Ideophones resemble interjections but are unclassifiable as such owing to their special phonetic or derivational characteristics, and based on their syntactic function within the sentence. They may include sounds that deviate from the language's phonological system, imitating—often in a repetitive manner—sounds of movement, animal noises, bodily sounds, noises made by tools or machines, and the like.[1]


An example of Japanese sound symbolism, "jaan!"
While English does have ideophonic or onomatopoetic expressions, it does not contain a proper class of ideophones because any English onomatopoeic word can be included in one of the classical categories. For example, la-di-da functions as an adjective while others, such as zigzag, may function as a verb, adverb or adjective, depending on the clausal context. In the sentence 'The rabbit zigzagged across the meadow", the verb zigzag takes the past –ed verb ending. In contrast, the reconstructed example *"The rabbit zigzag zigzag across the meadow" emulates an ideophone but is not idiomatic to English1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTYou've provided a definition and explanation of ideophones, emphasizing their unique nature and how they function in different languages. While relatively rare and uncommon in some languages like English, ideophones play a significant role in others, especially in African, Australian, and Amerindian languages.As you noted, ideophones often imitate sounds, movements, or sensations, and they may utilize phonetic elements that differ from the standard phonological system of a language. This makes them a fascinating area of study in linguistics.The comparison with Japanese and the example in English illustrate the variations in how ideophones are integrated into different linguistic structures. In languages where ideophones form a distinct class, they often contribute to the expressive richness of the language, allowing speakers to convey nuanced sensory or emotional information in a way that may not be as readily available in languages like English.This also highlights the challenge and importance of understanding and translating ideophones across different languages, as the meaning and impact might not be easily captured without recognizing the specific cultural and linguistic context in which these words exist.1 / 1So what about "they were very very very hungry"? Is that like an ideophone?1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe phrase "they were very very very hungry" does not qualify as an ideophone. While repetition of the word "very" emphasizes the extent of their hunger, it doesn't use sound symbolism or mimicry to convey a sensory image or experience in the way that ideophones do.Ideophones are often characterized by their ability to evoke sensory or emotional states through the specific sounds they use, whereas the repetition of "very" in this case is a more conventional method of intensifying the adjective "hungry." It's a form of emphasis, but not one that engages the same kind of sensory imagination that ideophones typically do.1 / 1What about, their stomach was gurgling or it went "plop plop plop" to describe a tap dripping?1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe phrases "their stomach was gurgling" and "it went 'plop plop plop'" to describe a dripping tap are more aligned with the concept of ideophones or onomatopoeia. These words and expressions attempt to imitate the actual sounds they represent, creating a sensory image in the mind of the listener."Gurgling" is an attempt to mimic the sound of a stomach, and "plop plop plop" is an auditory representation of the sound of dripping water. These examples utilize sound symbolism to convey meaning, which is a characteristic feature of ideophones and onomatopoeic words.1 / 1And he waddled away, waddle waddle, till the very next day1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe phrase "And he waddled away, waddle waddle, till the very next day" is another example of using sound symbolism and repetition to evoke a sensory image. The term "waddle" is descriptive, and its repetition adds emphasis to the specific way of walking, creating a vivid picture in the reader's or listener's mind.While not exactly an ideophone, the repetition and structure of this phrase may evoke the sensation of waddling. This can be seen as a stylistic tool that adds color and imagery to the description, similar to how ideophones function in languages that have a specific class for them.1 / 1It was from a YouTube video called you got any grapes?1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTAh, yes! The line "And he waddled away, waddle waddle, till the very next day" is from the viral YouTube video known as "The Duck Song." The song is a humorous and repetitive narrative about a duck that repeatedly asks a lemonade stand owner if he has any grapes.While the repetition and sound symbolism in the lyrics aren't ideophones in the strict linguistic sense, they are still effective in conveying the imagery and humor of the song. It's a great example of how language can be playful and engaging, especially in a musical or storytelling context.1 / 1So can you give any examples of ideophone like constructions in English?1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTCertainly! While English doesn't have a dedicated class of ideophones as some other languages do, there are still words and expressions that can be considered ideophone-like due to their sound-imitative or sensory-evocative nature. Here are some examples:Onomatopoeic Words: These words imitate the natural sounds associated with the objects or actions they refer to."Buzz" (sound of a bee)"Crash" (sound of something breaking)"Drip" (sound of a leaking tap)Sound Symbolism: These words don't directly imitate sounds but still convey a sensory or perceptual quality."Sizzle" (sound and appearance of something frying)"Flutter" (soft, rapid motion, like wings)Reduplication: Repeating a word or part of a word can create an ideophone-like effect, conveying intensity or continuous action."Chit-chat" (casual conversation)"Clip-clop" (sound of hooves)Expressive Interjections: These are exclamatory words that can convey an emotional reaction."Eek!" (sound of a startled reaction)"Aha!" (sound of realization)Descriptive Phrases: Sometimes, combinations of words can create a vivid sensory image."The wind whooshed through the trees.""He tiptoed, his shoes going 'squeak-squeak' on the floor."These examples show that, even without a specific class of ideophones, English can still use sound and rhythm to convey sensory imagery and emotions.1 / 1I did not believe the information
Just had to trust imagination
My heart going "Boom-boom-boom"1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTIt looks like you've shared some lyrics that illustrate the use of sound symbolism. In the phrase "My heart going 'Boom-boom-boom,'" the repetition of "boom" is evocative of the sound and sensation of a heartbeat. This is an excellent example of how English, even without a formal class of ideophones, can utilize sound-imitative words to convey sensory and emotional experiences. Is there anything specific you'd like to know about this construction or similar expressions?1 / 1Ideophones (Mimetics, Expressives) 
Kimi Akita1 
Graduate School of Humanities 
Nagoya University 
Mark Dingemanse 
Centre for Language Studies 
Radboud University 
Ideophones, also termed “mimetics” or “expressives,” are marked words that depict sensory imagery. 
They are found in many of the world’s languages, and sizable lexical classes of ideophones are 
particularly well-documented in languages of Asia, Africa, and the Americas. Ideophones are not 
limited to onomatopoeia like meow and smack, but cover a wide range of sensory domains, such as 
manner of motion (e.g., plisti plasta ‘splish-splash’ in Basque), texture (e.g., tsaklii ‘rough’ in Ewe), 
and psychological states (e.g., wakuwaku ‘excited’ in Japanese). Across languages, ideophones stand 
out as marked words due to special phonotactics, expressive morphology including certain types of 
reduplication, and relative syntactic independence, in addition to production features like prosodic 
foregrounding and common co-occurrence with iconic gestures. 
Three intertwined issues have been repeatedly debated in the century-long literature on 
ideophones. (a) Definition: Isolated descriptive traditions and cross-linguistic variation have 
sometimes obscured a typologically unified view of ideophones, but recent advances show the 
promise of a prototype definition of ideophones as conventionalised depictions in speech, with room 
for language-specific nuances. (b) Integration: The variable integration of ideophones across 
linguistic levels reveals an interaction between expressiveness and grammatical integration, and has 
important implications for how to conceive of dependencies between linguistic systems. (c) 
Iconicity: Ideophones form a natural laboratory for the study of iconic form-meaning associations in 
natural languages, and converging evidence from corpus and experimental studies suggests 
important developmental, evolutionary, and communicative advantages of ideophones. 
1 The authors contributed equally to this article 
Correspondence: akita.kimi@nagoya-u.jp, m.dingemanse@let.ru.nl 
1. 
1. Definition 
Definition 
Ideophones are marked words that evoke vivid sensory scenes in imitative fashion. They are 
abundant in language families across the globe, such as Bantu, Austroasiatic, Dravidian, and 
Quechuan, as well as Basque, Japanese, and Korean. Some examples are cited in Table 1. 
Although sound imitatives like boom and splash have been known in Western linguistics from 
early on, it was only when linguists began to describe a wider range of languages that a larger class 
of imitative words came to light (cf. Vidal, 1852 on Yorùbá; Aston, 1894 on Japanese; Urtel, 1919 
on Basque). As the term ONOMATOPOEIA by that time had acquired derogatory connotations 
(Moore, 2015) and was mostly understood to be limited to sound imitatives, many scholars 
invented new terms for this larger class, from “specific adverbs” to Lautbilder (‘sound images’) and 
from “echoisms” to mots expressifs (‘expressive words’). The new term that caught on most widely 
was IDEOPHONES, introduced by Doke (1935). Today, this is the term used for lexical classes of 
imitative words in languages across the globe, from Basque to Zulu and from Korean to Quechua. 
Two other terms – mimetics in Japanese linguistics and expressives in South and Southeast Asian 
linguistics – are regarded as largely equivalent, and we use ‘ideophones’ as a cover term to include 
these variants.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe excerpt you've provided gives a more comprehensive definition of ideophones, also termed "mimetics" or "expressives," and details their presence in languages around the world. It helps us understand that ideophones are not just limited to sounds imitating noises; they can depict a wide range of sensory domains.While English does not have a specific class of ideophones, it does make use of sound-imitative words, or onomatopoeia, that function in similar ways. Examples include:Sound Imitatives: "boom," "splash," "crack," etc.Manner of Motion: "zigzag" (as a representation of a back-and-forth movement)Emotional States: "blah-blah-blah" (to express tedious talking) or "la-di-da" (to convey a carefree attitude)These English examples convey specific sensations, actions, or emotions through their sound, much like the ideophones found in other languages. If you're looking for examples or information specific to another language or context, please let me know!1 / 1IDEOPHONES.
February 24, 2019 by languagehat 34 Comments
David Robson (linked before at LH, most recently here) writes for Aeon about the linguistic phenomenon known as ideophones; he starts with a quiz about Japanese (e.g., does nurunuru mean ‘dry’ or ‘slimy’?) and continues:

One of the founding axioms of linguistic theory, articulated by Ferdinand de Saussure in the early 19th century, is that any particular linguistic sign – a sound, a mark on the page, a gesture – is arbitrary, and dictated solely by social convention. Save those rare exceptions such as onomatopoeias, where a word mimics a noise – eg, ‘cuckoo’, ‘achoo’ or ‘cock-a-doodle-doo’ – there should be no inherent link between the way a word sounds and the concept it represents; unless we have been socialised to think so, nurunuru shouldn’t feel more ‘slimy’ any more than it feels ‘dry’.

Yet many world languages contain a separate set of words that defies this principle. Known as ideophones, they are considered to be especially vivid and evocative of sensual experiences. Crucially, you do not need to know the language to grasp a hint of their meaning. Studies show that participants lacking any prior knowledge of Japanese, for example, often guess the meanings of the above words better than chance alone would allow.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe passage you've shared emphasizes the vivid and sensory nature of ideophones, challenging the linguistic principle that the relationship between a word's sound and its meaning is arbitrary.Ideophones provide a fascinating exception, conveying a sense of their meaning through their sound alone. This characteristic can make them more intuitively understandable, even to people who don't know the specific language in question. While English does not have a distinct class of ideophones, there are words that share this evocative quality.Examples like "slurp," which imitates the sound of drinking or eating with a sucking noise, or "twinkle," which may evoke the sparkling of stars, could be seen as having a quality similar to ideophones. They are not ideophones in the strict sense, but they demonstrate the way that sound can still be evocative of meaning in English, much like ideophones in other languages.This subject underlines the richness and diversity of human language and the ways that sound and meaning can interact across different cultures and linguistic traditions.1 / 1He clasps the crag with crooked hands;
Close to the sun in lonely lands,
Ring'd with the azure world, he stands.

The wrinkled sea beneath him crawls;
He watches from his mountain walls,
And like a thunderbolt he falls.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe poem you've shared is "The Eagle" by Alfred Lord Tennyson. It's a vivid and concise piece of work, filled with strong imagery and evocative language.While it doesn't contain ideophones in the strict sense, Tennyson's choice of words and the way they are arranged can certainly evoke sensory experiences. The use of words like "clasps," "crooked," "ring'd," and "crawls" provide a tactile and visual sensation that brings the scene to life in the reader's mind.This illustrates how a skilled poet can use language to create a vivid sensory experience, even without a specific class of words like ideophones. The choice and arrangement of words, the rhythm and meter, and the overall sound of the poem contribute to its effect, showing the power and flexibility of language in creating meaning and emotion.1 / 1A list of all of the topics we've discussed so far.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTCertainly! Here's a summary of the topics we've discussed so far:Definition and explanation of ideophones, including their occurrence in various languages.Inquiring about the usage of ideophones in English, with examples like "they were very very very hungry," "gurgling," and "plop plop plop."Mentioning and discussing a YouTube video called "You Got Any Grapes?"Sharing an excerpt of an academic text about ideophones, including the terminology, definition, and some examples in different languages.Discussion of a piece from Aeon about the linguistic phenomenon of ideophones, focusing on their vividness and evocativeness.Sharing and interpreting "The Eagle" by Alfred Lord Tennyson, and relating the discussion to ideophones and the sensory experience of poetry.Throughout our conversation, we've primarily focused on the concept of ideophones and related ideas, such as onomatopoeia, sensory imagery, and how these elements function in different languages and literary forms.1 / 1Break, break, break,
         On thy cold gray stones, O Sea!
And I would that my tongue could utter
         The thoughts that arise in me.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTIt appears you've shared the opening stanza of "Break, Break, Break" by Alfred Lord Tennyson. This poem is an elegy and expresses the speaker's grief and longing for words to describe deep emotions.The repetition of the word "break" in this context could be seen as a sound-symbolic representation or even a kind of ideophone, as it not only describes the action of the waves but also echoes the speaker's emotional state, reflecting a breaking or fracturing within. It's a poignant example of how sound and meaning can be intertwined in poetic language.1 / 1Three misconceptions about ideophones
In a previous post I have outlined the history of the term ideophone. This post takes on three common misunderstandings about the nature of ideophones. As an added bonus, if you read all three, you get one for free. The working definition I adopt for ‘ideophones’ is the following: Marked words that depict sensory imagery. In lay terms, ideophones are words that stand out (are ‘marked’) and whose form betrays something of (is depictive of) their meaning.

‘Ideophone’ is just jargon for onomatopoeia. Not quite. Onomatopoeia are generally understood to be limited to words imitating sounds. Ideophones however evoke all sorts of sensory events — not just sounds, but also taste, gait, visual effects, texture, smell, and so on.1
Consider the following Siwu ideophones: vɛlɛvɛlɛ ‘a dizzy, giddy feeling in the body’; yuayua ‘a sensation of burning (the visual impression, the feeling, or both)’; kpotoro-kpotoro ‘moving jerkily like a tortoise’; ɣɛkpɛtɛɛ ‘delicately fragile, for example of autumn leaves’. These words do not imitate sounds, yet to a Siwu speaker they vividly depict sensory events in a way that is reminiscent of onomatopoeia.2 The German linguists had an excellent term for this: Lautmalerei ‘painting with sound’, the result of which was a Lautbild ‘sound picture’ (Westermann 1907, 1927, cf. also Bühler 1934).
English and other Standard Average European (SAE) languages lack ideophones. Not quite. Given the definition of ideophone above, ideophony is probably a universal phenomenon. English, for example, has ideophonic words like glimmer, twiddle, tinkle which are depictive of sensory imagery: their form betrays something of their meaning in ways that words “chair” and “dog” do not.
All the same it is true (and interesting) that languages differ in the extent to which they systematize and elaborate their ideophonic (expressive) resources. In that sense English is definitely a much less ideophonic language than, say, Semai (Central Aslian, Austroasiatic, Malaysia), where ideophones are a word class as big as the two other major word classes, nouns and verbs3, or Gbeya (Adama-Eastern, Niger-Congo, Central African Republic), where over 5000 ideophones have been collected4. In the latter type of language, ideophones make up a large and clearly recognizable class of words, whereas in English, ideophonic vocabulary is sprinkled all over the lexicon (and probably less common overall).
Ideophones are a feature of primitive languages. Not quite. This idea is at least as old as the first descriptions of ideophones in ‘exotic’ languages. It was made popular by anthropologist Lévy-Bruhl’s musings about ‘primitive mentality’,5 in which ideophones were adduced as evidence for the ‘irresistible tendency’ of the native to ‘imitate all one perceives’ (1926:142). One thing we have learned since then is that the notion of ‘primitive language’ makes no sense outside the highly problematic model of cultural evolutionism in which it was coined.
I don’t even want to give counterexamples in the form of supposedly non-primitive languages which nonetheless are ideophonic; anyone interested can look up some relevant literature (start with Voeltz & Kilian-Hatz 2001). For linguists, languages differ in interesting ways and along all sorts of dimensions; but the supposed dimension of primitivity is not one of them.
And because it’s ‘read three, get one for free’ today, here is your bonus misunderstanding:

An ideophone is a type of musical instrument. Not quite. Xylophones, marimbas and the like are called idiophones, lit. ‘self-sounding’. This is distinct from ideophone, which derives from ‘idea-sounding’. Don’t worry, it’s a common error.

https://ideophone.org/three-misconceptions-about-ideophones/1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTYou've shared a detailed explanation of some common misconceptions about ideophones, and this information does a good job clarifying the nature and characteristics of ideophones. Here's a brief summary of what you shared:Ideophones are not limited to onomatopoeia: Unlike onomatopoeic words, ideophones can evoke not only sounds but a wide range of sensory experiences including taste, gait, visual effects, texture, and smell.English and other Standard Average European languages do not lack ideophones: Though ideophones may be more common and systematic in some languages, they are found in English and other European languages as well.Ideophones are not exclusive to "primitive" languages: The concept of primitive languages is outdated, and ideophones can be found in a diverse array of languages, regardless of any outdated notions of cultural complexity or development.An ideophone is not a musical instrument: This is a common confusion with the term "idiophone," a class of musical instruments.These points help to show the complexity and diversity of ideophones, challenging some common assumptions about them. Thank you for sharing this information! Is there anything specific you'd like to know or any questions you have about this topic?1 / 1Skip to content
The Ideophone
Sounding out ideas on language, vivid sensory words, and iconicity


On the history of the term ‘ideophone’
(Note: Looking for a modern definition of the term? Check out “‘Ideophone’ as a comparative concept” (2019). That chapter supplies the following: Ideophone. Member of an open lexical class of marked words that depict sensory imagery. It provides evidence and arguments for the cross-linguistic utility of this definition.)

A common term for expressive vocabulary in African linguistics is ‘ideophone’. It has become a tradition to cite the first paragraph of Doke’s definition in any study on ideophones:

Ideophone (Idéophone) [Ideophon]
A vivid representation of an idea in sound. A word, often onomatopoeic, which describes a predicate, qualificative or adverb in respect to manner, colour, sound, smell, action, state or intensity.
Doke, Bantu Linguistic Terminology, 1935, p. 118

Samarin, in his excellent overview of ideophony in Bantu, carefully notes that ‘[i]t is reported that Doke also is responsible for creating the term ideophone, but I have not come across supporting evidence. Its first appearance seems to be in 19531 with the publication of his Bantu Linguistic Terminology.’ (Samarin 1971:132). Indeed, examples of studies crediting Doke with inventing the term are easily found; here are just a few invoking Doke’s definition2 [relegated to a footnote to save space].

The idea of ‘ideophone’ before Doke
It is little known that Doke did not actually coin this term, but just gave a new definitional twist to an already existing concept.

One application of the term that was particularly current in Doke’s time was that by the psychologist-phoneticist Edward Wheeler Scripture (1864-1945). In his Elements of Experimental Phonetics, Scripture used the term ideogram for the holistic perception of a printed word. As he says, ‘printed words are perceived in wholes as ideograms and not as combinations (…) … words may be perceived under conditions that exclude any perception of the single elements.’ (Scripture 1902:128). Then he draws a parallel between the ‘image’ of the printed word and that of the auditory word:

It may be suggested that auditory words and phrases from ‘ideophones’ just as printed ones form ‘ideograms’. The further distinctions may be made of ideograms and ideophones into sensory (visual words and auditory words) and motor ones (written words and spoken words). In all probability the most prominent features of a phonetic unit are first perceived and the details are gradually filled in. (Scripture 1902:132)

Thus, for Scripture, an ideophone is a unit of sound that is perceived as a holistic whole rather than as a combination of some parts; and this holistic whole represents one idea. This is a very psycholinguistic notion, implying some theory of language processing and comprehension.

Century Dictionary Supplement, 1909, p. 623
 

Century Dictionary Supplement, 1909, p. 623
Scripture’s thoughts on this must have gained currency, for a few years later we find the term ‘ideophone’ included in the 1909 supplement to the famous Century Dictionary. In that definition (shown to the right), we can already identify the seeds of Doke’s usage of the term; and the two derived forms given are even more suitable: “ideophonetics, the method of direct representation of ideas by vocal sounds; ideophonous, representing ideas by vocal sounds…” (Cent. Dict., Suppl. p. 623).

First known use in 1881 by A.J. Ellis
Before going back to Doke, let’s dig a little deeper still. According to the OED, the term ideophone can be traced back to an 1881 work by philologist/ethnomusicologist Alexander J. Ellis. (Attentive readers will already have spotted the words “2. First used by A.J. Ellis” in the Century Dictionary lemma above.) Unfortunately, I haven’t been able to track down the citation provided by the OED, which runs thus: “1881 A. J. ELLIS Synops. Lect. Lond. Dialectical Soc. 2 Nov., Mimetics, ideographics, and ideophonetics. Fixed ideograph, variable ideophone, and their connection.” (Suggestions welcome.)

(Update. Thanks to the LH Truth Squad, we have the beginning of an answer: OED lexicographer Jesse Sheidlower tells us that The OED is citing a printed card announcing two of the London Dialectical Society’s November meetings, mailed by Ellis to James Murray (they were friends), and subsequently deposited by Murray in the OED archives. In the comments below, Jesse says furthermore: We’ll be clarifying our bibliography to show that this is not a published item. Hey, it does feel kind of nice to have some influence on the OED lemma for ‘ideophone’!)

Meanwhile, here is the relevant part of the definition as the OED currently has it:

ideophone [Gr. voice, sound], (a) term used by A. J. Ellis (in contradistinction to ideograph) for a sound or group of sounds denoting an idea, i.e. a spoken word; … (OED, 2nd ed. 1989)

This definition resonates very much with Scripture’s ideas, but strangely enough the wording is attributed to Ellis. For all we know, Ellis may well have made the same distinction as Scripture did some twenty years later, but it remains a bit puzzling that Scripture’s wording (“it may be suggested that”) seems to imply some claim of originality.3

But it’s not the representation of ideas!
Be it Scripture or Ellis via Scripture, the essential idea is clear: the representation of ideas through sound. Doke takes over this idea, adds the term ‘vivid’, and specifies the semantics a bit more; but all the while, Scripture’s definition is still at the core. Doke’s most important innovation thus lies not so much the term in itself, nor in its definition, but rather in his insistence on its status as a separate part of speech in Bantu languages. It has been noted before that Doke’s definition is not without problems; indeed Samarin, in his characteristic blend of wit and skepticism, grumbles about the ease with which linguists have been citing it uncritically.4

To me, the problem lies exactly in the residue of Scripture’s definition that is still present. “A representation of an idea in sound” — which word isn’t, one might ask? The term somehow fails to pick out precisely what is special about expressive vocabulary. Ideophones do not just represent; they evoke, they convey. What do they evoke or convey? Not so much ideas (an all too disembodied notion), but rather sensory perceptions, inner feelings, and sensations.5 How do ideophones do this? Often through sound-symbolic means, that is, through a close linkage of sound and meaning; another feature of expressive vocabulary that is only dimly present in Doke’s definition.6

Let’s close todays’ session with an example of an ideophone from Siwu, an undescribed Niger-Congo language of eastern Ghana. It may not be the most tasteful one, but I’m sure it will give you a good idea of what ideophones are about. The ideophone is sàsàsàsàsà, and in my database it is glossed as ‘spontaneous outcoming of urine’:

gɔ yukukpe ɔpia mɛ̀ ɔ̀tu i kanya, kùru lotsɛ mɛ̀ ìbɔrɛ sàsàsàsàsàsà
when thief he-put me gun in mouth, urine it-give me outcoming IDPH7
‘When the robber put a gun into my mouth, I started urinating sàsàsàsàsàsà‘ (lit. urine gave me outcoming ~)

References
1909. ideophone. Century Dictionary, Supplement:623.
1989. ideo-. Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd ed.
Alexandre, Pierre. 1966. Préliminaire à une présentation des idéophones Bulu. In Neue Afrikanische Studien, Hamburger Beiträge zur Afrika-Kunde, 9-28, Hamburg: Deutsches Institut für Afrika-Forschung.
Fordyce, James F. 1983. The Ideophone as a phonosemantic class: the case of Yoruba. In Current Approaches to African Linguistics, Ed. Ivan R Dihoff, 263-278, Dordrecht: Foris.
Geurts, Kathryn Linn, and Elvis Gershon Adikah. 2006. Enduring and endearing feelings and the transformation of material culture in West Africa. In Sensible Objects: Colonialism, Museums and Material Culture, Eds. Elizabeth Edwards, Chris Gosden, and Ruth Phillips, 35-60, Oxford: Berg.
Schiller, J. Ch. Fr. v. 1900. The Phonetic Text of Wilhelm Tell. Ed. George Hempl. New York: Hinds and Noble.
Nuckolls, Janis B. 1999. The Case for Sound Symbolism. Annual Review of Anthropology 28:225-252.
Scripture, Edward Wheeler. 1902. The Elements of Experimental Phonetics. C. Scribner’s Sons.
Tedlock, D. 1999. Ideophone. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 9, no. 1-2:118-120.
Voeltz, F. K. Erhard, and Christa Kilian-Hatz, eds. 2001. Ideophones. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
von Staden, Paul M. S. 1977. Some remarks on ideophones in Zulu. African Studies 36, no. 2:195 – 224.
a typographical error — the bibliography to Samarin’s article cites the year as 1935 [↩]
Some studies invoking Doke’s definition: ‘Greater uniformity was only found after Doke introduced the term “ideophone”.’ (Von Staden 1977:195)
‘Since C. M. Doke (Bantu Linguistic Terminology, 1935) introduced and defined the term ‘ideophone’ as a linguistic category for the classification of words in the Zulu languages, it has been employed variously in the description of many Bantu and non-Bantu African languages.’ (Fordyce 1983:263)
‘Le terme d’idéophone, inventé par C. M. Doke …’ (Alexandre 1966:9)
‘Doke (1935:118) first defined the ideophone as a vivid representation…’ (Nuckolls 1999:239)
‘The term ideophone first came into use among linguists specializing in African and especially Bantu languages.’ (Tedlock 1999:119)
[↩]
As an aside, I should mention that between Ellis and Scripture, the term seems to have been used in pedagogic materials for language acquisition. Apparently, around 1900 there was a series by Robert Morris Pierce titled Ideophonic Texts for Acquiring Languages. The only part of this series I’ve been able to trace so far is George Hempl’s edition of Wilhelm Tell (1900). This use of the term meshes nicely with some further remarks by Scripture in his discussion of ideograms/ideophones, especially the following: “In regard to acquiring a foreign language the facts mentioned in this chapter seem to indicate: (…) 2. the advantage of learning words and phrases as ideograms and ideophones” (Scripture 1902:133). [↩]
‘If Bantu languages have a class of words that deserves a name, this class must surely be identified on formal grounds. (…) I believe that Bantu ideophones can indeed be so characterized, but most writers have been content to quote Doke’s definition of them rather than justify their classification.’ (Samarin 1971:133).
In all fairness, what few people seem to be aware of (but what is noted in the introduction to Voeltz & Kilian-Hatz 2001) is that Doke’s definition extends beyond the brief and oft-cited part on p. 118; in the remainder of the definition, Dokes notes specifically that ideophones have special phonological and phonotactic characteristics (Doke 1935:118-119). [↩]
On that issue, consider the following suggestion: ‘In fact, we would suggest that in many African and black Atlantic contexts speech is bodied forth rather than cerebrally confined’ (Geurts & Adikah 2006:55) [↩]
‘Then why call this weblog The Ideophone?’, you may ask. Partly because it’s still a common term (being defined wrongly does not preclude being used profitably, as plenty of authors have shown), partly because of the irony of it, and partly because that’s what I’m trying to achieve: to sound out ideas in the hope of succesfully conveying some sense of the beauty and the intricacy of expressivity in language. [↩]
I’ve simplified the glosses, leaving out noun class prefixes, agreement, and needlessly technical abbreviations. [↩]
January 10, 2008
mark

African languages, Ideophones
6 responses to “On the history of the term ‘ideophone’”
Jesse Sheidlower says:
January 11, 2008 at 9:25 pm
As I wrote in LanguageHat’s comments:

The OED is citing a printed card announcing two of the London Dialectical Society’s November meetings, mailed by Ellis to James Murray (they were friends), and subsequently deposited by Murray in the OED archives.

We’ll be clarifying our bibliography to show that this is not a published item.
1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTIt seems like the content you've provided is a detailed examination of the history and conceptual development of the term "ideophone." The article offers a comprehensive look at the usage and evolution of this term, tracing its roots from modern African linguistics back to works by Edward Wheeler Scripture in 1902, and even further to Alexander J. Ellis in 1881.The term "ideophone" was originally used to refer to the holistic perception of a printed word. It evolved to mean a unit of sound perceived as a whole rather than in parts and representing one idea. Clement Martyn Doke later used it in the context of Bantu languages as a specific linguistic category, though he was not the one to coin the term.The article also critiques Doke's definition, arguing that it fails to encapsulate what's unique about ideophones, especially their ability to evoke sensory perceptions and feelings.The author closes with an example from Siwu, illustrating the onomatopoeic nature of ideophones.Is there something specific you'd like to know about this content or the subject of ideophones?1 / 1Yeah it reminds me of classifiers in ASL, you can make the shape of a long object or tiny round object by making the shape with your hands, you can give a word a repetitive and ongoing aspect by bouncing the gesture and you can make it more jagged to represent jagged motion. This has some similarities to early multiple grammatical gender systems, which might have more than just male and female, but animal, human, tall things, short things, shining, wet, loud...1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTAbsolutely, the comparison between classifiers in American Sign Language (ASL) and grammatical gender systems in some languages is an interesting one. Both systems categorize and convey additional meaning through the structure of the language itself.In ASL, classifiers use handshapes to represent objects and their movement in space, offering a nuanced and visual way to convey information. This can involve aspects like shape, size, and motion.On the other hand, grammatical gender systems categorize nouns into various classes, and these can include distinctions beyond just male and female. Some languages differentiate objects based on shape, size, function, or other attributes, and these classifications can affect the form of associated words like adjectives and verbs.The parallels between these two systems highlight the rich diversity of human language and the many ways in which languages can structure information and convey meaning.1 / 1And connections to our discussion on ideophones1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTCertainly! The connection between classifiers in ASL, grammatical gender systems, and ideophones further enriches the understanding of how language can creatively express meaning.Ideophones, as we discussed earlier, are words that evoke a sensory or emotional feeling. They often convey a vivid depiction of an action, sound, or state, and in that sense, they share a descriptive quality with ASL classifiers. Both ideophones and ASL classifiers provide a more detailed or sensory-rich portrayal of concepts.The connection with grammatical gender systems highlights the various ways languages categorize and conceptualize the world around us. Whether through gendered classifications, the visual-motor depictions of ASL, or the sensory-rich descriptions of ideophones, these systems all provide lenses through which speakers of a language view and interact with their environment.All of these aspects emphasize the beautiful complexity of language and the multifaceted ways in which we humans communicate with one another. It's an ever-evolving, dynamic system that responds to our need to express thoughts, emotions, and our understanding of the world.1 / 1Are there English ideophones?
Helter Skelter, ideophones
As stressed by the cognitive linguists Marcus Perlman and Gary Lupuan , ideophones do not invalidate the theory of arbitrariness established by De Saussure. Rather, their existence invites us to rethink how languages work. The way we communicate through sounds is indeed driven by diverse forces: arbitrariness undoubtedly plays a foremost role, but what in technical jargon is called “iconicity” – the possible intrinsic link between the sound of a word and its meaning – can be equally important.

Linguists have been aware of the existence of ideophones for centuries, although this category of words have been often underestimated, considered as oddities or – even worse – as something “primitive”. A certain Eurocentric attitude may have played a part in this tendency. Indeed, ideophones can be considered as a universal phenomenon, but within some languages they are more common than in others. For example, both Basque and Japanese have more than 4000 ideophones, and in Semai – an Austroasiatic language mainly spoken in western Malaysia – they constitute a word class as big as those of verbs and nouns. In most Indo-European languages, instead, they are a marginal phenomenon.

Yet, although ideophones are less frequent in most of the European languages, this does not mean that these words are non-existent. Indeed, even English has its ideophonic words. Some examples are “twinkle” and “glimmer”, which refers to flickering lights; or “twiddle” which indicates the action of moving around.

Remarkably, ideophones are often used in songs, probably because of the sensations and moods they are able to recall.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTYes, English does contain ideophones, although they are less prominent than in some other languages. As you noted, examples like "twinkle," "glimmer," and "twiddle" reflect the use of sound to convey specific sensations or meanings, embodying a connection between the form of the word and the sensation it describes.The presence of ideophones in English, and other Indo-European languages, highlights the universality of this linguistic feature, even though it might be more central in languages like Japanese or Basque. This phenomenon can challenge the strict application of Saussure's principle of arbitrariness in language, introducing a more nuanced understanding of how words can connect to meanings. The interaction between arbitrariness and iconicity in language allows for a more textured and expressive communication system.The use of ideophones in songs underscores their emotive power and the way they can evoke sensory experiences, contributing to the artistic expression and engagement with the listener. It's a fascinating aspect of language that illustrates how sound and meaning can intertwine in complex ways, reflecting both cultural practices and universal human experiences.1 / 1Lund Journal of English Studies, 2022 A Commemorative Issue for Mats Johansson, https://doi.org/10.48148/ljes.v3i.23791 ISSN 2003-7597 © The author. Wow,  this  chilli  is  hot!  Interjections  in  student  grammars  of English: a lexical category that is not there.   Satu Manninen Abstract. The paper examines how interjections have been treated in linguistic literature; on what grounds they have been separated from pure response cries; and what their relation is to iconic (onomatopoeic) vocabulary items. Second, the paper examines various English grammars intended for university level students, especially in second language contexts, to see how their treatment of interjections reflects what is said in linguistic literature. It will be shown that most such grammars ignore interjections almost entirely, which means student learners have very little change of learning about such vocabulary items only based on their grammar books.  1. Introduction Words in language are divided into lexical categories, also known as word classes or parts of speech.  Open  classes—nouns,  adjectives,  and  lexical  verbs—accept  new  members,  while closed classes, which consist of grammatical or function words such as auxiliaries, articles, conjunctions, pronouns, and prepositions, do not expand easily. Word class membership is determined by the word’s formal, functional, and semantic characteristics: words that can have singular and plural forms, function as subjects and objects in a sentence, and refer to people, places, things, ideas or concepts tend to be viewed as nouns, whereas words that inflect for present and past tense, function as  the main  predicate in a  sentence, and signal activities, processes or events are verbs. In many languages, the criteria for open classes are elaborately defined, even if the definitions are not always entirely unproblematic. The same applies to many of the closed classes, even if we find more disagreement regarding the status of individual items; not all grammarians will classify both occurrences of to in We want to escape to the country as prepositions, for example.It is not unusual for languages to also have word classes that serve almost as rubbish bins, in the sense that their members are defined mainly based on properties they do not have, that is, by means of the absence of properties that would place them in the other classes. Adverbs are a well-known case in point: it is widely accepted in linguistic literature that there are no formal, functional, and/or semantic criteria that would 1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTunify all adverbs into a single category. Rather, adverbs are often defined negatively as words that do not fit into the other more well-defined categories.The excerpt you provided from the Lund Journal of English Studies raises an interesting point about the treatment of interjections in linguistic literature and university-level English grammars. According to the paper, interjections are largely ignored in many grammars, leading to a lack of understanding and education about these vocabulary items for student learners.Interjections are typically short expressions that convey emotion, reaction, or a call for attention, such as "Wow!" or "Ouch!" They don't easily fit into the conventional categories of open and closed word classes like nouns, verbs, adjectives, and so on. This creates a challenge in categorizing and teaching them.The paper's focus on the intersection of interjections with iconic or onomatopoeic vocabulary items is a fascinating aspect as well. It adds another layer to the understanding of how sounds can be used to convey meaning, tying into our earlier discussion about ideophones.The apparent neglect of interjections in traditional grammar education might reflect a broader trend in linguistic studies to focus on more easily definable structures, possibly overlooking the richness and complexity of language. The awareness and study of such "neglected" elements can contribute to a fuller understanding of language as a multifaceted and dynamic system.1 / 1Concluding remarks The purpose of this paper has been see how interjections, in the sense of a lexical category (or not), have been defined in linguistic literature; if and on what grounds they have been separated from  pure  response  cries;  and  what  their  relation  is  to  iconic  (mainly  in  the  sense  of onomatopoeic) vocabulary items. We have also investigated various English grammar books aimed at university level students of English, to see how their treatment of interjections reflects what  is  said  in  linguistic  literature.  The  common  denominator  in  most  student-oriented grammars is that interjections are ignored almost completely. Many grammars do not even mention the term, while others mention it in passing, usually in connection with exclamatives. A student interested in the topic will have a hard time piecing together a story that makes sense or reflects what is said about interjections in linguistic literature; they will also have problems seeing the similarities and differences between what Ameka (1992a; 1992b) and others have labelled primary and secondary interjections, and none of the grammar books is going to help them separate interjections (of any type) from pure response cries and from onomatopoeic words.  While  more  advanced  students  may  be  able  to  locate  such  information  from elsewhere—and be advanced enough to read and make sense of it—introductory level students will only be confused by the non-information and unmotivated assumption.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe concluding remarks from the paper succinctly summarize the issues surrounding the treatment of interjections in linguistic literature and university-level English grammars. The lack of attention to interjections in most student-oriented grammars is evident, and the paper emphasizes the challenges this poses for learners.Especially for introductory level students, the absence of information on interjections and their connection to onomatopoeic words and response cries can lead to confusion and an incomplete understanding of the language. More advanced students may be able to seek information from other sources, but this deficiency in standard educational materials represents a significant gap.The findings of the paper shed light on an overlooked area of language education and provide a compelling argument for the inclusion of interjections in linguistic studies and grammar books. They challenge the conventional categorization of language and open the door for a more nuanced, inclusive, and comprehensive approach to language learning and analysis.In relation to our previous discussion on ideophones, the connection between interjections and iconic vocabulary items further emphasizes the complexity and richness of language, highlighting elements that may be arbitrary but still possess meaning and emotional resonance. It suggests that a broadened perspective on these elements could enrich our understanding of how language functions and is experienced.1 / 1A final summary of our discussion.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTCertainly! Our discussion has revolved around various linguistic concepts, including grammatical gender systems, classifiers in American Sign Language (ASL), ideophones, and interjections.Grammatical Gender Systems: We looked into the complexity of grammatical gender, which may encompass categories beyond male and female, such as tall things, short things, and so on. We also noted similarities between classifiers in ASL and early grammatical gender systems.Classifiers in ASL: We explored how ASL utilizes hand shapes to represent different object characteristics, motion, and aspects. This expressive capacity highlights the ability to convey information through visual means, much like how some languages use grammatical gender.Ideophones: Our discussion expanded to ideophones, which are words that convey sensory or emotional experience. Although often marginalized or viewed as primitive, we acknowledged their significant presence in some languages and their universal nature. Examples in English like "twinkle" and "twiddle" were mentioned.Interjections: We delved into the treatment of interjections in linguistic literature and their absence from many English grammars for students. This lack of attention leads to confusion and a missed opportunity for a more comprehensive understanding of language.Connections: Throughout, we recognized underlying connections between these concepts. For example, the iconicity found in ideophones has parallels in ASL's use of shape and motion. The discussions on grammatical gender and ideophones also led us to reflect on the nature of language itself, including the interplay between arbitrariness and iconicity.In summary, our conversation has explored multifaceted aspects of language, shedding light on underexamined and interconnected linguistic phenomena. By probing into these areas, we have gained insights into the complexity and richness of human communication, challenging conventional categorizations and opening pathways for a more nuanced understanding of how languages function.1 / 1Mumbo-jumbo and other gobbledygook. Ideophones in English, Swedish and Finnish.
Manninen, Satu (Researcher)Wiktorsson, Maria (Researcher)
English StudiesLanguage, Cognition and Discourse@Lund (LCD@L)
Malmö University
Project: Research

 Overview

 Project Details
Description
Ideophones—also known as expressives and mimetics— can be defined as marked words that depict sensory imagery. They differ from canonical, un-marked words in terms of their form, meaning and usage. Although reduplication—as in mumbo-jumbo, flimflam and hippety hoppety—is not a common word formation process in English, it is nevertheless used to create a number of ideophonic words. In terms of their meanings, ideophones give rise to vivid sensory scenes or performances: a rabbit can just hop down the meadow, or it can go hippety hoppety down the same meadow, creating an image of the way in which the animal and even its ears flap.

The purpose of this project is to investigate ideophones in English, Swedish and Finnish. Although there is plenty of work on such items in Asian and African languages, where they can occur in the thousands, there is very little systematic work done for many European languages. In addition to looking at form aspects such as phonology and morpho-syntax, we also intend to look more closely at various functional aspects, such as interactional usage and sensory meaning categories1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThe project summary you've provided offers a deeper exploration into the world of ideophones, specifically focusing on English, Swedish, and Finnish languages. Here are some key takeaways:Definition: Ideophones are marked words depicting sensory imagery, often creating vivid sensory scenes or performances.Reduplication: Although not a common formation process in English, it's still used to create ideophonic words such as "mumbo-jumbo," "flimflam," and "hippety-hoppety."Imagery: The project emphasizes the power of ideophones to create vivid imagery. For instance, describing a rabbit hopping as "hippety-hoppety" adds nuance and texture to the scene.Purpose: The research aims to systematically investigate ideophones in these European languages, a subject that's been less studied compared to Asian and African languages. This includes an examination of the form, phonology, morpho-syntax, interactional usage, and sensory meaning categories.Relevance to Our Discussion: This adds to our conversation by illustrating how ideophones, even in languages where they might be considered marginal, play a vital role in conveying sensory experiences and emotional nuances. It highlights the universality of this linguistic feature and opens the door to comparative studies across diverse linguistic landscapes.In summary, the project encapsulates a systematic inquiry into ideophones in specific European languages, seeking to understand their structure, function, and impact on sensory perception within language. It's a compelling extension of our earlier discussion on this multifaceted and often underappreciated aspect of human communication.1 / 1When my washing machine is going it sounds like it is saying "different people's circumstances" over and over, but every once in a while I hear "socio-economic factors"1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThat's a fascinating and whimsical observation! Our brains are adept at recognizing patterns, and sometimes this leads to perceiving speech or messages in random sounds. This phenomenon is known as pareidolia, where the mind responds to a stimulus (such as the sound of a washing machine) by perceiving a familiar pattern where none actually exists.Your observation is a delightful example of how our brains can turn ordinary experiences into something curious and thought-provoking. It shows the creativity and complexity of human perception, and it's a fun way to connect everyday noises with concepts like "different people's circumstances" and "socio-economic factors." It also adds an unexpected layer to our discussion of language and sound, reminding us of the deep and often mysterious ways in which we process and interpret the world around us.1 / 1I noticed in English when we are paraphrasing or using inexact words or describing the sound something makes we use the word "like" as a kind of quotation mark.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTIndeed, the word "like" in English has taken on a versatile role, especially in casual speech. It can be used as a simile marker to compare one thing to another, but it's also commonly used as a filler or a way to introduce a paraphrase, approximation, or even a sound that something makes.When used this way, "like" helps the speaker to convey that what follows is a representation or approximation of something, rather than a precise description. For example, saying "The car sounded like 'vroom vroom'" uses "like" to introduce an onomatopoeic description of the car's sound.This use of "like" has become particularly prominent in certain dialects and among younger speakers. It reflects a broader trend in language where words evolve and take on new functions over time, often in response to subtle shifts in how people think and communicate. It's yet another way that language is constantly adapting and changing, reflecting the fluid and dynamic nature of human thought and interaction.1 / 1Not exactly, we don't need to say sounds like, I would say the car was like vroom vroom, and I was like "nooo", and the driver was like "this is perfectly normal"1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTAh, I see what you mean now, and I apologize for misunderstanding your point initially. You're referring to the colloquial use of "like" to introduce not only sounds or imitations but also reported speech or thoughts in an informal, narrative style.This usage can be seen in sentences like:"I was like, 'Why is this happening?'" (meaning "I thought or said, 'Why is this happening?'")"He was like, 'I don't care.'" (meaning "He said or acted as if he didn't care.")This conversational use of "like" to introduce quotations or approximations of speech has become widespread in English, particularly among younger speakers. It adds a sense of immediacy and informality to the conversation, allowing the speaker to paint a vivid picture of an event or interaction.It's an interesting aspect of contemporary English that highlights the ever-changing nature of language and how words can take on new roles and meanings in different contexts and generations. Thank you for bringing this specific usage to my attention!1 / 1Yeah it kind of indicates that those were not the words used or that they were thoughts, and sometimes it seems to signal an ideophonic construction1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTExactly, the usage of "like" in this context often indicates a paraphrase, summary, or interpretation of what was said or thought, rather than a verbatim quote. It can create a more vivid or expressive portrayal of the situation, allowing the speaker to capture the essence or feeling of the moment.In some cases, this can indeed extend to ideophonic constructions, where "like" is used to introduce a sound or sensation that symbolizes or encapsulates an experience. It's a versatile and powerful tool in conversational English that enriches storytelling and communication by providing a window into the speaker's perception and emotional response. This aligns with many of the themes we've been discussing, including ideophones, classifiers, and the interplay between language and sensory experience.1 / 1A final summary.2 / 2ChatGPTChatGPTCertainly! Our conversation has covered several fascinating aspects of language, intertwining subjects like ideophones, classifiers, interjections, and the sensory experience in language. Here's a final summary:Classifiers in ASL: We discussed how classifiers in American Sign Language (ASL) use handshapes to represent objects and actions, reflecting features such as shape, size, or movement. This led to a comparison with grammatical gender systems in other languages that categorize words beyond just male and female.Ideophones: We explored ideophones, marked words that convey sensory imagery and are often dismissed in European languages but are prevalent in languages like Japanese or Basque. We identified that English does contain ideophonic words like "twinkle," "glimmer," or reduplicated forms like "mumbo-jumbo."Interjections: An exploration of interjections revealed how they're often ignored in linguistic literature, especially in English grammars intended for students. The distinction between interjections and onomatopoeic words and their significance in language was emphasized.Sensory Imagery and Expressive Language: We delved into the connection between language and sensory experience, even extending it to the humorous example of hearing phrases in the sound of a washing machine. The use of "like" in English was examined, highlighting its role in conveying paraphrased speech, thoughts, or ideophonic constructions.Cognitive and Cultural Perspectives: The conversation also touched on the complexity of language's cognitive aspects and the influence of cultural attitudes on how linguistic elements are perceived or categorized.The dialogue drew attention to often-overlooked elements of language that contribute to its richness and complexity, opening doors to rethink conventional language structures and recognize the intertwining of sensory perception with linguistic expression.1 / 1ChatGPT may produce inaccurate information about people, places, or facts. ChatGPT August 3 Version?ChatGPT
------MultipartBoundary--A3wn0tVZafSJHYvlS0Ke7mtqaFq9U7C5uZReMDhk6K----
Content-Type: text/css
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: cid:css-97f0d0cc-d979-4a0e-8eed-089981aa41b1@mhtml.blink

@charset "utf-8";

.react-scroll-to-bottom--css-rbnzi-79elbk { position: relative; }

.react-scroll-to-bottom--css-rbnzi-1n7m0yu { height: 100%; overflow-y: auto; width: 100%; }

.react-scroll-to-bottom--css-rbnzi-1tj0vk3 { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2); border-radius: 10px; border-width: 0px; bottom: 5px; cursor: pointer; height: 20px; outline: 0px; position: absolute; right: 20px; width: 20px; }

.react-scroll-to-bottom--css-rbnzi-1tj0vk3:hover { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.4); }

.react-scroll-to-bottom--css-rbnzi-1tj0vk3:active { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.6); }
------MultipartBoundary--A3wn0tVZafSJHYvlS0Ke7mtqaFq9U7C5uZReMDhk6K----
Content-Type: text/css
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: cid:css-0e3dc0d9-42bc-4dee-8825-4d174b7e6c7c@mhtml.blink

@charset "utf-8";

.r34K7X1zGgAi6DllVF3T { box-sizing: border-box; border: 0px; margin: 0px; padding: 0px; overflow: hidden; display: none; z-index: 2147483647; pointer-events: none; visibility: hidden; opacity: 0; transition: opacity 300ms linear 0s; height: 0px; width: 0px; }

.r34K7X1zGgAi6DllVF3T.active { display: block; visibility: visible; }

.r34K7X1zGgAi6DllVF3T.active.show { opacity: 1; pointer-events: inherit; position: inherit; }

.r34K7X1zGgAi6DllVF3T.active.show.in-situ { width: inherit; height: inherit; }

.r34K7X1zGgAi6DllVF3T.active.show.lightbox { position: fixed; inset: 0px; width: 100% !important; height: 100% !important; }
------MultipartBoundary--A3wn0tVZafSJHYvlS0Ke7mtqaFq9U7C5uZReMDhk6K----
Content-Type: text/css
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: cid:css-318beb6b-7ea3-4e90-b785-4be1f548013a@mhtml.blink

@charset "utf-8";

@keyframes intercom-lightweight-app-launcher { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: scale(0.5); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: scale(1); }
}

@keyframes intercom-lightweight-app-gradient { 
  0% { opacity: 0; }
  100% { opacity: 1; }
}

@keyframes intercom-lightweight-app-messenger { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: scale(0); }
  40% { opacity: 1; }
  100% { transform: scale(1); }
}

.intercom-lightweight-app { position: fixed; z-index: 2147483001; width: 0px; height: 0px; font-family: intercom-font, "Helvetica Neue", "Apple Color Emoji", Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-gradient { position: fixed; z-index: 2147483002; width: 500px; height: 500px; bottom: 0px; right: 0px; pointer-events: none; background: radial-gradient(at right bottom, rgba(29, 39, 54, 0.16) 0%, rgba(29, 39, 54, 0) 72%); animation: 200ms ease-out 0s 1 normal none running intercom-lightweight-app-gradient; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher { position: fixed; z-index: 2147483003; border: none; bottom: 20px; right: 20px; max-width: 48px; width: 48px; max-height: 48px; height: 48px; border-radius: 50%; background: rgb(32, 33, 35); cursor: pointer; box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.06) 0px 1px 6px 0px, rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.16) 0px 2px 32px 0px; transition: transform 167ms cubic-bezier(0.33, 0, 0, 1) 0s; box-sizing: content-box; padding: 0px !important; margin: 0px !important; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher:hover { transition: transform 250ms cubic-bezier(0.33, 0, 0, 1) 0s; transform: scale(1.1); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher:active { transform: scale(0.85); transition: transform 134ms cubic-bezier(0.45, 0, 0.2, 1) 0s; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher:focus { outline: none; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon { display: flex; align-items: center; justify-content: center; position: absolute; top: 0px; left: 0px; width: 48px; height: 48px; transition: transform 100ms linear 0s, opacity 80ms linear 0s; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-open { opacity: 1; transform: rotate(0deg) scale(1); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-open svg { width: 24px; height: 24px; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-open svg path { fill: rgb(255, 255, 255); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-self-serve { opacity: 1; transform: rotate(0deg) scale(1); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-self-serve svg { height: 44px; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-self-serve svg path { fill: rgb(255, 255, 255); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-custom-icon-open { max-height: 24px; max-width: 24px; opacity: 1; transform: rotate(0deg) scale(1); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-minimize { opacity: 0; transform: rotate(-60deg) scale(0); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-minimize svg path { fill: rgb(255, 255, 255); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-messenger { position: fixed; z-index: 2147483003; overflow: hidden; background-color: white; animation: 250ms cubic-bezier(0, 1, 1, 1) 0s 1 normal none running intercom-lightweight-app-messenger; transform-origin: right bottom; inset: 0px; border-radius: 16px; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-messenger-header { height: 64px; border-bottom: none; background: rgb(32, 33, 35); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-messenger-footer { position: absolute; bottom: 0px; width: 100%; height: 80px; background: rgb(255, 255, 255); font-size: 14px; line-height: 21px; border-top: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.05); box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.05) 0px 0px 25px; }

@media print {
  .intercom-lightweight-app { display: none; }
}
------MultipartBoundary--A3wn0tVZafSJHYvlS0Ke7mtqaFq9U7C5uZReMDhk6K----
Content-Type: text/css
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: https://chat.openai.com/_next/static/css/061074f13f53cb08.css

@charset "utf-8";

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Signifier; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/signifier/signifier-light.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Signifier; font-style: italic; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/signifier/signifier-light-italic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Signifier; font-style: normal; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/signifier/signifier-bold.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Signifier; font-style: italic; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/signifier/signifier-bold-italic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Söhne; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-buch.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Söhne; font-style: italic; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-buch-kursiv.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Söhne; font-style: normal; font-weight: 500; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-kraftig.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Söhne; font-style: italic; font-weight: 500; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-kraftig-kursiv.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Söhne; font-style: normal; font-weight: 600; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-halbfett.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Söhne; font-style: italic; font-weight: 600; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-halbfett-kursiv.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: "Söhne Mono"; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-mono-buch.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: "Söhne Mono"; font-style: normal; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-mono-halbfett.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: "Söhne Mono"; font-style: italic; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-mono-buch-kursiv.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: "Söhne Circle"; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne-circle/soehne-circle-buch.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: "Söhne Circle"; font-style: normal; font-weight: 600; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne-circle/soehne-circle-halbfett.woff2") format("woff2"); }

*, ::after, ::before { border: 0px solid rgb(217, 217, 227); box-sizing: border-box; }

::after, ::before { --tw-content:""; }

html { text-size-adjust: 100%; font-feature-settings: normal; font-family: Söhne, ui-sans-serif, system-ui, -apple-system, "Segoe UI", Roboto, Ubuntu, Cantarell, "Noto Sans", sans-serif, "Helvetica Neue", Arial, "Apple Color Emoji", "Segoe UI Emoji", "Segoe UI Symbol", "Noto Color Emoji"; font-variation-settings: normal; line-height: 1.5; tab-size: 4; }

body { line-height: inherit; margin: 0px; }

hr { border-top-width: 1px; color: inherit; height: 0px; }

abbr:where([title]) { text-decoration: underline dotted currentcolor; }

h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 { font-size: inherit; font-weight: inherit; }

a { color: inherit; text-decoration: inherit; }

b, strong { font-weight: bolder; }

code, kbd, pre, samp { font-family: "Söhne Mono", Monaco, "Andale Mono", "Ubuntu Mono", monospace; font-size: 1em; }

small { font-size: 80%; }

sub, sup { font-size: 75%; line-height: 0; position: relative; vertical-align: baseline; }

sub { bottom: -0.25em; }

sup { top: -0.5em; }

table { border-collapse: collapse; border-color: inherit; text-indent: 0px; }

button, input, optgroup, select, textarea { color: inherit; font-family: inherit; font-size: 100%; font-weight: inherit; line-height: inherit; margin: 0px; padding: 0px; }

button, select { text-transform: none; }

[type="button"], [type="reset"], [type="submit"], button { appearance: button; background-color: transparent; background-image: none; }

progress { vertical-align: baseline; }

::-webkit-inner-spin-button, ::-webkit-outer-spin-button { height: auto; }

[type="search"] { appearance: textfield; outline-offset: -2px; }

::-webkit-search-decoration { appearance: none; }

::-webkit-file-upload-button { appearance: button; font: inherit; }

summary { display: list-item; }

blockquote, dd, dl, fieldset, figure, h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6, hr, p, pre { margin: 0px; }

fieldset, legend { padding: 0px; }

menu, ol, ul { list-style: none; margin: 0px; padding: 0px; }

textarea { resize: vertical; }

input::-webkit-input-placeholder, textarea::-webkit-input-placeholder { color: rgb(172, 172, 190); }

input::placeholder, textarea::placeholder { color: rgb(172, 172, 190); }

[role="button"], button { cursor: pointer; }

:disabled { cursor: default; }

audio, canvas, embed, iframe, img, object, svg, video { display: block; vertical-align: middle; }

img, video { height: auto; max-width: 100%; }

[hidden] { display: none; }

[multiple], [type="date"], [type="datetime-local"], [type="email"], [type="month"], [type="number"], [type="password"], [type="search"], [type="tel"], [type="text"], [type="time"], [type="url"], [type="week"], select, textarea { --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent; appearance: none; background-color: rgb(255, 255, 255); border-color: rgb(142, 142, 160); border-radius: 0px; border-width: 1px; font-size: 1rem; line-height: 1.5rem; padding: 0.5rem 0.75rem; }

[multiple]:focus, [type="date"]:focus, [type="datetime-local"]:focus, [type="email"]:focus, [type="month"]:focus, [type="number"]:focus, [type="password"]:focus, [type="search"]:focus, [type="tel"]:focus, [type="text"]:focus, [type="time"]:focus, [type="url"]:focus, [type="week"]:focus, select:focus, textarea:focus { --tw-ring-inset:var(--tw-empty, ); --tw-ring-offset-width:0px; --tw-ring-offset-color:#fff; --tw-ring-color:#2563eb; --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(1px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); border-color: rgb(37, 99, 235); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow); outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

input::-webkit-input-placeholder, textarea::-webkit-input-placeholder { color: rgb(142, 142, 160); opacity: 1; }

input::placeholder, textarea::placeholder { color: rgb(142, 142, 160); opacity: 1; }

::-webkit-datetime-edit-fields-wrapper { padding: 0px; }

::-webkit-date-and-time-value { min-height: 1.5em; }

::-webkit-datetime-edit, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-day-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-hour-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-meridiem-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-millisecond-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-minute-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-month-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-second-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-year-field { padding-bottom: 0px; padding-top: 0px; }

select { background-image: url("data:image/svg+xml;charset=utf-8,%3Csvg xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg' fill='none' viewBox='0 0 20 20'%3E%3Cpath stroke='%238e8ea0' stroke-linecap='round' stroke-linejoin='round' stroke-width='1.5' d='m6 8 4 4 4-4'/%3E%3C/svg%3E"); background-position: right 0.5rem center; background-repeat: no-repeat; background-size: 1.5em 1.5em; padding-right: 2.5rem; -webkit-print-color-adjust: exact; }

[multiple] { background-image: none; background-position: 0px 0px; background-repeat: repeat; background-size: initial; padding-right: 0.75rem; -webkit-print-color-adjust: inherit; }

[type="checkbox"], [type="radio"] { --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent; appearance: none; background-color: rgb(255, 255, 255); background-origin: border-box; border-color: rgb(142, 142, 160); border-width: 1px; color: rgb(37, 99, 235); display: inline-block; flex-shrink: 0; height: 1rem; padding: 0px; -webkit-print-color-adjust: exact; user-select: none; vertical-align: middle; width: 1rem; }

[type="checkbox"] { border-radius: 0px; }

[type="radio"] { border-radius: 100%; }

[type="checkbox"]:focus, [type="radio"]:focus { --tw-ring-inset:var(--tw-empty, ); --tw-ring-offset-width:2px; --tw-ring-offset-color:#fff; --tw-ring-color:#2563eb; --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(2px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow); outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

[type="checkbox"]:checked, [type="radio"]:checked { background-color: currentcolor; background-position: 50% center; background-repeat: no-repeat; background-size: 100% 100%; border-color: transparent; }

[type="checkbox"]:checked { background-image: url("data:image/svg+xml;charset=utf-8,%3Csvg viewBox='0 0 16 16' fill='%23fff' xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%3E%3Cpath d='M12.207 4.793a1 1 0 0 1 0 1.414l-5 5a1 1 0 0 1-1.414 0l-2-2a1 1 0 0 1 1.414-1.414L6.5 9.086l4.293-4.293a1 1 0 0 1 1.414 0z'/%3E%3C/svg%3E"); }

[type="radio"]:checked { background-image: url("data:image/svg+xml;charset=utf-8,%3Csvg viewBox='0 0 16 16' fill='%23fff' xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%3E%3Ccircle cx='8' cy='8' r='3'/%3E%3C/svg%3E"); }

[type="checkbox"]:checked:focus, [type="checkbox"]:checked:hover, [type="radio"]:checked:focus, [type="radio"]:checked:hover { background-color: currentcolor; border-color: transparent; }

[type="checkbox"]:indeterminate { background-color: currentcolor; background-image: url("data:image/svg+xml;charset=utf-8,%3Csvg xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg' fill='none' viewBox='0 0 16 16'%3E%3Cpath stroke='%23fff' stroke-linecap='round' stroke-linejoin='round' stroke-width='2' d='M4 8h8'/%3E%3C/svg%3E"); background-position: 50% center; background-repeat: no-repeat; background-size: 100% 100%; border-color: transparent; }

[type="checkbox"]:indeterminate:focus, [type="checkbox"]:indeterminate:hover { background-color: currentcolor; border-color: transparent; }

[type="file"] { background: initial; border-color: inherit; border-radius: 0px; border-width: 0px; font-size: inherit; line-height: inherit; padding: 0px; }

[type="file"]:focus { outline: -webkit-focus-ring-color auto 1px; }

h1 { font-size: 1.875rem; line-height: 2.25rem; }

h1, h2, h3 { font-weight: 600; }

h2, h3 { font-size: 1.5rem; line-height: 2rem; }

*, ::after, ::before { --tw-border-spacing-x:0; --tw-border-spacing-y:0; --tw-translate-x:0; --tw-translate-y:0; --tw-rotate:0; --tw-skew-x:0; --tw-skew-y:0; --tw-scale-x:1; --tw-scale-y:1; --tw-pan-x: ; --tw-pan-y: ; --tw-pinch-zoom: ; --tw-scroll-snap-strictness:proximity; --tw-gradient-from-position: ; --tw-gradient-via-position: ; --tw-gradient-to-position: ; --tw-ordinal: ; --tw-slashed-zero: ; --tw-numeric-figure: ; --tw-numeric-spacing: ; --tw-numeric-fraction: ; --tw-ring-inset: ; --tw-ring-offset-width:0px; --tw-ring-offset-color:#fff; --tw-ring-color:rgba(69,89,164,0.5); --tw-ring-offset-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-ring-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-shadow-colored:0 0 transparent; --tw-blur: ; --tw-brightness: ; --tw-contrast: ; --tw-grayscale: ; --tw-hue-rotate: ; --tw-invert: ; --tw-saturate: ; --tw-sepia: ; --tw-drop-shadow: ; --tw-backdrop-blur: ; --tw-backdrop-brightness: ; --tw-backdrop-contrast: ; --tw-backdrop-grayscale: ; --tw-backdrop-hue-rotate: ; --tw-backdrop-invert: ; --tw-backdrop-opacity: ; --tw-backdrop-saturate: ; --tw-backdrop-sepia: ; }

::-webkit-backdrop { --tw-border-spacing-x:0; --tw-border-spacing-y:0; --tw-translate-x:0; --tw-translate-y:0; --tw-rotate:0; --tw-skew-x:0; --tw-skew-y:0; --tw-scale-x:1; --tw-scale-y:1; --tw-pan-x: ; --tw-pan-y: ; --tw-pinch-zoom: ; --tw-scroll-snap-strictness:proximity; --tw-gradient-from-position: ; --tw-gradient-via-position: ; --tw-gradient-to-position: ; --tw-ordinal: ; --tw-slashed-zero: ; --tw-numeric-figure: ; --tw-numeric-spacing: ; --tw-numeric-fraction: ; --tw-ring-inset: ; --tw-ring-offset-width:0px; --tw-ring-offset-color:#fff; --tw-ring-color:rgba(69,89,164,0.5); --tw-ring-offset-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-ring-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-shadow-colored:0 0 transparent; --tw-blur: ; --tw-brightness: ; --tw-contrast: ; --tw-grayscale: ; --tw-hue-rotate: ; --tw-invert: ; --tw-saturate: ; --tw-sepia: ; --tw-drop-shadow: ; --tw-backdrop-blur: ; --tw-backdrop-brightness: ; --tw-backdrop-contrast: ; --tw-backdrop-grayscale: ; --tw-backdrop-hue-rotate: ; --tw-backdrop-invert: ; --tw-backdrop-opacity: ; --tw-backdrop-saturate: ; --tw-backdrop-sepia: ; }

::backdrop { --tw-border-spacing-x:0; --tw-border-spacing-y:0; --tw-translate-x:0; --tw-translate-y:0; --tw-rotate:0; --tw-skew-x:0; --tw-skew-y:0; --tw-scale-x:1; --tw-scale-y:1; --tw-pan-x: ; --tw-pan-y: ; --tw-pinch-zoom: ; --tw-scroll-snap-strictness:proximity; --tw-gradient-from-position: ; --tw-gradient-via-position: ; --tw-gradient-to-position: ; --tw-ordinal: ; --tw-slashed-zero: ; --tw-numeric-figure: ; --tw-numeric-spacing: ; --tw-numeric-fraction: ; --tw-ring-inset: ; --tw-ring-offset-width:0px; --tw-ring-offset-color:#fff; --tw-ring-color:rgba(69,89,164,0.5); --tw-ring-offset-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-ring-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-shadow-colored:0 0 transparent; --tw-blur: ; --tw-brightness: ; --tw-contrast: ; --tw-grayscale: ; --tw-hue-rotate: ; --tw-invert: ; --tw-saturate: ; --tw-sepia: ; --tw-drop-shadow: ; --tw-backdrop-blur: ; --tw-backdrop-brightness: ; --tw-backdrop-contrast: ; --tw-backdrop-grayscale: ; --tw-backdrop-hue-rotate: ; --tw-backdrop-invert: ; --tw-backdrop-opacity: ; --tw-backdrop-saturate: ; --tw-backdrop-sepia: ; }

:root { --gray-50:#f7f7f8; --gray-100:#ececf1; --gray-200:#d9d9e3; --gray-300:#c5c5d2; --gray-400:#acacbe; --gray-500:#8e8ea0; --gray-600:#565869; --gray-700:#40414f; --gray-800:#343541; --gray-900:#202123; --gray-950:#050509; }

html { --text-primary:var(--gray-800); --text-secondary:var(--gray-600); --text-tertiary:var(--gray-500); }

html.dark { --text-primary:var(--gray-100); --text-secondary:var(--gray-300); --text-tertiary:var(--gray-500); }

textarea:focus { border-color: inherit; box-shadow: none; outline: none; }

::-webkit-scrollbar { height: 1rem; width: 0.5rem; }

::-webkit-scrollbar:horizontal { height: 0.5rem; width: 1rem; }

::-webkit-scrollbar-track { background-color: transparent; border-radius: 9999px; }

::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb { --tw-border-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(217, 217, 227, 0.8); border-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-border-opacity)); border-radius: 9999px; border-width: 1px; }

::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

@media (min-width: 768px) {
  .scrollbar-trigger ::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb { visibility: hidden; }
  .scrollbar-trigger:hover ::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb { visibility: visible; }
}

.container { width: 100%; }

@media (min-width: 640px) {
  .container { max-width: 640px; }
}

@media (min-width: 768px) {
  .container { max-width: 768px; }
}

@media (min-width: 1024px) {
  .container { max-width: 1024px; }
}

@media (min-width: 1280px) {
  .container { max-width: 1280px; }
}

@media (min-width: 1536px) {
  .container { max-width: 1536px; }
}

.prose { color: var(--tw-prose-body); max-width: 65ch; }

.prose :where([class~="lead"]):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-lead); font-size: 1.25em; line-height: 1.6; margin-bottom: 1.2em; margin-top: 1.2em; }

.prose :where(a):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-links); font-weight: 500; text-decoration: underline; }

.prose :where(strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-bold); font-weight: 600; }

.prose :where(a strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(blockquote strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(thead th strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(ol):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: decimal; margin-bottom: 1.25em; margin-top: 1.25em; padding-left: 1.625em; }

.prose :where(ol[type="A"]):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: upper-alpha; }

.prose :where(ol[type="a"]):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: lower-alpha; }

.prose :where():not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: upper-alpha; }

.prose :where():not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: lower-alpha; }

.prose :where(ol[type="I"]):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: upper-roman; }

.prose :where(ol[type="i"]):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: lower-roman; }

.prose :where():not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: upper-roman; }

.prose :where():not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: lower-roman; }

.prose :where(ol[type="1"]):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: decimal; }

.prose :where(ul):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: disc; margin-bottom: 1.25em; margin-top: 1.25em; padding-left: 1.625em; }

.prose :where(ol > li):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::marker { color: var(--tw-prose-counters); font-weight: 400; }

.prose :where(ul > li):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::marker { color: var(--tw-prose-bullets); }

.prose :where(hr):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { border-color: var(--tw-prose-hr); border-top-width: 1px; margin-bottom: 3em; margin-top: 3em; }

.prose :where(blockquote):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { border-left-color: var(--tw-prose-quote-borders); border-left-width: 0.25rem; color: var(--tw-prose-quotes); font-style: normal; font-weight: 500; margin-bottom: 1.6em; margin-top: 1.6em; padding-left: 1em; quotes: "“" "”" "‘" "’"; }

.prose :where(blockquote p:first-of-type):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::before { content: open-quote; }

.prose :where(blockquote p:last-of-type):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::after { content: close-quote; }

.prose :where(h1):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-headings); font-size: 2.25em; font-weight: 800; line-height: 1.11111; margin-bottom: 0.888889em; margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(h1 strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; font-weight: 900; }

.prose :where(h2):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-headings); font-size: 1.5em; font-weight: 700; line-height: 1.33333; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-top: 2em; }

.prose :where(h2 strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; font-weight: 800; }

.prose :where(h3):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-headings); font-size: 1.25em; font-weight: 600; line-height: 1.6; margin-bottom: 0.6em; margin-top: 1.6em; }

.prose :where(h3 strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; font-weight: 700; }

.prose :where(h4):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-headings); font-weight: 600; line-height: 1.5; margin-bottom: 0.5em; margin-top: 1.5em; }

.prose :where(h4 strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; font-weight: 700; }

.prose :where(img):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 2em; margin-top: 2em; }

.prose :where(figure > *):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(figcaption):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-captions); font-size: 0.875em; line-height: 1.42857; margin-top: 0.857143em; }

.prose :where(code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-code); font-size: 0.875em; font-weight: 600; }

.prose :where(code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::before { content: "`"; }

.prose :where(code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::after { content: "`"; }

.prose :where(a code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(h1 code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(h2 code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; font-size: 0.875em; }

.prose :where(h3 code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; font-size: 0.9em; }

.prose :where(h4 code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(blockquote code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(thead th code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(pre):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { background-color: transparent; border-radius: 0.375rem; color: currentcolor; font-size: 0.875em; font-weight: 400; line-height: 1.71429; margin: 0px; overflow-x: auto; padding: 0px; }

.prose :where(pre code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { background-color: transparent; border-radius: 0px; border-width: 0px; color: inherit; font-family: inherit; font-size: inherit; font-weight: inherit; line-height: inherit; padding: 0px; }

.prose :where(pre code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::before { content: none; }

.prose :where(pre code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::after { content: none; }

.prose :where(table):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { font-size: 0.875em; line-height: 1.71429; margin-bottom: 2em; margin-top: 2em; table-layout: auto; text-align: left; width: 100%; }

.prose :where(thead):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { border-bottom-color: var(--tw-prose-th-borders); border-bottom-width: 1px; }

.prose :where(thead th):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-headings); font-weight: 600; padding-bottom: 0.571429em; padding-left: 0.571429em; padding-right: 0.571429em; vertical-align: bottom; }

.prose :where(tbody tr):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { border-bottom-color: var(--tw-prose-td-borders); border-bottom-width: 1px; }

.prose :where(tbody tr:last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { border-bottom-width: 0px; }

.prose :where(tbody td):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { vertical-align: baseline; }

.prose :where(tfoot):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { border-top-color: var(--tw-prose-th-borders); border-top-width: 1px; }

.prose :where(tfoot td):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { vertical-align: top; }

.prose { --tw-prose-body:#374151; --tw-prose-headings:#111827; --tw-prose-lead:#4b5563; --tw-prose-links:#111827; --tw-prose-bold:#111827; --tw-prose-counters:#6b7280; --tw-prose-bullets:#d1d5db; --tw-prose-hr:#e5e7eb; --tw-prose-quotes:#111827; --tw-prose-quote-borders:#e5e7eb; --tw-prose-captions:#6b7280; --tw-prose-code:#111827; --tw-prose-pre-code:#e5e7eb; --tw-prose-pre-bg:#1f2937; --tw-prose-th-borders:#d1d5db; --tw-prose-td-borders:#e5e7eb; --tw-prose-invert-body:#d1d5db; --tw-prose-invert-headings:#fff; --tw-prose-invert-lead:#9ca3af; --tw-prose-invert-links:#fff; --tw-prose-invert-bold:#fff; --tw-prose-invert-counters:#9ca3af; --tw-prose-invert-bullets:#4b5563; --tw-prose-invert-hr:#374151; --tw-prose-invert-quotes:#f3f4f6; --tw-prose-invert-quote-borders:#374151; --tw-prose-invert-captions:#9ca3af; --tw-prose-invert-code:#fff; --tw-prose-invert-pre-code:#d1d5db; --tw-prose-invert-pre-bg:rgba(0,0,0,0.5); --tw-prose-invert-th-borders:#4b5563; --tw-prose-invert-td-borders:#374151; font-size: 1rem; line-height: 1.75; }

.prose :where(p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.25em; margin-top: 1.25em; }

.prose :where(video):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 2em; margin-top: 2em; }

.prose :where(figure):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 2em; margin-top: 2em; }

.prose :where(li):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.5em; margin-top: 0.5em; }

.prose :where(ol > li):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding-left: 0.375em; }

.prose :where(ul > li):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding-left: 0.375em; }

.prose :where(.prose > ul > li p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.75em; margin-top: 0.75em; }

.prose :where(.prose > ul > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.25em; }

.prose :where(.prose > ul > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.25em; }

.prose :where(.prose > ol > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.25em; }

.prose :where(.prose > ol > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.25em; }

.prose :where(ul ul, ul ol, ol ul, ol ol):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.75em; margin-top: 0.75em; }

.prose :where(hr + *):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(h2 + *):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(h3 + *):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(h4 + *):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(thead th:first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding-left: 0px; }

.prose :where(thead th:last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding-right: 0px; }

.prose :where(tbody td, tfoot td):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding: 0.571429em; }

.prose :where(tbody td:first-child, tfoot td:first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding-left: 0px; }

.prose :where(tbody td:last-child, tfoot td:last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding-right: 0px; }

.prose :where(.prose > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(.prose > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > ul > li p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.571429em; margin-top: 0.571429em; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > ul > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.14286em; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > ul > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.14286em; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > ol > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.14286em; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > ol > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.14286em; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > ul > li p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.75em; margin-top: 0.75em; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > ul > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.25em; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > ul > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.25em; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > ol > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.25em; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > ol > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.25em; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > ul > li p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.888889em; margin-top: 0.888889em; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > ul > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.33333em; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > ul > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.33333em; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > ol > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.33333em; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > ol > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.33333em; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > ul > li p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.8em; margin-top: 0.8em; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > ul > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.2em; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > ul > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.2em; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > ol > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.2em; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > ol > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.2em; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > ul > li p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.833333em; margin-top: 0.833333em; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > ul > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.33333em; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > ul > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.33333em; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > ol > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.33333em; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > ol > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.33333em; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.prose-invert { --tw-prose-body:var(--tw-prose-invert-body); --tw-prose-headings:var(--tw-prose-invert-headings); --tw-prose-lead:var(--tw-prose-invert-lead); --tw-prose-links:var(--tw-prose-invert-links); --tw-prose-bold:var(--tw-prose-invert-bold); --tw-prose-counters:var(--tw-prose-invert-counters); --tw-prose-bullets:var(--tw-prose-invert-bullets); --tw-prose-hr:var(--tw-prose-invert-hr); --tw-prose-quotes:var(--tw-prose-invert-quotes); --tw-prose-quote-borders:var(--tw-prose-invert-quote-borders); --tw-prose-captions:var(--tw-prose-invert-captions); --tw-prose-code:var(--tw-prose-invert-code); --tw-prose-pre-code:var(--tw-prose-invert-pre-code); --tw-prose-pre-bg:var(--tw-prose-invert-pre-bg); --tw-prose-th-borders:var(--tw-prose-invert-th-borders); --tw-prose-td-borders:var(--tw-prose-invert-td-borders); }

.form-input, .form-multiselect, .form-select, .form-textarea { --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent; appearance: none; background-color: rgb(255, 255, 255); border-color: rgb(142, 142, 160); border-radius: 0px; border-width: 1px; font-size: 1rem; line-height: 1.5rem; padding: 0.5rem 0.75rem; }

.form-input:focus, .form-multiselect:focus, .form-select:focus, .form-textarea:focus { --tw-ring-inset:var(--tw-empty, ); --tw-ring-offset-width:0px; --tw-ring-offset-color:#fff; --tw-ring-color:#2563eb; --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(1px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); border-color: rgb(37, 99, 235); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow); outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

.form-input::-webkit-input-placeholder, .form-textarea::-webkit-input-placeholder { color: rgb(142, 142, 160); opacity: 1; }

.form-input::placeholder, .form-textarea::placeholder { color: rgb(142, 142, 160); opacity: 1; }

.form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-fields-wrapper { padding: 0px; }

.form-input::-webkit-date-and-time-value { min-height: 1.5em; }

.form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-day-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-hour-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-meridiem-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-millisecond-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-minute-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-month-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-second-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-year-field { padding-bottom: 0px; padding-top: 0px; }

.btn { align-items: center; border-color: transparent; border-radius: 0.25rem; border-width: 1px; display: inline-flex; font-size: 0.875rem; line-height: 1.25rem; padding: 0.5rem 0.75rem; pointer-events: auto; }

.btn:focus { outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

.btn:disabled { cursor: not-allowed; opacity: 0.5; }

.btn-primary { --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.btn-primary:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(26,127,100,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-primary:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(2px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); --tw-ring-offset-width:2px; box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.btn-primary.focus-visible { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.btn-primary:focus-visible { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.btn-danger { --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(185,28,28,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.btn-danger:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(153,27,27,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-danger:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(2px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); --tw-ring-offset-width:2px; box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.btn-danger.focus-visible { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(220,38,38,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.btn-danger:focus-visible { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(220,38,38,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.btn-danger:disabled:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(185,28,28,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-neutral { --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1); border-width: 1px; color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-text-opacity)); font-size: 0.875rem; line-height: 1.25rem; }

.btn-neutral:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-neutral:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(2px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); --tw-ring-offset-width:2px; box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.btn-neutral.focus-visible { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(99,102,241,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.btn-neutral:focus-visible { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(99,102,241,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.dark .btn-neutral { --tw-border-opacity:1; --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); border-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-border-opacity)); color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .btn-neutral:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-dark { --tw-border-opacity:1; --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); border-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-border-opacity)); border-width: 1px; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.btn-dark:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-light { --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); color: rgba(0,0,0,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.btn-light:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-disabled { --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); cursor: not-allowed; }

.btn-disabled, .btn-disabled:hover { background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-disabled:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; }

.btn-small { padding: 0.25rem 0.5rem; }

.hide-scrollbar { }

.hide-scrollbar ::-webkit-scrollbar { display: none; }

.sr-only { clip: rect(0px, 0px, 0px, 0px); border-width: 0px; height: 1px; margin: -1px; overflow: hidden; padding: 0px; position: absolute; white-space: nowrap; width: 1px; }

.pointer-events-none { pointer-events: none; }

.pointer-events-auto { pointer-events: auto; }

.visible { visibility: visible; }

.\!invisible { visibility: hidden !important; }

.invisible { visibility: hidden; }

.static { position: static; }

.fixed { position: fixed; }

.absolute { position: absolute; }

.relative { position: relative; }

.\!sticky { position: sticky !important; }

.sticky { position: sticky; }

.inset-0 { left: 0px; right: 0px; }

.inset-0, .inset-y-0 { bottom: 0px; top: 0px; }

.-left-2 { left: -0.5rem; }

.-top-0 { top: 0px; }

.-top-0\.5 { top: -0.125rem; }

.-top-4 { top: -1rem; }

.-top-\[1px\] { top: -1px; }

.bottom-0 { bottom: 0px; }

.bottom-1 { bottom: 0.25rem; }

.bottom-1\.5 { bottom: 0.375rem; }

.bottom-2 { bottom: 0.5rem; }

.bottom-4 { bottom: 1rem; }

.bottom-5 { bottom: 1.25rem; }

.bottom-\[10px\] { bottom: 10px; }

.bottom-\[124px\] { bottom: 124px; }

.bottom-full { bottom: 100%; }

.left-0 { left: 0px; }

.left-1 { left: 0.25rem; }

.left-1\.5 { left: 0.375rem; }

.left-1\/2 { left: 50%; }

.left-2 { left: 0.5rem; }

.left-4 { left: 1rem; }

.left-5 { left: 1.25rem; }

.right-0 { right: 0px; }

.right-1 { right: 0.25rem; }

.right-12 { right: 3rem; }

.right-2 { right: 0.5rem; }

.right-3 { right: 0.75rem; }

.right-4 { right: 1rem; }

.right-6 { right: 1.5rem; }

.top-0 { top: 0px; }

.top-1 { top: 0.25rem; }

.top-1\/2 { top: 50%; }

.top-14 { top: 3.5rem; }

.top-2 { top: 0.5rem; }

.top-8 { top: 2rem; }

.top-\[-3px\] { top: -3px; }

.top-\[-6px\] { top: -6px; }

.top-\[20px\] { top: 20px; }

.top-full { top: 100%; }

.-z-0, .z-0 { z-index: 0; }

.z-10 { z-index: 10; }

.z-20 { z-index: 20; }

.z-50 { z-index: 50; }

.z-\[14\] { z-index: 14; }

.z-\[15\] { z-index: 15; }

.z-\[16\] { z-index: 16; }

.z-\[17\] { z-index: 17; }

.z-\[2\] { z-index: 2; }

.z-\[60\] { z-index: 60; }

.z-\[9\] { z-index: 9; }

.order-1 { order: 1; }

.order-2 { order: 2; }

.col-auto { grid-column: auto / auto; }

.col-span-1 { grid-column: span 1 / span 1; }

.col-start-2 { grid-column-start: 2; }

.row-auto { grid-row: auto / auto; }

.row-start-2 { grid-row-start: 2; }

.float-left { float: left; }

.m-0 { margin: 0px; }

.m-1 { margin: 0.25rem; }

.m-4 { margin: 1rem; }

.m-6 { margin: 1.5rem; }

.m-auto { margin: auto; }

.-my-0 { margin-bottom: 0px; margin-top: 0px; }

.-my-0\.5 { margin-bottom: -0.125rem; margin-top: -0.125rem; }

.-my-1 { margin-bottom: -0.25rem; margin-top: -0.25rem; }

.mx-1 { margin-left: 0.25rem; margin-right: 0.25rem; }

.mx-2 { margin-left: 0.5rem; margin-right: 0.5rem; }

.mx-3 { margin-left: 0.75rem; margin-right: 0.75rem; }

.mx-6 { margin-left: 1.5rem; margin-right: 1.5rem; }

.mx-8 { margin-left: 2rem; margin-right: 2rem; }

.mx-auto { margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; }

.my-0 { margin-bottom: 0px; margin-top: 0px; }

.my-1 { margin-bottom: 0.25rem; margin-top: 0.25rem; }

.my-1\.5 { margin-bottom: 0.375rem; margin-top: 0.375rem; }

.my-2 { margin-bottom: 0.5rem; margin-top: 0.5rem; }

.my-3 { margin-bottom: 0.75rem; margin-top: 0.75rem; }

.my-4 { margin-bottom: 1rem; margin-top: 1rem; }

.-ml-0 { margin-left: 0px; }

.-ml-0\.5 { margin-left: -0.125rem; }

.-ml-1 { margin-left: -0.25rem; }

.-ml-2 { margin-left: -0.5rem; }

.-ml-4 { margin-left: -1rem; }

.-ml-\[1px\] { margin-left: -1px; }

.-ml-\[8px\] { margin-left: -8px; }

.-mr-1 { margin-right: -0.25rem; }

.-mr-12 { margin-right: -3rem; }

.-mr-2 { margin-right: -0.5rem; }

.-mt-0 { margin-top: 0px; }

.-mt-0\.5 { margin-top: -0.125rem; }

.-mt-\[3px\] { margin-top: -3px; }

.mb-0 { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.mb-0\.5 { margin-bottom: 0.125rem; }

.mb-1 { margin-bottom: 0.25rem; }

.mb-10 { margin-bottom: 2.5rem; }

.mb-12 { margin-bottom: 3rem; }

.mb-2 { margin-bottom: 0.5rem; }

.mb-3 { margin-bottom: 0.75rem; }

.mb-4 { margin-bottom: 1rem; }

.mb-5 { margin-bottom: 1.25rem; }

.mb-6 { margin-bottom: 1.5rem; }

.mb-7 { margin-bottom: 1.75rem; }

.mb-8 { margin-bottom: 2rem; }

.mb-\[5px\] { margin-bottom: 5px; }

.mb-auto { margin-bottom: auto; }

.ml-0 { margin-left: 0px; }

.ml-0\.5 { margin-left: 0.125rem; }

.ml-1 { margin-left: 0.25rem; }

.ml-12 { margin-left: 3rem; }

.ml-3 { margin-left: 0.75rem; }

.ml-5 { margin-left: 1.25rem; }

.ml-auto { margin-left: auto; }

.mr-0 { margin-right: 0px; }

.mr-1 { margin-right: 0.25rem; }

.mr-2 { margin-right: 0.5rem; }

.mr-3 { margin-right: 0.75rem; }

.mr-4 { margin-right: 1rem; }

.mr-8 { margin-right: 2rem; }

.mr-auto { margin-right: auto; }

.mt-1 { margin-top: 0.25rem; }

.mt-10 { margin-top: 2.5rem; }

.mt-2 { margin-top: 0.5rem; }

.mt-3 { margin-top: 0.75rem; }

.mt-4 { margin-top: 1rem; }

.mt-5 { margin-top: 1.25rem; }

.mt-6 { margin-top: 1.5rem; }

.mt-8 { margin-top: 2rem; }

.mt-auto { margin-top: auto; }

.box-border { box-sizing: border-box; }

.line-clamp-1 { -webkit-line-clamp: 1; }

.line-clamp-1, .line-clamp-2 { -webkit-box-orient: vertical; display: -webkit-box; overflow: hidden; }

.line-clamp-2 { -webkit-line-clamp: 2; }

.line-clamp-3 { -webkit-box-orient: vertical; -webkit-line-clamp: 3; display: -webkit-box; overflow: hidden; }

.block { display: block; }

.inline-block { display: inline-block; }

.inline { display: inline; }

.flex { display: flex; }

.inline-flex { display: inline-flex; }

.table { display: table; }

.grid { display: grid; }

.contents { display: contents; }

.hidden { display: none; }

.aspect-\[4\/7\] { aspect-ratio: 4 / 7; }

.aspect-\[7\/4\] { aspect-ratio: 7 / 4; }

.aspect-square { aspect-ratio: 1 / 1; }

.\!h-5 { height: 1.25rem !important; }

.h-1 { height: 0.25rem; }

.h-1\.5 { height: 0.375rem; }

.h-10 { height: 2.5rem; }

.h-11 { height: 2.75rem; }

.h-12 { height: 3rem; }

.h-14 { height: 3.5rem; }

.h-16 { height: 4rem; }

.h-2 { height: 0.5rem; }

.h-24 { height: 6rem; }

.h-3 { height: 0.75rem; }

.h-32 { height: 8rem; }

.h-4 { height: 1rem; }

.h-5 { height: 1.25rem; }

.h-52 { height: 13rem; }

.h-6 { height: 1.5rem; }

.h-64 { height: 16rem; }

.h-7 { height: 1.75rem; }

.h-8 { height: 2rem; }

.h-9 { height: 2.25rem; }

.h-\[1200px\] { height: 1200px; }

.h-\[12px\] { height: 12px; }

.h-\[14px\] { height: 14px; }

.h-\[18px\] { height: 18px; }

.h-\[19px\] { height: 19px; }

.h-\[21px\] { height: 21px; }

.h-\[22px\] { height: 22px; }

.h-\[25px\] { height: 25px; }

.h-\[30px\] { height: 30px; }

.h-\[34px\] { height: 34px; }

.h-\[36px\] { height: 36px; }

.h-\[404px\] { height: 404px; }

.h-\[42px\] { height: 42px; }

.h-\[50px\] { height: 50px; }

.h-\[60px\] { height: 60px; }

.h-\[70px\] { height: 70px; }

.h-auto { height: auto; }

.h-full { height: 100%; }

.h-px { height: 1px; }

.h-screen { height: 100vh; }

.max-h-0 { max-height: 0px; }

.max-h-5 { max-height: 1.25rem; }

.max-h-60 { max-height: 15rem; }

.max-h-64 { max-height: 16rem; }

.max-h-72 { max-height: 18rem; }

.max-h-\[28rem\] { max-height: 28rem; }

.max-h-\[450px\] { max-height: 450px; }

.max-h-\[80vh\] { max-height: 80vh; }

.max-h-\[calc\(100vh-300px\)\] { max-height: calc(100vh - 300px); }

.min-h-0 { min-height: 0px; }

.min-h-\[1\.5rem\] { min-height: 1.5rem; }

.min-h-\[20px\] { min-height: 20px; }

.min-h-\[24px\] { min-height: 24px; }

.min-h-\[60px\] { min-height: 60px; }

.min-h-\[71px\] { min-height: 71px; }

.min-h-full { min-height: 100%; }

.min-h-screen { min-height: 100vh; }

.\!w-5 { width: 1.25rem !important; }

.w-1 { width: 0.25rem; }

.w-1\.5 { width: 0.375rem; }

.w-1\/3 { width: 33.3333%; }

.w-10 { width: 2.5rem; }

.w-11 { width: 2.75rem; }

.w-12 { width: 3rem; }

.w-14 { width: 3.5rem; }

.w-16 { width: 4rem; }

.w-2 { width: 0.5rem; }

.w-28 { width: 7rem; }

.w-3 { width: 0.75rem; }

.w-4 { width: 1rem; }

.w-5 { width: 1.25rem; }

.w-6 { width: 1.5rem; }

.w-60 { width: 15rem; }

.w-64 { width: 16rem; }

.w-7 { width: 1.75rem; }

.w-8 { width: 2rem; }

.w-8\/12 { width: 66.6667%; }

.w-96 { width: 24rem; }

.w-\[103px\] { width: 103px; }

.w-\[120px\] { width: 120px; }

.w-\[184px\] { width: 184px; }

.w-\[18px\] { width: 18px; }

.w-\[2\.5px\] { width: 2.5px; }

.w-\[209px\] { width: 209px; }

.w-\[218px\] { width: 218px; }

.w-\[21px\] { width: 21px; }

.w-\[260px\] { width: 260px; }

.w-\[30px\] { width: 30px; }

.w-\[34px\] { width: 34px; }

.w-\[42px\] { width: 42px; }

.w-\[70px\] { width: 70px; }

.w-\[860px\] { width: 860px; }

.w-\[88px\] { width: 88px; }

.w-\[960px\] { width: 960px; }

.w-\[calc\(100\%-50px\)\] { width: calc(100% - 50px); }

.w-auto { width: auto; }

.w-full { width: 100%; }

.w-screen { width: 100vw; }

.min-w-0 { min-width: 0px; }

.min-w-\[100vw\] { min-width: 100vw; }

.min-w-\[175px\] { min-width: 175px; }

.min-w-\[180px\] { min-width: 180px; }

.min-w-\[220px\] { min-width: 220px; }

.min-w-\[300px\] { min-width: 300px; }

.min-w-\[32px\] { min-width: 32px; }

.min-w-\[50px\] { min-width: 50px; }

.min-w-\[8rem\] { min-width: 8rem; }

.max-w-2xl { max-width: 42rem; }

.max-w-5xl { max-width: 64rem; }

.max-w-7xl { max-width: 80rem; }

.max-w-\[100vw\] { max-width: 100vw; }

.max-w-\[220px\] { max-width: 220px; }

.max-w-\[250px\] { max-width: 250px; }

.max-w-\[350px\] { max-width: 350px; }

.max-w-\[400px\] { max-width: 400px; }

.max-w-\[440px\] { max-width: 440px; }

.max-w-\[44rem\] { max-width: 44rem; }

.max-w-\[510px\] { max-width: 510px; }

.max-w-\[550px\] { max-width: 550px; }

.max-w-\[560px\] { max-width: 560px; }

.max-w-\[650px\] { max-width: 650px; }

.max-w-full { max-width: 100%; }

.max-w-lg { max-width: 32rem; }

.max-w-md { max-width: 28rem; }

.max-w-sm { max-width: 24rem; }

.max-w-xl { max-width: 36rem; }

.max-w-xs { max-width: 20rem; }

.flex-1 { flex: 1 1 0%; }

.flex-auto { flex: 1 1 auto; }

.flex-initial { flex: 0 1 auto; }

.flex-none { flex: 0 0 auto; }

.flex-shrink { flex-shrink: 1; }

.flex-shrink-0 { flex-shrink: 0; }

.shrink { flex-shrink: 1; }

.shrink-0 { flex-shrink: 0; }

.flex-grow { flex-grow: 1; }

.flex-grow-0 { flex-grow: 0; }

.grow { flex-grow: 1; }

.table-fixed { table-layout: fixed; }

.border-separate { border-collapse: separate; }

.border-spacing-0 { --tw-border-spacing-x:0px; --tw-border-spacing-y:0px; border-spacing: var(--tw-border-spacing-x) var(--tw-border-spacing-y); }

.origin-\[50\%_50\%\] { transform-origin: 50% 50%; }

.-translate-x-1\/2 { --tw-translate-x:-50%; }

.-translate-x-1\/2, .-translate-x-\[calc\(100\%\+4px\)\] { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.-translate-x-\[calc\(100\%\+4px\)\] { --tw-translate-x:calc(-100% + -4px); }

.-translate-x-full { --tw-translate-x:-100%; }

.-translate-x-full, .-translate-y-1\/2 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.-translate-y-1\/2 { --tw-translate-y:-50%; }

.translate-x-0 { --tw-translate-x:0px; }

.translate-x-0, .translate-x-0\.5 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.translate-x-0\.5 { --tw-translate-x:0.125rem; }

.translate-x-1 { --tw-translate-x:0.25rem; }

.translate-x-1, .translate-x-1\/2 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.translate-x-1\/2 { --tw-translate-x:50%; }

.translate-x-full { --tw-translate-x:100%; }

.translate-x-full, .translate-y-0 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.translate-y-0 { --tw-translate-y:0px; }

.translate-y-1 { --tw-translate-y:0.25rem; }

.translate-y-1, .translate-y-3 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.translate-y-3 { --tw-translate-y:0.75rem; }

.translate-y-\[calc\(-50\%-1em\)\] { --tw-translate-y:calc(-50% - 1em); }

.translate-y-\[calc\(-50\%-1em\)\], .translate-y-\[calc\(-50\%-1em\+16px\)\] { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.translate-y-\[calc\(-50\%-1em\+16px\)\] { --tw-translate-y:calc(-50% - 1em + 16px); }

.translate-y-\[calc\(-50\%-1em-16px\)\] { --tw-translate-y:calc(-50% - 1em - 16px); }

.translate-y-\[calc\(-50\%-1em-16px\)\], .translate-y-\[calc\(100\%-71px\)\] { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.translate-y-\[calc\(100\%-71px\)\] { --tw-translate-y:calc(100% - 71px); }

.-rotate-180 { --tw-rotate:-180deg; }

.-rotate-180, .-rotate-45 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.-rotate-45 { --tw-rotate:-45deg; }

.-rotate-90 { --tw-rotate:-90deg; }

.-rotate-90, .rotate-180 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.rotate-180 { --tw-rotate:180deg; }

.rotate-45 { --tw-rotate:45deg; }

.rotate-45, .scale-0 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.scale-0 { --tw-scale-x:0; --tw-scale-y:0; }

.transform { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

@-webkit-keyframes slideDownAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateY(-2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateY(0px); }
}

.animate-slideDownAndFade { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideDownAndFade; }

@-webkit-keyframes slideLeftAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateX(2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateX(0px); }
}

.animate-slideLeftAndFade { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideLeftAndFade; }

@-webkit-keyframes slideUpAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateY(2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateY(0px); }
}

.animate-slideUpAndFade { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideUpAndFade; }

@-webkit-keyframes spin { 
  100% { transform: rotate(1turn); }
}

@keyframes spin { 
  100% { transform: rotate(1turn); }
}

.animate-spin { animation: 1s linear 0s infinite normal none running spin; }

.cursor-auto { cursor: auto; }

.cursor-default { cursor: default; }

.cursor-not-allowed { cursor: not-allowed; }

.cursor-pointer { cursor: pointer; }

.select-none { user-select: none; }

.resize-none { resize: none; }

.resize { resize: both; }

.list-disc { list-style-type: disc; }

.list-none { list-style-type: none; }

.appearance-none { appearance: none; }

.grid-flow-row { grid-auto-flow: row; }

.grid-cols-1 { grid-template-columns: repeat(1, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }

.grid-cols-2 { grid-template-columns: repeat(2, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }

.grid-cols-\[10px_1fr_10px\] { grid-template-columns: 10px 1fr 10px; }

.grid-cols-\[auto_max-content\] { grid-template-columns: auto max-content; }

.grid-cols-\[repeat\(auto-fit\,minmax\(250px\,1fr\)\)\] { grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fit, minmax(250px, 1fr)); }

.grid-rows-\[minmax\(10px\,_1fr\)_auto_minmax\(10px\,_1fr\)\] { grid-template-rows: minmax(10px, 1fr) auto minmax(10px, 1fr); }

.flex-row { flex-direction: row; }

.flex-col { flex-direction: column; }

.flex-col-reverse { flex-direction: column-reverse; }

.flex-wrap { flex-wrap: wrap; }

.place-items-center { place-items: center; }

.items-start { align-items: flex-start; }

.items-end { align-items: flex-end; }

.items-center { align-items: center; }

.items-stretch { align-items: stretch; }

.justify-start { justify-content: flex-start; }

.justify-end { justify-content: flex-end; }

.justify-center { justify-content: center; }

.justify-between { justify-content: space-between; }

.justify-around { justify-content: space-around; }

.justify-stretch { justify-content: stretch; }

.gap-0 { gap: 0px; }

.gap-1 { gap: 0.25rem; }

.gap-1\.5 { gap: 0.375rem; }

.gap-2 { gap: 0.5rem; }

.gap-2\.5 { gap: 0.625rem; }

.gap-3 { gap: 0.75rem; }

.gap-3\.5 { gap: 0.875rem; }

.gap-4 { gap: 1rem; }

.gap-5 { gap: 1.25rem; }

.gap-6 { gap: 1.5rem; }

.gap-7 { gap: 1.75rem; }

.gap-\[10px\] { gap: 10px; }

.gap-x-1 { column-gap: 0.25rem; }

.gap-x-1\.5 { column-gap: 0.375rem; }

.gap-x-3 { column-gap: 0.75rem; }

.gap-x-9 { column-gap: 2.25rem; }

.gap-x-\[15px\] { column-gap: 15px; }

.space-x-0 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-x-reverse:0; margin-left: calc(0px*(1 - var(--tw-space-x-reverse))); margin-right: calc(0px*var(--tw-space-x-reverse)); }

.space-x-0\.5 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-x-reverse:0; margin-left: calc(0.125rem*(1 - var(--tw-space-x-reverse))); margin-right: calc(0.125rem*var(--tw-space-x-reverse)); }

.space-x-1 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-x-reverse:0; margin-left: calc(0.25rem*(1 - var(--tw-space-x-reverse))); margin-right: calc(0.25rem*var(--tw-space-x-reverse)); }

.space-x-1\.5 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-x-reverse:0; margin-left: calc(0.375rem*(1 - var(--tw-space-x-reverse))); margin-right: calc(0.375rem*var(--tw-space-x-reverse)); }

.space-x-2 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-x-reverse:0; margin-left: calc(0.5rem*(1 - var(--tw-space-x-reverse))); margin-right: calc(0.5rem*var(--tw-space-x-reverse)); }

.space-y-2 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-y-reverse:0; margin-bottom: calc(0.5rem*var(--tw-space-y-reverse)); margin-top: calc(0.5rem*(1 - var(--tw-space-y-reverse))); }

.space-y-3 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-y-reverse:0; margin-bottom: calc(0.75rem*var(--tw-space-y-reverse)); margin-top: calc(0.75rem*(1 - var(--tw-space-y-reverse))); }

.self-end { align-self: flex-end; }

.self-center { align-self: center; }

.self-stretch { align-self: stretch; }

.justify-self-start { justify-self: start; }

.overflow-auto { overflow: auto; }

.overflow-hidden { overflow: hidden; }

.overflow-scroll { overflow: scroll; }

.overflow-x-auto { overflow-x: auto; }

.overflow-y-auto { overflow-y: auto; }

.overflow-x-hidden { overflow-x: hidden; }

.overflow-y-hidden { overflow-y: hidden; }

.truncate { overflow: hidden; white-space: nowrap; }

.overflow-ellipsis, .text-ellipsis, .truncate { text-overflow: ellipsis; }

.whitespace-normal { white-space: normal; }

.whitespace-nowrap { white-space: nowrap; }

.\!whitespace-pre { white-space: pre !important; }

.whitespace-pre-line { white-space: pre-line; }

.\!whitespace-pre-wrap { white-space: pre-wrap !important; }

.whitespace-pre-wrap { white-space: pre-wrap; }

.break-words { overflow-wrap: break-word; }

.break-all { word-break: break-all; }

.rounded { border-radius: 0.25rem; }

.rounded-2xl { border-radius: 1rem; }

.rounded-\[4px\] { border-radius: 4px; }

.rounded-\[5px\] { border-radius: 5px; }

.rounded-full { border-radius: 9999px; }

.rounded-lg { border-radius: 0.5rem; }

.rounded-md { border-radius: 0.375rem; }

.rounded-none { border-radius: 0px; }

.rounded-sm { border-radius: 0.125rem; }

.rounded-xl { border-radius: 0.75rem; }

.rounded-b-lg { border-bottom-left-radius: 0.5rem; border-bottom-right-radius: 0.5rem; }

.rounded-l-md { border-bottom-left-radius: 0.375rem; border-top-left-radius: 0.375rem; }

.rounded-r-md { border-bottom-right-radius: 0.375rem; border-top-right-radius: 0.375rem; }

.rounded-t-\[30px\] { border-top-left-radius: 30px; border-top-right-radius: 30px; }

.rounded-t-md { border-top-left-radius: 0.375rem; border-top-right-radius: 0.375rem; }

.rounded-t-xl { border-top-left-radius: 0.75rem; border-top-right-radius: 0.75rem; }

.rounded-br-sm { border-bottom-right-radius: 0.125rem; }

.border { border-width: 1px; }

.border-0 { border-width: 0px; }

.border-2 { border-width: 2px; }

.border-\[0\.5px\] { border-width: 0.5px; }

.border-b { border-bottom-width: 1px; }

.border-l { border-left-width: 1px; }

.border-l-4 { border-left-width: 4px; }

.border-r { border-right-width: 1px; }

.border-r-0 { border-right-width: 0px; }

.border-t { border-top-width: 1px; }

.border-none { border-style: none; }

.border-black\/10 { border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1); }

.border-black\/20 { border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2); }

.border-black\/30 { border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.3); }

.border-black\/5 { border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.05); }

.border-brand-green { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-brand-purple { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-100 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-200 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-300 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-400 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-500 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-700 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-800 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-green-500 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-orange-400 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(255,128,82,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-orange-500 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(224,108,43,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-red-500 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-transparent { border-color: transparent; }

.border-white { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-white\/20 { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.2); }

.\!bg-brand-purple { --tw-bg-opacity:1 !important; background-color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)) !important; }

.\!bg-gray-700 { --tw-bg-opacity:1 !important; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)) !important; }

.\!bg-transparent { background-color: transparent !important; }

.bg-\[\#0077FF\] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(0,119,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-\[\#3C46FF\] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(60,70,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-\[rgba\(30\,203\,239\,0\.07\)\] { background-color: rgba(30, 203, 239, 0.07); }

.bg-black { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(0,0,0,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-black\/5 { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.05); }

.bg-black\/\[\.04\] { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.04); }

.bg-black\/\[\.08\] { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.08); }

.bg-black\/\[\.12\] { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.12); }

.bg-blue-200 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(191,219,254,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-blue-300 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(121,137,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-100 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-200 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-300 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-50 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(247,247,248,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-500 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-500\/90 { background-color: rgba(141, 141, 160, 0.9); }

.bg-gray-600 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-700 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-800 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-900 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-950 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(5,5,9,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-green-100 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(210,244,211,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-green-500 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-green-500\/10 { background-color: rgba(25, 195, 125, 0.1); }

.bg-green-600 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-orange-500 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(224,108,43,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-orange-500\/10 { background-color: rgba(224, 108, 43, 0.1); }

.bg-red-100 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(254,226,226,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-red-200 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(254,202,202,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-red-500 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-red-500\/10 { background-color: rgba(239, 68, 68, 0.1); }

.bg-red-600 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(220,38,38,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-transparent { background-color: transparent; }

.bg-white { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-white\/20 { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.2); }

.bg-white\/25 { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.25); }

.bg-yellow-100 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(254,249,195,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-yellow-200 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(250,230,158,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-yellow-300 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(255,243,201,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-opacity-75 { --tw-bg-opacity:0.75; }

.bg-gradient-to-l { background-image: linear-gradient(to left,var(--tw-gradient-stops)); }

.bg-gradient-to-t { background-image: linear-gradient(to top,var(--tw-gradient-stops)); }

.from-gray-100 { --tw-gradient-from:#ececf1 var(--tw-gradient-from-position); --tw-gradient-to:rgba(236,236,241,0) var(--tw-gradient-to-position); --tw-gradient-stops:var(--tw-gradient-from),var(--tw-gradient-to); }

.from-gray-800 { --tw-gradient-from:#343541 var(--tw-gradient-from-position); --tw-gradient-to:rgba(52,53,65,0) var(--tw-gradient-to-position); --tw-gradient-stops:var(--tw-gradient-from),var(--tw-gradient-to); }

.from-gray-900 { --tw-gradient-from:#202123 var(--tw-gradient-from-position); --tw-gradient-to:rgba(32,33,35,0) var(--tw-gradient-to-position); --tw-gradient-stops:var(--tw-gradient-from),var(--tw-gradient-to); }

.from-gray-900\/0 { --tw-gradient-from:rgba(32,33,35,0) var(--tw-gradient-from-position); --tw-gradient-to:rgba(32,33,35,0) var(--tw-gradient-to-position); --tw-gradient-stops:var(--tw-gradient-from),var(--tw-gradient-to); }

.from-\[60\%\] { --tw-gradient-from-position:60%; }

.to-gray-900 { --tw-gradient-to:#202123 var(--tw-gradient-to-position); }

.bg-contain { background-size: contain; }

.bg-cover { background-size: cover; }

.bg-center { background-position: 50% center; }

.bg-no-repeat { background-repeat: no-repeat; }

.fill-gray-800 { fill: rgb(52, 53, 65); }

.fill-yellow-500 { fill: rgb(234, 179, 8); }

.stroke-gray-200 { stroke: rgb(217, 217, 227); }

.object-cover { object-fit: cover; }

.p-0 { padding: 0px; }

.p-0\.5 { padding: 0.125rem; }

.p-1 { padding: 0.25rem; }

.p-2 { padding: 0.5rem; }

.p-3 { padding: 0.75rem; }

.p-4 { padding: 1rem; }

.p-6 { padding: 1.5rem; }

.p-7 { padding: 1.75rem; }

.p-\[15px\] { padding: 15px; }

.p-\[5px\] { padding: 5px; }

.p-\[var\(--viewport-padding\)\] { padding: var(--viewport-padding); }

.\!px-1 { padding-left: 0.25rem !important; padding-right: 0.25rem !important; }

.\!px-1\.5 { padding-left: 0.375rem !important; padding-right: 0.375rem !important; }

.\!py-0 { padding-bottom: 0px !important; padding-top: 0px !important; }

.\!py-0\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.125rem !important; padding-top: 0.125rem !important; }

.px-0 { padding-left: 0px; padding-right: 0px; }

.px-0\.5 { padding-left: 0.125rem; padding-right: 0.125rem; }

.px-1 { padding-left: 0.25rem; padding-right: 0.25rem; }

.px-1\.5 { padding-left: 0.375rem; padding-right: 0.375rem; }

.px-2 { padding-left: 0.5rem; padding-right: 0.5rem; }

.px-3 { padding-left: 0.75rem; padding-right: 0.75rem; }

.px-4 { padding-left: 1rem; padding-right: 1rem; }

.px-5 { padding-left: 1.25rem; padding-right: 1.25rem; }

.px-6 { padding-left: 1.5rem; padding-right: 1.5rem; }

.px-8 { padding-left: 2rem; padding-right: 2rem; }

.px-\[10px\] { padding-left: 10px; padding-right: 10px; }

.py-0 { padding-bottom: 0px; padding-top: 0px; }

.py-0\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.125rem; padding-top: 0.125rem; }

.py-1 { padding-bottom: 0.25rem; padding-top: 0.25rem; }

.py-1\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.375rem; padding-top: 0.375rem; }

.py-2 { padding-bottom: 0.5rem; padding-top: 0.5rem; }

.py-2\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.625rem; padding-top: 0.625rem; }

.py-3 { padding-bottom: 0.75rem; padding-top: 0.75rem; }

.py-4 { padding-bottom: 1rem; padding-top: 1rem; }

.py-6 { padding-bottom: 1.5rem; padding-top: 1.5rem; }

.py-8 { padding-bottom: 2rem; padding-top: 2rem; }

.py-\[10px\] { padding-bottom: 10px; padding-top: 10px; }

.\!pr-2 { padding-right: 0.5rem !important; }

.\!pt-0 { padding-top: 0px !important; }

.pb-0 { padding-bottom: 0px; }

.pb-0\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.125rem; }

.pb-1 { padding-bottom: 0.25rem; }

.pb-1\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.375rem; }

.pb-12 { padding-bottom: 3rem; }

.pb-2 { padding-bottom: 0.5rem; }

.pb-3 { padding-bottom: 0.75rem; }

.pb-4 { padding-bottom: 1rem; }

.pb-5 { padding-bottom: 1.25rem; }

.pb-64 { padding-bottom: 16rem; }

.pb-8 { padding-bottom: 2rem; }

.pl-0 { padding-left: 0px; }

.pl-1 { padding-left: 0.25rem; }

.pl-10 { padding-left: 2.5rem; }

.pl-12 { padding-left: 3rem; }

.pl-2 { padding-left: 0.5rem; }

.pl-3 { padding-left: 0.75rem; }

.pl-4 { padding-left: 1rem; }

.pl-5 { padding-left: 1.25rem; }

.pl-6 { padding-left: 1.5rem; }

.pr-1 { padding-right: 0.25rem; }

.pr-1\.5 { padding-right: 0.375rem; }

.pr-10 { padding-right: 2.5rem; }

.pr-11 { padding-right: 2.75rem; }

.pr-12 { padding-right: 3rem; }

.pr-14 { padding-right: 3.5rem; }

.pr-2 { padding-right: 0.5rem; }

.pr-3 { padding-right: 0.75rem; }

.pr-4 { padding-right: 1rem; }

.pr-5 { padding-right: 1.25rem; }

.pr-6 { padding-right: 1.5rem; }

.pr-7 { padding-right: 1.75rem; }

.pr-9 { padding-right: 2.25rem; }

.pt-0 { padding-top: 0px; }

.pt-0\.5 { padding-top: 0.125rem; }

.pt-1 { padding-top: 0.25rem; }

.pt-2 { padding-top: 0.5rem; }

.pt-20 { padding-top: 5rem; }

.pt-3 { padding-top: 0.75rem; }

.pt-4 { padding-top: 1rem; }

.pt-5 { padding-top: 1.25rem; }

.pt-8 { padding-top: 2rem; }

.pt-\[67\%\] { padding-top: 67%; }

.text-left { text-align: left; }

.text-center { text-align: center; }

.text-right { text-align: right; }

.align-top { vertical-align: top; }

.font-mono { font-family: "Söhne Mono", Monaco, "Andale Mono", "Ubuntu Mono", monospace; }

.font-sans { font-family: Söhne, ui-sans-serif, system-ui, -apple-system, "Segoe UI", Roboto, Ubuntu, Cantarell, "Noto Sans", sans-serif, "Helvetica Neue", Arial, "Apple Color Emoji", "Segoe UI Emoji", "Segoe UI Symbol", "Noto Color Emoji"; }

.text-2xl { font-size: 1.5rem; line-height: 2rem; }

.text-3xl { font-size: 1.875rem; line-height: 2.25rem; }

.text-4xl { font-size: 2.25rem; line-height: 2.5rem; }

.text-\[10px\] { font-size: 10px; }

.text-\[13px\] { font-size: 13px; }

.text-\[15px\] { font-size: 15px; }

.text-\[20px\] { font-size: 20px; }

.text-\[28px\] { font-size: 28px; }

.text-\[32px\] { font-size: 32px; }

.text-base { font-size: 1rem; line-height: 1.5rem; }

.text-lg { font-size: 1.125rem; line-height: 1.75rem; }

.text-sm { font-size: 0.875rem; line-height: 1.25rem; }

.text-xl { font-size: 1.25rem; line-height: 1.75rem; }

.text-xs { font-size: 0.75rem; line-height: 1rem; }

.font-bold { font-weight: 700; }

.font-medium { font-weight: 500; }

.font-normal { font-weight: 400; }

.font-semibold { font-weight: 600; }

.uppercase { text-transform: uppercase; }

.capitalize { text-transform: capitalize; }

.normal-case { text-transform: none; }

.italic { font-style: italic; }

.leading-3 { line-height: 0.75rem; }

.leading-5 { line-height: 1.25rem; }

.leading-6 { line-height: 1.5rem; }

.leading-\[1\.2\] { line-height: 1.2; }

.leading-\[1\.3\] { line-height: 1.3; }

.leading-none { line-height: 1; }

.leading-normal { line-height: 1.5; }

.leading-tight { line-height: 1.25; }

.tracking-tight { letter-spacing: -0.025em; }

.tracking-wide { letter-spacing: 0.025em; }

.tracking-widest { letter-spacing: 0.1em; }

.\!text-gray-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1 !important; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)) !important; }

.text-\[\#756B5C\] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(117,107,92,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-\[\#800080\] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(128,0,128,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-\[\#FE7600\] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(254,118,0,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-\[\#cdcdcd\] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(205,205,205,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-\[\#fff\] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-black { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(0,0,0,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-black\/50 { color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.5); }

.text-black\/60 { color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.6); }

.text-black\/70 { color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.7); }

.text-blue-400 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(58,136,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-blue-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(69,89,164,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-blue-600 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(37,99,235,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-blue-700 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(29,78,216,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-brand-green { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-brand-purple { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-100 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-200 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-300 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-400 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-600 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-600\/50 { color: rgba(86, 88, 105, 0.5); }

.text-gray-700 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-800 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-900 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-green-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-green-600 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-green-700 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(26,127,100,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-orange-400 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,128,82,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-orange-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(224,108,43,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-red-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-red-600 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(220,38,38,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-red-700 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(185,28,28,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-red-800 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(153,27,27,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-token-text-primary { color: var(--text-primary); }

.text-token-text-secondary { color: var(--text-secondary); }

.text-token-text-tertiary { color: var(--text-tertiary); }

.text-white { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-white\/25 { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.25); }

.text-white\/50 { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.5); }

.text-white\/80 { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.8); }

.text-yellow-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(234,179,8,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-yellow-700 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(161,98,7,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-yellow-800 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(133,77,14,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-yellow-900 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(146,114,1,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.underline { text-decoration-line: underline; }

.\!no-underline { text-decoration-line: none !important; }

.antialiased { -webkit-font-smoothing: antialiased; }

.placeholder-gray-500::-webkit-input-placeholder { --tw-placeholder-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-placeholder-opacity)); }

.placeholder-gray-500::placeholder { --tw-placeholder-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-placeholder-opacity)); }

.opacity-0 { opacity: 0; }

.opacity-100 { opacity: 1; }

.opacity-20 { opacity: 0.2; }

.opacity-50 { opacity: 0.5; }

.opacity-60 { opacity: 0.6; }

.opacity-70 { opacity: 0.7; }

.opacity-80 { opacity: 0.8; }

.\!shadow-none { --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent !important; --tw-shadow-colored:0 0 transparent !important; box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow) !important; }

.shadow { --tw-shadow:0 1px 3px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.1),0 1px 2px -1px rgba(0,0,0,0.1); --tw-shadow-colored:0 1px 3px 0 var(--tw-shadow-color),0 1px 2px -1px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow, .shadow-\[0_0\.5px_2px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.15\)\] { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-\[0_0\.5px_2px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.15\)\] { --tw-shadow:0 0.5px 2px rgba(0,0,0,0.15); --tw-shadow-colored:0 0.5px 2px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0_1px_2px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.45\)\] { --tw-shadow:0 1px 2px rgba(0,0,0,0.45); --tw-shadow-colored:0 1px 2px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0_1px_2px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.45\)\], .shadow-\[0_1px_7px_0_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.03\)\] { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-\[0_1px_7px_0_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.03\)\] { --tw-shadow:0 1px 7px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.03); --tw-shadow-colored:0 1px 7px 0 var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0_1px_7px_0px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.06\)\] { --tw-shadow:0 1px 7px 0px rgba(0,0,0,0.06); --tw-shadow-colored:0 1px 7px 0px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0_1px_7px_0px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.06\)\], .shadow-\[0_2px_12px_0px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.08\)\] { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-\[0_2px_12px_0px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.08\)\] { --tw-shadow:0 2px 12px 0px rgba(0,0,0,0.08); --tw-shadow-colored:0 2px 12px 0px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0_2px_24px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.05\)\] { --tw-shadow:0 2px 24px rgba(0,0,0,0.05); --tw-shadow-colored:0 2px 24px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0_2px_24px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.05\)\], .shadow-\[0px_1px_6px_0px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.02\)\] { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-\[0px_1px_6px_0px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.02\)\] { --tw-shadow:0px 1px 6px 0px rgba(0,0,0,0.02); --tw-shadow-colored:0px 1px 6px 0px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0px_4px_14px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.06\)\] { --tw-shadow:0px 4px 14px rgba(0,0,0,0.06); --tw-shadow-colored:0px 4px 14px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0px_4px_14px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.06\)\], .shadow-lg { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-lg { --tw-shadow:0 10px 15px -3px rgba(0,0,0,0.1),0 4px 6px -4px rgba(0,0,0,0.1); --tw-shadow-colored:0 10px 15px -3px var(--tw-shadow-color),0 4px 6px -4px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-md { --tw-shadow:0 4px 6px -1px rgba(0,0,0,0.1),0 2px 4px -2px rgba(0,0,0,0.1); --tw-shadow-colored:0 4px 6px -1px var(--tw-shadow-color),0 2px 4px -2px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-md, .shadow-sm { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-sm { --tw-shadow:0 1px 2px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.05); --tw-shadow-colored:0 1px 2px 0 var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-xl { --tw-shadow:0 20px 25px -5px rgba(0,0,0,0.1),0 8px 10px -6px rgba(0,0,0,0.1); --tw-shadow-colored:0 20px 25px -5px var(--tw-shadow-color),0 8px 10px -6px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-xl, .shadow-xs { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-xs { --tw-shadow:0 0 15px rgba(0,0,0,0.1); --tw-shadow-colored:0 0 15px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-xxs { --tw-shadow:0 1px 7px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.03); --tw-shadow-colored:0 1px 7px 0 var(--tw-shadow-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.outline-none { outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

.ring-1 { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(1px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.ring-inset { --tw-ring-inset:inset; }

.ring-black\/10 { --tw-ring-color:rgba(0,0,0,0.1); }

.blur { --tw-blur:blur(8px); }

.blur, .blur-xl { filter: var(--tw-blur) var(--tw-brightness) var(--tw-contrast) var(--tw-grayscale) var(--tw-hue-rotate) var(--tw-invert) var(--tw-saturate) var(--tw-sepia) var(--tw-drop-shadow); }

.blur-xl { --tw-blur:blur(24px); }

.filter { filter: var(--tw-blur) var(--tw-brightness) var(--tw-contrast) var(--tw-grayscale) var(--tw-hue-rotate) var(--tw-invert) var(--tw-saturate) var(--tw-sepia) var(--tw-drop-shadow); }

.transition { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: color, background-color, border-color, text-decoration-color, fill, stroke, opacity, box-shadow, transform, filter, backdrop-filter, -webkit-transform, -webkit-filter, -webkit-backdrop-filter; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-\[stroke-dashoffset\] { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: stroke-dashoffset; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-\[transform\,opacity\] { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: transform, opacity, -webkit-transform; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-all { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: all; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-colors { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: color, background-color, border-color, text-decoration-color, fill, stroke; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-opacity { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: opacity; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-transform { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: transform, -webkit-transform; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-width { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: width; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.delay-100 { transition-delay: 0.1s; }

.delay-\[300ms\] { transition-delay: 0.3s; }

.delay-\[500ms\] { transition-delay: 0.5s; }

.duration-100 { transition-duration: 0.1s; }

.duration-1000 { transition-duration: 1s; }

.duration-150 { transition-duration: 0.15s; }

.duration-200 { transition-duration: 0.2s; }

.duration-300 { transition-duration: 0.3s; }

.duration-500 { transition-duration: 0.5s; }

.ease-in { transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 1, 1); }

.ease-in-out { transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.ease-linear { transition-timing-function: linear; }

.ease-out { transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.will-change-\[opacity\,transform\] { will-change: opacity, transform; }

.will-change-transform { will-change: transform; }

.\[--viewport-padding\:_25px\] { --viewport-padding:25px; }

.\[grid-area\:_description\] { grid-area: description / description / description / description; }

.\[grid-area\:_title\] { grid-area: title / title / title / title; }

.\[grid-template-areas\:_\'title_action\'_\'description_action\'\] { grid-template-areas: "title action" "description action"; }

body, html { height: 100%; }

.dark body, .dark html { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

#__next, #root { height: 100%; }

.markdown { max-width: none; }

.markdown h1, .markdown h2 { font-weight: 600; }

.markdown h2 { margin-bottom: 1rem; margin-top: 2rem; }

.markdown h3 { font-weight: 600; }

.markdown h3, .markdown h4 { margin-bottom: 0.5rem; margin-top: 1rem; }

.markdown h4 { font-weight: 400; }

.markdown h5 { font-weight: 600; }

.markdown blockquote { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-border-opacity)); border-left-width: 2px; line-height: 1.5rem; margin: 0px; padding-bottom: 0.5rem; padding-left: 1rem; padding-top: 0.5rem; }

.markdown blockquote > p { margin: 0px; }

.markdown blockquote > p::after, .markdown blockquote > p::before { display: none; }

.markdown ol { counter-reset: list-number 0; display: flex; flex-direction: column; list-style-type: none; padding-left: 0px; }

.markdown ol > li { counter-increment: list-number 1; display: block; margin-bottom: 0px; margin-top: 0px; min-height: 28px; }

.markdown ol > li::before { --tw-translate-x:-100%; --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); content: counters(list-number, ".") "."; padding-right: 0.5rem; position: absolute; transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

:is(.dark .markdown ol > li)::before { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.markdown ul { display: flex; flex-direction: column; padding-left: 0px; }

.markdown ul > li { display: block; margin: 0px; min-height: 28px; }

.markdown ul > li::before { --tw-translate-x:-100%; content: "•"; font-size: 0.875rem; line-height: 1.25rem; padding-right: 0.5rem; position: absolute; transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.markdown ol li > p, .markdown ol li > pre, .markdown ul li > p, .markdown ul li > pre { margin: 0px; }

.markdown ol ol, .markdown ol ul, .markdown ul ol, .markdown ul ul { margin-bottom: 0px; margin-left: 1rem; margin-top: 0px; }

.markdown table { --tw-border-spacing-x:0px; --tw-border-spacing-y:0px; border-collapse: separate; border-spacing: var(--tw-border-spacing-x) var(--tw-border-spacing-y); width: 100%; }

.markdown th { background-color: rgba(236, 236, 241, 0.2); border-bottom-width: 1px; border-left-width: 1px; border-top-width: 1px; padding: 0.25rem 0.75rem; }

.markdown th:first-child { border-top-left-radius: 0.375rem; }

.markdown th:last-child { border-right-width: 1px; border-top-right-radius: 0.375rem; }

.markdown td { border-bottom-width: 1px; border-left-width: 1px; padding: 0.25rem 0.75rem; }

.markdown td:last-child { border-right-width: 1px; }

.markdown tbody tr:last-child td:first-child { border-bottom-left-radius: 0.375rem; }

.markdown tbody tr:last-child td:last-child { border-bottom-right-radius: 0.375rem; }

.markdown a { text-decoration-line: underline; text-underline-offset: 2px; }

.conversation-item-time::before { content: attr(data-time); }

button.scroll-convo { display: none; }

@-webkit-keyframes blink { 
  100% { visibility: hidden; }
}

@keyframes blink { 
  100% { visibility: hidden; }
}

.animate-flash { animation: 2s steps(60, start) 0s 1 normal none running flash; }

@-webkit-keyframes flash { 
  0% { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.4); }
}

@keyframes flash { 
  0% { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.4); }
}

.result-streaming > :not(ol):not(ul):not(pre):last-child::after, .result-streaming > ol:last-child li:last-child::after, .result-streaming > pre:last-child code::after, .result-streaming > ul:last-child li:last-child::after { animation: 1s steps(5, start) 0s infinite normal none running blink; content: "▋"; margin-left: 0.25rem; vertical-align: baseline; }

@-webkit-keyframes toast-open { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateY(-100%); }
  100% { transform: translateY(0px); }
}

@keyframes toast-open { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateY(-100%); }
  100% { transform: translateY(0px); }
}

@-webkit-keyframes toast-close { 
  0% { opacity: 1; }
  100% { opacity: 0; }
}

@keyframes toast-close { 
  0% { opacity: 1; }
  100% { opacity: 0; }
}

button[data-state="closed"] .toggle-item-button-closed, button[data-state="open"] .toggle-item-button-open { display: none; }

.toast-root { align-items: center; display: flex; flex-direction: column; height: 0px; transition: all 0.24s cubic-bezier(0, 0, 0.2, 1) 0s; }

.toast-root[data-state="entered"], .toast-root[data-state="entering"] { animation: 0.24s cubic-bezier(0.175, 0.885, 0.32, 1.175) 0s 1 normal both running toast-open; }

.toast-root[data-state="exiting"] { animation: 0.12s cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 1, 1) 0s 1 normal both running toast-close; }

.toast-root .alert-root { box-shadow: rgba(67, 90, 111, 0.3) 0px 0px 1px, rgba(67, 90, 111, 0.3) 0px 5px 8px -4px; flex-shrink: 0; pointer-events: all; }

.interact-bounce { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: transform, -webkit-transform; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.interact-bounce:hover { --tw-scale-x:1.05; --tw-scale-y:1.05; }

.interact-bounce:active, .interact-bounce:hover { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.interact-bounce:active { --tw-scale-x:0.9; --tw-scale-y:0.9; }

.title { font-feature-settings: normal; font-family: Söhne, ui-sans-serif, system-ui, -apple-system, "Segoe UI", Roboto, Ubuntu, Cantarell, "Noto Sans", sans-serif, "Helvetica Neue", Arial, "Apple Color Emoji", "Segoe UI Emoji", "Segoe UI Symbol", "Noto Color Emoji"; font-variation-settings: normal; }

.font-circle { font-family: "Söhne Circle", system-ui, -apple-system, "Segoe UI", Roboto, Ubuntu, Cantarell, "Noto Sans", sans-serif; }

.dark .dark\:prose-invert { --tw-prose-body:var(--tw-prose-invert-body); --tw-prose-headings:var(--tw-prose-invert-headings); --tw-prose-lead:var(--tw-prose-invert-lead); --tw-prose-links:var(--tw-prose-invert-links); --tw-prose-bold:var(--tw-prose-invert-bold); --tw-prose-counters:var(--tw-prose-invert-counters); --tw-prose-bullets:var(--tw-prose-invert-bullets); --tw-prose-hr:var(--tw-prose-invert-hr); --tw-prose-quotes:var(--tw-prose-invert-quotes); --tw-prose-quote-borders:var(--tw-prose-invert-quote-borders); --tw-prose-captions:var(--tw-prose-invert-captions); --tw-prose-code:var(--tw-prose-invert-code); --tw-prose-pre-code:var(--tw-prose-invert-pre-code); --tw-prose-pre-bg:var(--tw-prose-invert-pre-bg); --tw-prose-th-borders:var(--tw-prose-invert-th-borders); --tw-prose-td-borders:var(--tw-prose-invert-td-borders); }

.placeholder\:text-gray-300::-webkit-input-placeholder { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.placeholder\:text-gray-300::placeholder { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.after\:content-\[\'\"\'\]::after, .before\:content-\[\'\"\'\]::before { --tw-content:"\""; content: var(--tw-content); }

.last\:mb-0:last-child { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.last\:mb-2:last-child { margin-bottom: 0.5rem; }

.last\:border-0:last-child { border-width: 0px; }

.last\:pr-0:last-child { padding-right: 0px; }

.last-of-type\:border-b-0:last-of-type { border-bottom-width: 0px; }

.checked\:border-blue-600:checked { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(37,99,235,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.checked\:bg-blue-600:checked { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(37,99,235,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.empty\:hidden:empty { display: none; }

.focus-within\:z-10[focus-within] { z-index: 10; }

.focus-within\:z-10:focus-within { z-index: 10; }

.focus-within\:border-indigo-600[focus-within] { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(79,70,229,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus-within\:border-indigo-600:focus-within { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(79,70,229,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus-within\:ring-1[focus-within] { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(1px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.focus-within\:ring-1:focus-within { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(1px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.focus-within\:ring-indigo-600[focus-within] { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(79,70,229,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.focus-within\:ring-indigo-600:focus-within { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(79,70,229,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.hover\:border-black\/10:hover { border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1); }

.hover\:border-gray-300:hover { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.hover\:border-gray-700:hover { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.hover\:\!bg-gray-50:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1 !important; background-color: rgba(247,247,248,var(--tw-bg-opacity)) !important; }

.hover\:bg-\[\#0000FF\]:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(0,0,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-\[\#2A2B32\]:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(42,43,50,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-black:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(0,0,0,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-black\/10:hover { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1); }

.hover\:bg-black\/5:hover { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.05); }

.hover\:bg-brand-purple:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-gray-100:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-gray-200:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-gray-300:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-gray-50:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(247,247,248,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-gray-50\/50:hover { background-color: rgba(247, 247, 248, 0.5); }

.hover\:bg-gray-500\/10:hover { background-color: rgba(141, 141, 160, 0.1); }

.hover\:bg-gray-700:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-gray-800:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-green-100:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(210,244,211,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-white\/40:hover { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.4); }

.hover\:pr-14:hover { padding-right: 3.5rem; }

.hover\:pr-4:hover { padding-right: 1rem; }

.hover\:text-black\/50:hover { color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.5); }

.hover\:text-black\/70:hover { color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.7); }

.hover\:text-blue-600:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(37,99,235,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-gray-500:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-gray-600:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-gray-700:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-gray-800:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-gray-900:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-white:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-white\/40:hover { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.4); }

.hover\:\!opacity-100:hover { opacity: 1 !important; }

.hover\:opacity-100:hover { opacity: 1; }

.hover\:opacity-70:hover { opacity: 0.7; }

.hover\:opacity-75:hover { opacity: 0.75; }

.hover\:opacity-80:hover { opacity: 0.8; }

.hover\:brightness-90:hover { --tw-brightness:brightness(0.9); filter: var(--tw-blur) var(--tw-brightness) var(--tw-contrast) var(--tw-grayscale) var(--tw-hue-rotate) var(--tw-invert) var(--tw-saturate) var(--tw-sepia) var(--tw-drop-shadow); }

.hover\:delay-0:hover { transition-delay: 0s; }

.focus\:border-brand-green:focus, .focus\:border-green-500:focus { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus\:border-green-600:focus { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus\:border-orange-400:focus { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(255,128,82,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus\:border-red-500:focus { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus\:bg-gray-50:focus { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(247,247,248,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.focus\:bg-green-600:focus { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.focus\:text-white:focus { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.focus\:outline-none:focus { outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

.focus\:ring-0:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); }

.focus\:ring-0:focus, .focus\:ring-1:focus { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.focus\:ring-1:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(1px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); }

.focus\:ring-2:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(2px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.focus\:ring-inset:focus { --tw-ring-inset:inset; }

.focus\:ring-gray-200:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.focus\:ring-gray-500:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.focus\:ring-green-500:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.focus\:ring-green-600:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.focus\:ring-white:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.focus\:ring-offset-2:focus { --tw-ring-offset-width:2px; }

.focus-visible\:border-blue-500.focus-visible { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(69,89,164,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus-visible\:border-blue-500:focus-visible { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(69,89,164,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus-visible\:ring-0.focus-visible { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.focus-visible\:ring-0:focus-visible { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.enabled\:bg-brand-purple:enabled { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.enabled\:hover\:text-gray-700:hover:enabled { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.disabled\:bottom-0:disabled { bottom: 0px; }

.disabled\:bottom-0\.5:disabled { bottom: 0.125rem; }

.disabled\:cursor-auto:disabled { cursor: auto; }

.disabled\:text-gray-300:disabled { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.disabled\:text-gray-400:disabled { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.disabled\:opacity-20:disabled { opacity: 0.2; }

.disabled\:opacity-40:disabled { opacity: 0.4; }

.disabled\:hover\:bg-gray-900:hover:disabled { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.group:hover .group-hover\:visible { visibility: visible; }

.group:hover .group-hover\:block { display: block; }

.group:hover .group-hover\:hidden { display: none; }

.group\/options:hover .group-hover\/options\:bg-transparent { background-color: transparent; }

.group\/toggle:hover .group-hover\/toggle\:bg-red-500 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.group:hover .group-hover\:bg-black { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(0,0,0,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.group:hover .group-hover\:bg-gray-100 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.group:hover .group-hover\:from-\[\#2A2B32\] { --tw-gradient-from:#2a2b32 var(--tw-gradient-from-position); --tw-gradient-to:rgba(42,43,50,0) var(--tw-gradient-to-position); --tw-gradient-stops:var(--tw-gradient-from),var(--tw-gradient-to); }

.group\/button:hover .group-hover\/button\:text-blue-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(69,89,164,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/button:hover .group-hover\/button\:text-brand-green { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/button:hover .group-hover\/button\:text-brand-purple { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/button:hover .group-hover\/button\:text-orange-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(224,108,43,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/button:hover .group-hover\/button\:text-red-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/option:hover .group-hover\/option\:\!text-brand-green { --tw-text-opacity:1 !important; color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-text-opacity)) !important; }

.group\/option:hover .group-hover\/option\:\!text-brand-purple { --tw-text-opacity:1 !important; color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)) !important; }

.group\/option:hover .group-hover\/option\:text-gray-100 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/option:hover .group-hover\/option\:text-gray-800 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/options:hover .group-hover\/options\:text-gray-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/options:hover .group-hover\/options\:opacity-0 { opacity: 0; }

.group:hover .group-hover\:opacity-100 { opacity: 1; }

.group:hover .group-hover\:opacity-50 { opacity: 0.5; }

.group-ui-open\:bg-gray-800.group[data-headlessui-state~="open"] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.group:where([data-headlessui-state~="open"]) .group-ui-open\:bg-gray-800 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.radix-disabled\:pointer-events-none[data-disabled] { pointer-events: none; }

.radix-disabled\:cursor-auto[data-disabled] { cursor: auto; }

.radix-disabled\:bg-transparent[data-disabled] { background-color: transparent; }

.radix-disabled\:text-gray-300[data-disabled] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.radix-disabled\:text-gray-500[data-disabled] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.radix-highlighted\:bg-gray-50[data-highlighted] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(247,247,248,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.radix-highlighted\:outline-none[data-highlighted] { outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

.group[data-highlighted] .group-radix-highlighted\:bg-green-600 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.radix-state-active\:bg-gray-800[data-state="active"] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.radix-state-active\:text-gray-600[data-state="active"] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.radix-state-active\:text-white[data-state="active"] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group[data-state="active"] .group-radix-state-active\:fill-white { fill: rgb(255, 255, 255); }

.radix-state-checked\:translate-x-\[19px\][data-state="checked"] { --tw-translate-x:19px; transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.radix-state-checked\:bg-green-600[data-state="checked"] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

@-webkit-keyframes hide { 
  0% { opacity: 1; }
  100% { opacity: 0; }
}

@keyframes hide { 
  0% { opacity: 1; }
  100% { opacity: 0; }
}

.radix-state-closed\:animate-hide[data-state="closed"] { animation: 0.1s ease-in 0s 1 normal none running hide; }

@-webkit-keyframes slideIn { 
  0% { transform: translateX(calc(100% + var(--viewport-padding))); }
  100% { transform: translateX(0px); }
}

@keyframes slideIn { 
  0% { transform: translateX(calc(100% + var(--viewport-padding))); }
  100% { transform: translateX(0px); }
}

.radix-state-open\:animate-slideIn[data-state="open"] { animation: 0.15s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideIn; }

.radix-state-open\:text-gray-600[data-state="open"] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.radix-side-bottom\:animate-slideDownAndFade[data-side="bottom"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideDownAndFade; }

.radix-side-bottom\:animate-slideUpAndFade[data-side="bottom"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideUpAndFade; }

.radix-side-left\:animate-slideLeftAndFade[data-side="left"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideLeftAndFade; }

@-webkit-keyframes slideRightAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateX(-2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateX(0px); }
}

.radix-side-left\:animate-slideRightAndFade[data-side="left"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideRightAndFade; }

@keyframes slideLeftAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateX(2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateX(0px); }
}

.radix-side-right\:animate-slideLeftAndFade[data-side="right"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideLeftAndFade; }

@keyframes slideRightAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateX(-2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateX(0px); }
}

.radix-side-right\:animate-slideRightAndFade[data-side="right"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideRightAndFade; }

@keyframes slideDownAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateY(-2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateY(0px); }
}

.radix-side-top\:animate-slideDownAndFade[data-side="top"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideDownAndFade; }

@keyframes slideUpAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateY(2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateY(0px); }
}

.radix-side-top\:animate-slideUpAndFade[data-side="top"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideUpAndFade; }

@supports (min-height:100dvh) {
  .supports-\[min-height\:100dvh\]\:min-h-\[100dvh\] { min-height: 100dvh; }
}

.dark .dark\:border-\[\#4E4F60\] { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(78,79,96,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:border-black\/20 { border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2); }

.dark .dark\:border-gray-300 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:border-gray-600 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:border-gray-700 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:border-gray-800 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:border-gray-900\/50 { border-color: rgba(32, 33, 35, 0.5); }

.dark .dark\:border-white { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:border-white\/10 { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.1); }

.dark .dark\:border-white\/20 { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.2); }

.dark .dark\:border-white\/30 { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.298); }

.dark .dark\:bg-\[\#272832\] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(39,40,50,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-\[\#444654\] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(68,70,84,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-\[rgba\(255\,255\,255\,0\.15\)\] { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.15); }

.dark .dark\:bg-black { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(0,0,0,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-50 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(247,247,248,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-500 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-600 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-700 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-800 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-800\/30 { background-color: rgba(52, 53, 65, 0.3); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-800\/90 { background-color: rgba(52, 53, 65, 0.9); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-900 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-950 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(5,5,9,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-red-200 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(254,202,202,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-transparent { background-color: transparent; }

.dark .dark\:bg-white { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-white\/10 { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.1); }

.dark .dark\:bg-white\/5 { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.05); }

.dark .dark\:from-gray-700 { --tw-gradient-from:#40414f var(--tw-gradient-from-position); --tw-gradient-to:rgba(64,65,79,0) var(--tw-gradient-to-position); --tw-gradient-stops:var(--tw-gradient-from),var(--tw-gradient-to); }

.dark .dark\:fill-gray-500 { fill: rgb(142, 142, 160); }

.dark .dark\:text-\[\#D292FF\] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(210,146,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-blue-200 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(191,219,254,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-blue-400 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(58,136,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-blue-600 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(37,99,235,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-100 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-200 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-300 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-400 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-600 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-700 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-900 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-red-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-red-800 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(153,27,27,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-white { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-white\/60 { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.6); }

.dark .dark\:text-white\/70 { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.698); }

.dark .dark\:opacity-100 { opacity: 1; }

.dark .dark\:shadow-xs { --tw-shadow:0 0 15px rgba(0,0,0,0.1); --tw-shadow-colored:0 0 15px var(--tw-shadow-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.dark .dark\:ring-white\/20 { --tw-ring-color:hsla(0,0%,100%,0.2); }

.dark .dark\:last\:border-0:last-child { border-width: 0px; }

.dark .dark\:hover\:border-gray-600:hover { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:border-white\/10:hover { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.1); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:\!bg-gray-700:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1 !important; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)) !important; }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-\[\#2E2F33\]:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(46,47,51,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-\[\#494A54\]:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(73,74,84,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-200:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-500\/10:hover { background-color: rgba(141, 141, 160, 0.1); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-600:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-700:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-700\/50:hover { background-color: rgba(64, 65, 79, 0.5); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-800:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-900:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-white\/20:hover { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.2); }

:is(.dark .hover\:dark\:bg-gray-700):hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

:is(.dark .hover\:dark\:bg-white\/10):hover { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.1); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:text-blue-600:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(37,99,235,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:text-gray-100:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:text-gray-200:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:text-gray-400:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:text-white:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:text-white\/50:hover { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.5); }

:is(.dark .hover\:dark\:text-gray-100):hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

:is(.dark .hover\:dark\:text-gray-300):hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:focus\:border-white:focus { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:focus\:bg-gray-800:focus { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

:is(.dark .focus\:dark\:bg-gray-700):focus { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:focus\:ring-gray-600:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:focus\:ring-white:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:focus-visible\:border-blue-500.focus-visible { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(69,89,164,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:focus-visible\:border-blue-500:focus-visible { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(69,89,164,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

:is(.dark .enabled\:dark\:hover\:text-gray-400:hover):enabled { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:disabled\:text-gray-400:disabled { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:disabled\:hover\:bg-transparent:hover:disabled { background-color: transparent; }

.dark .dark\:disabled\:hover\:bg-white:hover:disabled { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

:is(.dark .disabled\:dark\:hover\:text-gray-400:hover):disabled { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .group:hover .dark\:group-hover\:bg-gray-700 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .group\/option:hover .dark\:group-hover\/option\:text-gray-100 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-disabled\:bg-transparent[data-disabled] { background-color: transparent; }

.dark .dark\:radix-disabled\:text-gray-500[data-disabled] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-disabled\:text-gray-600[data-disabled] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-highlighted\:bg-\[\#2E2F33\][data-highlighted] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(46,47,51,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-highlighted\:bg-gray-700[data-highlighted] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-highlighted\:hover\:bg-\[\#2E2F33\][data-highlighted]:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(46,47,51,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-state-active\:text-white[data-state="active"] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-state-open\:text-gray-400[data-state="open"] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

@media not all and (min-width: 1024px) {
  .max-lg\:justify-center { justify-content: center; }
}

@media (max-width: 370px) {
  .max-\[370px\]\:hidden { display: none; }
}

@media (min-width: 640px) {
  .sm\:order-1 { order: 1; }
  .sm\:order-2 { order: 2; }
  .sm\:mx-1 { margin-left: 0.25rem; margin-right: 0.25rem; }
  .sm\:mb-0 { margin-bottom: 0px; }
  .sm\:mb-0\.5 { margin-bottom: 0.125rem; }
  .sm\:mb-16 { margin-bottom: 4rem; }
  .sm\:mb-2 { margin-bottom: 0.5rem; }
  .sm\:ml-0 { margin-left: 0px; }
  .sm\:mt-0 { margin-top: 0px; }
  .sm\:mt-16 { margin-top: 4rem; }
  .sm\:mt-4 { margin-top: 1rem; }
  .sm\:mt-6 { margin-top: 1.5rem; }
  .sm\:mt-\[20vh\] { margin-top: 20vh; }
  .sm\:mt-\[6vh\] { margin-top: 6vh; }
  .sm\:block { display: block; }
  .sm\:flex { display: flex; }
  .sm\:h-10 { height: 2.5rem; }
  .sm\:h-5 { height: 1.25rem; }
  .sm\:w-10 { width: 2.5rem; }
  .sm\:w-5 { width: 1.25rem; }
  .sm\:w-\[312px\] { width: 312px; }
  .sm\:w-\[calc\(\(100\%-12px\)\/2\)\] { width: calc(50% - 6px); }
  .sm\:w-auto { width: auto; }
  .sm\:min-w-\[148px\] { min-width: 148px; }
  .sm\:min-w-\[312px\] { min-width: 312px; }
  .sm\:min-w-\[420px\] { min-width: 420px; }
  .sm\:max-w-lg { max-width: 32rem; }
  .sm\:max-w-md { max-width: 28rem; }
  .sm\:grid-cols-2 { grid-template-columns: repeat(2, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }
  .sm\:grid-rows-2 { grid-template-rows: repeat(2, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }
  .sm\:flex-row { flex-direction: row; }
  .sm\:flex-row-reverse { flex-direction: row-reverse; }
  .sm\:items-center { align-items: center; }
  .sm\:justify-center { justify-content: center; }
  .sm\:gap-3 { gap: 0.75rem; }
  .sm\:rounded-2xl { border-radius: 1rem; }
  .sm\:border-r { border-right-width: 1px; }
  .sm\:border-t-0 { border-top-width: 0px; }
  .sm\:p-0 { padding: 0px; }
  .sm\:p-2 { padding: 0.5rem; }
  .sm\:p-3 { padding: 0.75rem; }
  .sm\:p-4 { padding: 1rem; }
  .sm\:p-6 { padding: 1.5rem; }
  .sm\:px-0 { padding-left: 0px; padding-right: 0px; }
  .sm\:px-14 { padding-left: 3.5rem; padding-right: 3.5rem; }
  .sm\:px-2 { padding-left: 0.5rem; padding-right: 0.5rem; }
  .sm\:px-4 { padding-left: 1rem; padding-right: 1rem; }
  .sm\:px-6 { padding-left: 1.5rem; padding-right: 1.5rem; }
  .sm\:pb-0 { padding-bottom: 0px; }
  .sm\:pb-1 { padding-bottom: 0.25rem; }
  .sm\:pb-2 { padding-bottom: 0.5rem; }
  .sm\:pb-6 { padding-bottom: 1.5rem; }
  .sm\:pl-3 { padding-left: 0.75rem; }
  .sm\:pt-4 { padding-top: 1rem; }
  .sm\:pt-8 { padding-top: 2rem; }
  .sm\:text-left { text-align: left; }
  .sm\:text-4xl { font-size: 2.25rem; line-height: 2.5rem; }
  .sm\:text-base { font-size: 1rem; line-height: 1.5rem; }
  .sm\:text-sm { font-size: 0.875rem; line-height: 1.25rem; }
  .sm\:duration-300 { transition-duration: 0.3s; }
  .sm\:duration-500 { transition-duration: 0.5s; }
}

@media (min-width: 768px) {
  .md\:visible { visibility: visible; }
  .md\:invisible { visibility: hidden; }
  .md\:static { position: static; }
  .md\:absolute { position: absolute; }
  .md\:bottom-3 { bottom: 0.75rem; }
  .md\:bottom-3\.5 { bottom: 0.875rem; }
  .md\:bottom-4 { bottom: 1rem; }
  .md\:bottom-\[180px\] { bottom: 180px; }
  .md\:left-1\/2 { left: 50%; }
  .md\:left-4 { left: 1rem; }
  .md\:right-3 { right: 0.75rem; }
  .md\:top-\[22px\] { top: 22px; }
  .md\:m-0 { margin: 0px; }
  .md\:m-auto { margin: auto; }
  .md\:mx-4 { margin-left: 1rem; margin-right: 1rem; }
  .md\:mb-0 { margin-bottom: 0px; }
  .md\:mb-3 { margin-bottom: 0.75rem; }
  .md\:mb-4 { margin-bottom: 1rem; }
  .md\:mb-auto { margin-bottom: auto; }
  .md\:mt-0 { margin-top: 0px; }
  .md\:inline-block { display: inline-block; }
  .md\:flex { display: flex; }
  .md\:grid { display: grid; }
  .md\:hidden { display: none; }
  .md\:h-48 { height: 12rem; }
  .md\:h-full { height: 100%; }
  .md\:min-h-\[300px\] { min-height: 300px; }
  .md\:w-1\/2 { width: 50%; }
  .md\:w-\[100\%\] { width: 100%; }
  .md\:w-\[250px\] { width: 250px; }
  .md\:w-\[672px\] { width: 672px; }
  .md\:w-\[calc\(100\%-\.5rem\)\] { width: calc(100% - 0.5rem); }
  .md\:w-auto { width: auto; }
  .md\:w-full { width: 100%; }
  .md\:min-w-\[672px\] { min-width: 672px; }
  .md\:max-w-2xl { max-width: 42rem; }
  .md\:max-w-3xl { max-width: 48rem; }
  .md\:max-w-\[390px\] { max-width: 390px; }
  .md\:max-w-\[672px\] { max-width: 672px; }
  .md\:max-w-\[680px\] { max-width: 680px; }
  .md\:max-w-none { max-width: none; }
  .md\:max-w-xl { max-width: 36rem; }
  .md\:-translate-x-1\/2 { --tw-translate-x:-50%; transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }
  .md\:grid-cols-2 { grid-template-columns: repeat(2, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }
  .md\:grid-rows-\[minmax\(20px\,_1fr\)_auto_minmax\(20px\,_1fr\)\] { grid-template-rows: minmax(20px, 1fr) auto minmax(20px, 1fr); }
  .md\:flex-row { flex-direction: row; }
  .md\:flex-col { flex-direction: column; }
  .md\:items-end { align-items: flex-end; }
  .md\:justify-between { justify-content: space-between; }
  .md\:gap-2 { gap: 0.5rem; }
  .md\:gap-3 { gap: 0.75rem; }
  .md\:gap-6 { gap: 1.5rem; }
  .md\:overflow-visible { overflow: visible; }
  .md\:whitespace-normal { white-space: normal; }
  .md\:rounded-none { border-radius: 0px; }
  .md\:border { border-width: 1px; }
  .md\:border-l { border-left-width: 1px; }
  .md\:border-t-0 { border-top-width: 0px; }
  .md\:border-gray-100 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }
  .md\:border-transparent { border-color: transparent; }
  .md\:\!bg-transparent { background-color: transparent !important; }
  .md\:bg-vert-light-gradient { background-image: linear-gradient(rgba(255, 255, 255, 0) 13.94%, rgb(255, 255, 255) 54.73%); }
  .md\:p-2 { padding: 0.5rem; }
  .md\:px-6 { padding-left: 1.5rem; padding-right: 1.5rem; }
  .md\:px-8 { padding-left: 2rem; padding-right: 2rem; }
  .md\:px-\[60px\] { padding-left: 60px; padding-right: 60px; }
  .md\:py-2 { padding-bottom: 0.5rem; padding-top: 0.5rem; }
  .md\:py-2\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.625rem; padding-top: 0.625rem; }
  .md\:py-4 { padding-bottom: 1rem; padding-top: 1rem; }
  .md\:py-6 { padding-bottom: 1.5rem; padding-top: 1.5rem; }
  .md\:py-\[22px\] { padding-bottom: 22px; padding-top: 22px; }
  .md\:\!pt-0 { padding-top: 0px !important; }
  .md\:pb-5 { padding-bottom: 1.25rem; }
  .md\:pb-6 { padding-bottom: 1.5rem; }
  .md\:pb-\[8vh\] { padding-bottom: 8vh; }
  .md\:pl-0 { padding-left: 0px; }
  .md\:pl-2 { padding-left: 0.5rem; }
  .md\:pl-4 { padding-left: 1rem; }
  .md\:pl-6 { padding-left: 1.5rem; }
  .md\:pl-\[30px\] { padding-left: 30px; }
  .md\:pr-1 { padding-right: 0.25rem; }
  .md\:pr-1\.5 { padding-right: 0.375rem; }
  .md\:pr-12 { padding-right: 3rem; }
  .md\:pr-4 { padding-right: 1rem; }
  .md\:pr-8 { padding-right: 2rem; }
  .md\:pt-3 { padding-top: 0.75rem; }
  .md\:text-justify { text-align: justify; }
  .md\:text-\[32px\] { font-size: 32px; }
  .md\:text-\[40px\] { font-size: 40px; }
  .md\:text-sm { font-size: 0.875rem; line-height: 1.25rem; }
  .md\:leading-\[1\.25\] { line-height: 1.25; }
  .md\:opacity-0 { opacity: 0; }
  .md\:last\:mb-6:last-child { margin-bottom: 1.5rem; }
  .md\:disabled\:bottom-0:disabled { bottom: 0px; }
  .group:hover .md\:group-hover\:visible { visibility: visible; }
  .dark .md\:dark\:border-gray-700 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }
  .dark .md\:dark\:border-transparent { border-color: transparent; }
  .dark .dark\:md\:bg-vert-dark-gradient { background-image: linear-gradient(rgba(53, 55, 64, 0), rgb(53, 55, 64) 58.85%); }
}

@media (min-width: 1024px) {
  .lg\:absolute { position: absolute; }
  .lg\:relative { position: relative; }
  .lg\:-left-3 { left: -0.75rem; }
  .lg\:-right-3 { right: -0.75rem; }
  .lg\:bottom-\[120px\] { bottom: 120px; }
  .lg\:left-auto { left: auto; }
  .lg\:right-0 { right: 0px; }
  .lg\:top-0 { top: 0px; }
  .lg\:top-1\/2 { top: 50%; }
  .lg\:mx-auto { margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; }
  .lg\:mb-0 { margin-bottom: 0px; }
  .lg\:mt-0 { margin-top: 0px; }
  .lg\:block { display: block; }
  .lg\:hidden { display: none; }
  .lg\:w-1\/3 { width: 33.3333%; }
  .lg\:w-3\/5 { width: 60%; }
  .lg\:w-\[300px\] { width: 300px; }
  .lg\:w-\[896px\] { width: 896px; }
  .lg\:w-\[calc\(\(100\%-24px\)\/3\)\] { width: calc(33.3333% - 8px); }
  .lg\:w-\[calc\(100\%-115px\)\] { width: calc(100% - 115px); }
  .lg\:w-auto { width: auto; }
  .lg\:min-w-\[896px\] { min-width: 896px; }
  .lg\:max-w-2xl { max-width: 42rem; }
  .lg\:max-w-3xl { max-width: 48rem; }
  .lg\:max-w-\[38rem\] { max-width: 38rem; }
  .lg\:max-w-\[796px\] { max-width: 796px; }
  .lg\:max-w-\[896px\] { max-width: 896px; }
  .lg\:max-w-none { max-width: none; }
  .lg\:max-w-sm { max-width: 24rem; }
  .lg\:max-w-xl { max-width: 36rem; }
  .lg\:-translate-x-full { --tw-translate-x:-100%; }
  .lg\:-translate-x-full, .lg\:-translate-y-1\/2 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }
  .lg\:-translate-y-1\/2 { --tw-translate-y:-50%; }
  .lg\:translate-x-full { --tw-translate-x:100%; }
  .lg\:translate-x-full, .lg\:translate-y-0 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }
  .lg\:translate-y-0 { --tw-translate-y:0px; }
  .lg\:grid-cols-3 { grid-template-columns: repeat(3, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }
  .lg\:grid-cols-\[60\%_40\%\] { grid-template-columns: 60% 40%; }
  .lg\:gap-1 { gap: 0.25rem; }
  .lg\:self-center { align-self: center; }
  .lg\:rounded-lg { border-radius: 0.5rem; }
  .lg\:rounded-none { border-radius: 0px; }
  .lg\:border { border-width: 1px; }
  .lg\:border-0 { border-width: 0px; }
  .lg\:p-0 { padding: 0px; }
  .lg\:p-6 { padding: 1.5rem; }
  .lg\:px-0 { padding-left: 0px; padding-right: 0px; }
  .lg\:px-14 { padding-left: 3.5rem; padding-right: 3.5rem; }
  .lg\:px-8 { padding-left: 2rem; padding-right: 2rem; }
  .lg\:pl-2 { padding-left: 0.5rem; }
  .lg\:pl-8 { padding-left: 2rem; }
  .lg\:pr-10 { padding-right: 2.5rem; }
  .lg\:pt-32 { padding-top: 8rem; }
  .lg\:text-left { text-align: left; }
  .lg\:text-\[22px\] { font-size: 22px; }
}

@media (min-width: 1280px) {
  .xl\:w-1\/4 { width: 25%; }
  .xl\:w-\[1024px\] { width: 1024px; }
  .xl\:w-\[350px\] { width: 350px; }
  .xl\:min-w-\[1024px\] { min-width: 1024px; }
  .xl\:max-w-3xl { max-width: 48rem; }
  .xl\:max-w-4xl { max-width: 56rem; }
  .xl\:max-w-6xl { max-width: 72rem; }
  .xl\:max-w-xl { max-width: 36rem; }
  .xl\:max-w-xs { max-width: 20rem; }
  .xl\:grid-cols-4 { grid-template-columns: repeat(4, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }
}

@media (min-width: 1536px) {
  .\32 xl\:w-\[400px\] { width: 400px; }
}

tr:last-child .\[tr\:last-child_\&\]\:border-b-0 { border-bottom-width: 0px; }

tr[data-disabled="true"] .\[tr\[data-disabled\=true\]_\&\]\:opacity-50 { opacity: 0.5; }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_AMS; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_AMS-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Caligraphic; font-style: normal; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Caligraphic-Bold.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Caligraphic; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Caligraphic-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Fraktur; font-style: normal; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Fraktur-Bold.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Fraktur; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Fraktur-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-style: normal; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Main-Bold.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-style: italic; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Main-BoldItalic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-style: italic; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Main-Italic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Main-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Math; font-style: italic; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Math-BoldItalic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Math; font-style: italic; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Math-Italic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; font-style: normal; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_SansSerif-Bold.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; font-style: italic; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_SansSerif-Italic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_SansSerif-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Script; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Script-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Size1; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Size1-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Size2; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Size2-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Size3; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Size3-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Size4; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Size4-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Typewriter; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Typewriter-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

.katex { font: 1.21em / 1.2 KaTeX_Main, "Times New Roman", serif; text-indent: 0px; text-rendering: auto; }

.katex * { border-color: currentcolor; forced-color-adjust: none !important; }

.katex .katex-version::after { content: "0.16.0"; }

.katex .katex-mathml { clip: rect(1px, 1px, 1px, 1px); border: 0px; height: 1px; overflow: hidden; padding: 0px; position: absolute; width: 1px; }

.katex .katex-html > .newline { display: block; }

.katex .base { position: relative; white-space: nowrap; width: min-content; }

.katex .base, .katex .strut { display: inline-block; }

.katex .textbf { font-weight: 700; }

.katex .textit { font-style: italic; }

.katex .textrm { font-family: KaTeX_Main; }

.katex .textsf { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; }

.katex .texttt { font-family: KaTeX_Typewriter; }

.katex .mathnormal { font-family: KaTeX_Math; font-style: italic; }

.katex .mathit { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-style: italic; }

.katex .mathrm { font-style: normal; }

.katex .mathbf { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-weight: 700; }

.katex .boldsymbol { font-family: KaTeX_Math; font-style: italic; font-weight: 700; }

.katex .amsrm, .katex .mathbb, .katex .textbb { font-family: KaTeX_AMS; }

.katex .mathcal { font-family: KaTeX_Caligraphic; }

.katex .mathfrak, .katex .textfrak { font-family: KaTeX_Fraktur; }

.katex .mathtt { font-family: KaTeX_Typewriter; }

.katex .mathscr, .katex .textscr { font-family: KaTeX_Script; }

.katex .mathsf, .katex .textsf { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; }

.katex .mathboldsf, .katex .textboldsf { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; font-weight: 700; }

.katex .mathitsf, .katex .textitsf { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; font-style: italic; }

.katex .mainrm { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-style: normal; }

.katex .vlist-t { border-collapse: collapse; display: inline-table; table-layout: fixed; }

.katex .vlist-r { display: table-row; }

.katex .vlist { display: table-cell; position: relative; vertical-align: bottom; }

.katex .vlist > span { display: block; height: 0px; position: relative; }

.katex .vlist > span > span { display: inline-block; }

.katex .vlist > span > .pstrut { overflow: hidden; width: 0px; }

.katex .vlist-t2 { margin-right: -2px; }

.katex .vlist-s { display: table-cell; font-size: 1px; min-width: 2px; vertical-align: bottom; width: 2px; }

.katex .vbox { align-items: baseline; display: inline-flex; flex-direction: column; }

.katex .hbox { width: 100%; }

.katex .hbox, .katex .thinbox { display: inline-flex; flex-direction: row; }

.katex .thinbox { max-width: 0px; width: 0px; }

.katex .msupsub { text-align: left; }

.katex .mfrac > span > span { text-align: center; }

.katex .mfrac .frac-line { border-bottom-style: solid; display: inline-block; width: 100%; }

.katex .hdashline, .katex .hline, .katex .mfrac .frac-line, .katex .overline .overline-line, .katex .rule, .katex .underline .underline-line { min-height: 1px; }

.katex .mspace { display: inline-block; }

.katex .clap, .katex .llap, .katex .rlap { position: relative; width: 0px; }

.katex .clap > .inner, .katex .llap > .inner, .katex .rlap > .inner { position: absolute; }

.katex .clap > .fix, .katex .llap > .fix, .katex .rlap > .fix { display: inline-block; }

.katex .llap > .inner { right: 0px; }

.katex .clap > .inner, .katex .rlap > .inner { left: 0px; }

.katex .clap > .inner > span { margin-left: -50%; margin-right: 50%; }

.katex .rule { border: 0px solid; display: inline-block; position: relative; }

.katex .hline, .katex .overline .overline-line, .katex .underline .underline-line { border-bottom-style: solid; display: inline-block; width: 100%; }

.katex .hdashline { border-bottom-style: dashed; display: inline-block; width: 100%; }

.katex .sqrt > .root { margin-left: 0.277778em; margin-right: -0.555556em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size1 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size2 { font-size: 1.2em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size3 { font-size: 1.4em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size4 { font-size: 1.6em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size5 { font-size: 1.8em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size6 { font-size: 2em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size7 { font-size: 2.4em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size8 { font-size: 2.88em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size9 { font-size: 3.456em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size10 { font-size: 4.148em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size11 { font-size: 4.976em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size1 { font-size: 0.833333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size2 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size3 { font-size: 1.16667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size4 { font-size: 1.33333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size5 { font-size: 1.5em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size6 { font-size: 1.66667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size7 { font-size: 2em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size8 { font-size: 2.4em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size9 { font-size: 2.88em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size10 { font-size: 3.45667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size11 { font-size: 4.14667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size1 { font-size: 0.714286em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size2 { font-size: 0.857143em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size3 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size4 { font-size: 1.14286em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size5 { font-size: 1.28571em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size6 { font-size: 1.42857em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size7 { font-size: 1.71429em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size8 { font-size: 2.05714em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size9 { font-size: 2.46857em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size10 { font-size: 2.96286em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size11 { font-size: 3.55429em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size1 { font-size: 0.625em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size2 { font-size: 0.75em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size3 { font-size: 0.875em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size4 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size5 { font-size: 1.125em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size6 { font-size: 1.25em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size7 { font-size: 1.5em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size8 { font-size: 1.8em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size9 { font-size: 2.16em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size10 { font-size: 2.5925em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size11 { font-size: 3.11em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size1 { font-size: 0.555556em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size2 { font-size: 0.666667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size3 { font-size: 0.777778em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size4 { font-size: 0.888889em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size5 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size6 { font-size: 1.11111em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size7 { font-size: 1.33333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size8 { font-size: 1.6em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size9 { font-size: 1.92em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size10 { font-size: 2.30444em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size11 { font-size: 2.76444em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size1 { font-size: 0.5em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size2 { font-size: 0.6em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size3 { font-size: 0.7em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size4 { font-size: 0.8em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size5 { font-size: 0.9em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size6 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size7 { font-size: 1.2em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size8 { font-size: 1.44em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size9 { font-size: 1.728em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size10 { font-size: 2.074em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size11 { font-size: 2.488em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size1 { font-size: 0.416667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size2 { font-size: 0.5em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size3 { font-size: 0.583333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size4 { font-size: 0.666667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size5 { font-size: 0.75em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size6 { font-size: 0.833333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size7 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size8 { font-size: 1.2em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size9 { font-size: 1.44em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size10 { font-size: 1.72833em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size11 { font-size: 2.07333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size1 { font-size: 0.347222em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size2 { font-size: 0.416667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size3 { font-size: 0.486111em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size4 { font-size: 0.555556em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size5 { font-size: 0.625em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size6 { font-size: 0.694444em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size7 { font-size: 0.833333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size8 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size9 { font-size: 1.2em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size10 { font-size: 1.44028em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size11 { font-size: 1.72778em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size1 { font-size: 0.289352em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size2 { font-size: 0.347222em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size3 { font-size: 0.405093em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size4 { font-size: 0.462963em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size5 { font-size: 0.520833em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size6 { font-size: 0.578704em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size7 { font-size: 0.694444em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size8 { font-size: 0.833333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size9 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size10 { font-size: 1.20023em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size11 { font-size: 1.43981em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size1 { font-size: 0.24108em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size2 { font-size: 0.289296em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size3 { font-size: 0.337512em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size4 { font-size: 0.385728em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size5 { font-size: 0.433944em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size6 { font-size: 0.48216em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size7 { font-size: 0.578592em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size8 { font-size: 0.694311em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size9 { font-size: 0.833173em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size10 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size11 { font-size: 1.19961em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size1 { font-size: 0.200965em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size2 { font-size: 0.241158em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size3 { font-size: 0.28135em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size4 { font-size: 0.321543em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size5 { font-size: 0.361736em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size6 { font-size: 0.401929em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size7 { font-size: 0.482315em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size8 { font-size: 0.578778em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size9 { font-size: 0.694534em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size10 { font-size: 0.833601em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size11 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .delimsizing.size1 { font-family: KaTeX_Size1; }

.katex .delimsizing.size2 { font-family: KaTeX_Size2; }

.katex .delimsizing.size3 { font-family: KaTeX_Size3; }

.katex .delimsizing.size4 { font-family: KaTeX_Size4; }

.katex .delimsizing.mult .delim-size1 > span { font-family: KaTeX_Size1; }

.katex .delimsizing.mult .delim-size4 > span { font-family: KaTeX_Size4; }

.katex .nulldelimiter { display: inline-block; width: 0.12em; }

.katex .delimcenter, .katex .op-symbol { position: relative; }

.katex .op-symbol.small-op { font-family: KaTeX_Size1; }

.katex .op-symbol.large-op { font-family: KaTeX_Size2; }

.katex .accent > .vlist-t, .katex .op-limits > .vlist-t { text-align: center; }

.katex .accent .accent-body { position: relative; }

.katex .accent .accent-body:not(.accent-full) { width: 0px; }

.katex .overlay { display: block; }

.katex .mtable .vertical-separator { display: inline-block; min-width: 1px; }

.katex .mtable .arraycolsep { display: inline-block; }

.katex .mtable .col-align-c > .vlist-t { text-align: center; }

.katex .mtable .col-align-l > .vlist-t { text-align: left; }

.katex .mtable .col-align-r > .vlist-t { text-align: right; }

.katex .svg-align { text-align: left; }

.katex svg { fill: currentcolor; stroke: currentcolor; fill-rule: nonzero; fill-opacity: 1; stroke-width: 1; stroke-linecap: butt; stroke-linejoin: miter; stroke-miterlimit: 4; stroke-dasharray: none; stroke-dashoffset: 0; stroke-opacity: 1; display: block; height: inherit; position: absolute; width: 100%; }

.katex svg path { stroke: none; }

.katex img { border-style: none; max-height: none; max-width: none; min-height: 0px; min-width: 0px; }

.katex .stretchy { display: block; overflow: hidden; position: relative; width: 100%; }

.katex .stretchy::after, .katex .stretchy::before { content: ""; }

.katex .hide-tail { overflow: hidden; position: relative; width: 100%; }

.katex .halfarrow-left { left: 0px; overflow: hidden; position: absolute; width: 50.2%; }

.katex .halfarrow-right { overflow: hidden; position: absolute; right: 0px; width: 50.2%; }

.katex .brace-left { left: 0px; overflow: hidden; position: absolute; width: 25.1%; }

.katex .brace-center { left: 25%; overflow: hidden; position: absolute; width: 50%; }

.katex .brace-right { overflow: hidden; position: absolute; right: 0px; width: 25.1%; }

.katex .x-arrow-pad { padding: 0px 0.5em; }

.katex .cd-arrow-pad { padding: 0px 0.55556em 0px 0.27778em; }

.katex .mover, .katex .munder, .katex .x-arrow { text-align: center; }

.katex .boxpad { padding: 0px 0.3em; }

.katex .fbox, .katex .fcolorbox { border: 0.04em solid; box-sizing: border-box; }

.katex .cancel-pad { padding: 0px 0.2em; }

.katex .cancel-lap { margin-left: -0.2em; margin-right: -0.2em; }

.katex .sout { border-bottom-style: solid; border-bottom-width: 0.08em; }

.katex .angl { border-right: 0.049em solid; border-top: 0.049em solid; box-sizing: border-box; margin-right: 0.03889em; }

.katex .anglpad { padding: 0px 0.03889em; }

.katex .eqn-num::before { content: "(" counter(katexEqnNo) ")"; counter-increment: katexEqnNo 1; }

.katex .mml-eqn-num::before { content: "(" counter(mmlEqnNo) ")"; counter-increment: mmlEqnNo 1; }

.katex .mtr-glue { width: 50%; }

.katex .cd-vert-arrow { display: inline-block; position: relative; }

.katex .cd-label-left { display: inline-block; position: absolute; right: calc(50% + 0.3em); text-align: left; }

.katex .cd-label-right { display: inline-block; left: calc(50% + 0.3em); position: absolute; text-align: right; }

.katex-display { display: block; margin: 1em 0px; text-align: center; }

.katex-display > .katex { display: block; text-align: center; white-space: nowrap; }

.katex-display > .katex > .katex-html { display: block; position: relative; }

.katex-display > .katex > .katex-html > .tag { position: absolute; right: 0px; }

.katex-display.leqno > .katex > .katex-html > .tag { left: 0px; right: auto; }

.katex-display.fleqn > .katex { padding-left: 2em; text-align: left; }

body { counter-reset: katexEqnNo 0 mmlEqnNo 0; }

code, pre { font-family: "Söhne Mono", Monaco, "Andale Mono", "Ubuntu Mono", monospace !important; }

code[class="language-plaintext"] { white-space: pre-line; }

code.hljs, code[class*="language-"], pre[class*="language-"] { overflow-wrap: normal; background: none; color: rgb(255, 255, 255); hyphens: none; line-height: 1.5; tab-size: 4; text-align: left; white-space: pre; word-break: normal; word-spacing: normal; }

pre[class*="language-"] { border-radius: 0.3em; overflow: auto; }

:not(pre) > code.hljs, :not(pre) > code[class*="language-"] { border-radius: 0.3em; padding: 0.1em; white-space: normal; }

.hljs-comment { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.5); }

.hljs-meta { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.6); }

.hljs-built_in, .hljs-class .hljs-title { color: rgb(233, 149, 12); }

.hljs-doctag, .hljs-formula, .hljs-keyword, .hljs-literal { color: rgb(46, 149, 211); }

.hljs-addition, .hljs-attribute, .hljs-meta-string, .hljs-regexp, .hljs-string { color: rgb(0, 166, 125); }

.hljs-attr, .hljs-number, .hljs-selector-attr, .hljs-selector-class, .hljs-selector-pseudo, .hljs-template-variable, .hljs-type, .hljs-variable { color: rgb(223, 48, 121); }

.hljs-bullet, .hljs-link, .hljs-selector-id, .hljs-symbol, .hljs-title { color: rgb(242, 44, 61); }

.token.cdata, .token.comment, .token.doctype, .token.prolog { color: rgb(169, 174, 193); }

.token.punctuation { color: rgb(254, 254, 254); }

.token.constant, .token.deleted, .token.property, .token.symbol, .token.tag { color: rgb(255, 160, 122); }

.token.boolean, .token.number { color: rgb(0, 224, 224); }

.token.attr-name, .token.builtin, .token.char, .token.inserted, .token.selector, .token.string { color: rgb(171, 227, 56); }

.language-css .token.string, .style .token.string, .token.entity, .token.operator, .token.url, .token.variable { color: rgb(0, 224, 224); }

.token.atrule, .token.attr-value, .token.function { color: gold; }

.token.keyword { color: rgb(0, 224, 224); }

.token.important, .token.regex { color: gold; }

.token.bold, .token.important { font-weight: 700; }

.token.italic { font-style: italic; }

.token.entity { cursor: help; }

@media screen and (-ms-high-contrast: active) {
  code[class*="language-"], pre[class*="language-"] { background: window; color: windowtext; }
  :not(pre) > code[class*="language-"], pre[class*="language-"] { background: window; }
  .token.important { background: highlight; color: window; font-weight: 400; }
  .token.atrule, .token.attr-value, .token.function, .token.keyword, .token.operator, .token.selector { font-weight: 700; }
  .token.attr-value, .token.comment, .token.doctype, .token.function, .token.keyword, .token.operator, .token.property, .token.string { color: highlight; }
  .token.attr-value, .token.url { font-weight: 400; }
}

.PopoverContent { z-index: 1000; }

.react-select-container input:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.react-select-container .react-select__control { --tw-border-opacity:1; align-items: flex-start; border-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-border-opacity)); border-radius: 0.5rem; font-size: 0.875rem; height: 192px; line-height: 1.25rem; min-height: 192px; overflow: auto; padding: 0.5rem; }

.react-select-container .react-select__control:hover { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .react-select-container .react-select__control { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.1); }

:is(.dark .react-select-container .react-select__control):hover { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.2); }

.dark .react-select-container.react-select--invalid .react-select__control, .react-select-container.react-select--invalid .react-select__control { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.react-select-container .react-select__input-container, .react-select-container .react-select__placeholder { padding-left: 0.5rem; padding-right: 0.5rem; }

.dark .react-select-container .react-select__input-container { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.react-select-container .react-select__input { height: 2rem; }

.react-select-container .react-select__control--is-focused { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); --tw-border-opacity:1 !important; border-color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-border-opacity)) !important; }

.dark .react-select-container .react-select__control--is-focused { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.2) !important; }

.react-select-container .react-select__value-container { padding: 0px; }

.react-select-container .react-select__indicators:empty { display: none; }

.react-select-container .react-select__multi-value { background-color: transparent; margin: 0px; }

.react-select-container .react-select__multi-value__label { padding: 0px; }

#intercom-container { display: none; }
------MultipartBoundary--A3wn0tVZafSJHYvlS0Ke7mtqaFq9U7C5uZReMDhk6K----
Content-Type: text/html
Content-ID: 
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary


------MultipartBoundary--A3wn0tVZafSJHYvlS0Ke7mtqaFq9U7C5uZReMDhk6K----
Content-Type: text/html
Content-ID: 
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary





------MultipartBoundary--A3wn0tVZafSJHYvlS0Ke7mtqaFq9U7C5uZReMDhk6K----
Content-Type: text/html
Content-ID: 
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: https://tcr9i.chat.openai.com/v2/1.5.4/enforcement.cd12da708fe6cbe6e068918c38de2ad9.html#35536E1E-65B4-4D96-9D97-6ADB7EFF8147


------MultipartBoundary--A3wn0tVZafSJHYvlS0Ke7mtqaFq9U7C5uZReMDhk6K----
Content-Type: text/css
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: cid:css-b2360379-68e9-44b0-991b-f723a2835add@mhtml.blink

@charset "utf-8";

html, body { margin: 0px; padding: 0px; height: 100%; }

* { box-sizing: border-box; }

#app { height: 100%; overflow: hidden; }
------MultipartBoundary--A3wn0tVZafSJHYvlS0Ke7mtqaFq9U7C5uZReMDhk6K----
Content-Type: text/css
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: cid:css-b8ff77db-8ede-4607-9e68-4cbbb1064efd@mhtml.blink

@charset "utf-8";

@keyframes spin { 
  0% { transform: rotate(0deg) translateZ(0px); }
  100% { transform: rotate(360deg) translateZ(0px); }
}

@keyframes fadeIn { 
  0% { opacity: 0; }
  100% { opacity: 1; }
}

.kXaXkDzIfSzLHRklX2r3 { position: fixed; top: 20px; right: 20px; width: 20px; height: 20px; z-index: 200; border: none; background-color: transparent; background-image: url("data:image/svg+xml;base64,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"); background-repeat: no-repeat; background-position: center center; background-size: contain; cursor: pointer; pointer-events: none; transform: scale(1); transition: transform 100ms ease-in-out 0s; visibility: hidden; opacity: 0; }

.kXaXkDzIfSzLHRklX2r3:hover { transform: scale(1.3); }

.kXaXkDzIfSzLHRklX2r3.active { pointer-events: inherit; visibility: visible; opacity: 1; transition: opacity 400ms ease-in-out 0s; }

.nMUBxApsE7lSELvJiiAA { position: fixed; inset: 0px; background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.8); z-index: -1; opacity: 0; transition: opacity 300ms linear 0s; pointer-events: none; }

.nMUBxApsE7lSELvJiiAA.active { opacity: 1; pointer-events: inherit; }

.lTLYGVw1ASsTZWg0vUbC { position: absolute; top: 50%; left: 50%; margin-left: -15px; margin-top: -15px; z-index: 1010; border-radius: 50%; width: 30px; height: 30px; border-width: 3px; border-style: solid; border-color: transparent transparent transparent rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2); transform: translateZ(0px); box-sizing: border-box; }

.lTLYGVw1ASsTZWg0vUbC { animation: 500ms linear 0s infinite normal none running spin; }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k { transition: opacity 500ms ease 0s, transform 500ms ease 0s; opacity: 0; transform: scale(0.8); text-align: center; height: 100%; }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.active { opacity: 1; transform: scale(1); }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.challenge-enter { opacity: 0; transform: scale(0.8); }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.challenge-enter-active, .slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.challenge-enter-done { transform: scale(1); opacity: 1; }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.challenge-exit { transform: scale(1); opacity: 1; }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.challenge-exit-active, .slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.challenge-exit-done { transform: scale(0.8); opacity: 0; }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.dTcazKGGob_VbK_J853h { flex-direction: column; }

.dTcazKGGob_VbK_J853h { display: flex; align-items: center; justify-content: center; }
------MultipartBoundary--A3wn0tVZafSJHYvlS0Ke7mtqaFq9U7C5uZReMDhk6K------
