Everyone give a warm welcome to Mary and Robinette.
So Brandon invited me here to talk to you about short stories
because he is good at many things that are not short stories.
I know, it's shocking. I write a lot of short stories.
But the thing that you should understand is that writing is fractal.
Once you understand how something works at one length,
you can actually apply it to other lengths
as long as you understand the principles that are involved.
So if it's something that works on a paragraph level,
you can scale it down to sentence, up to chapter, scene,
or five volume monstrosity.
So what is a short story?
Now I'm not talking about the market definition,
but about the reader experience.
Short stories are about delivering a specific emotional punch.
It's a specific experience.
Novels are about immersion.
And this is an important distinction to understand.
That when readers pick up a piece of fiction,
they're picking it up because they want to affect a change in their brain.
They want to have an emotional experience and they want a specific ride.
So novel readers, the analogy I use,
is that it's like two different modes of watching the Olympics.
You can watch the Olympics like watch the Olympics.
You watch the pre-show stuff.
You watch all of the rude to the Olympics with the fancy music
and people running in the background.
The heart felt things about someone's mom
and how they drove them in the dark to whatever it is.
You watch all of the different athletes
and whatever competition it is that you were totally invested in.
Even if there's like one gymnast that you are there for,
you watch the competition because you want to know.
And then, you know, your gymnast goes out,
they do their flippy flippy routine
and it's amazing and they stick the landing,
and then there's the hugging with the coach
and then there's the medal ceremony
and then there's the post-show interview,
which is the denouement and you have watched the Olympics.
That's a novel.
A short story is someone has forwarded you a YouTube clip
of the gymnast doing the flippy flippy routine
and you watch it and it begins right before they flip
and it ends when they stick the landing.
You have watched the Olympics.
Very different experiences.
But you're reading them or watching them for different things.
In one case, you just want that punch,
that excitement of watching someone stick the landing
and doing something exceptional.
In the other, you want this long immersive thing.
So with a short story, it's that quick fix, right?
And that's an important thing to understand.
So, now we get to some structure.
Ready?
We have the mice quotient.
Whee!
Okay, the mice quotient is an organizational theory
that explains pretty much every story, fiction and nonfiction.
So, I'm going to talk about this through a lens of fiction,
but I'll let you know that if you have to write an essay,
it works for nonfiction too.
Now, stories are made up of click four elements,
milieu, enquiry, character and event,
mixed in different proportions.
So these elements can help you determine where a story starts
and stops and the kind of conflicts that your characters face.
So a milieu story begins when your character enters a place
and it ends when your character exits the place.
These are things like Gulliver's Travels around the world in 80 days,
classic examples.
Click.
So knowing where milieu stories end,
this also tells you the kind of conflicts that go in the middle
because your job as a writer is to figure out what your character needs to do
and then systematically prevent them from reaching the goal.
The moment that goal is reached, the story is over.
So you are just mean.
Click.
So milieu conflict, if it ends when you exit a place,
all of the stuff in the middle is about difficulty with navigating that space.
It's people getting confused about how to find the exit.
It's trouble surviving in the place.
It's attempting to navigate.
Anything around place is going to be milieu,
anything where you're struggling with the space you're in.
Inquiry stories, click.
Inquiry stories are driven by questions.
They begin when a character has a question
and they end when they answer it.
Aha!
So these are, it's a super complicated structure,
but it's things like Sherlock Holmes, Murder Mysteries,
these are classic inquiry stories.
Click.
So for an inquiry conflict,
your goal is to keep your character from finding the answer.
They're lied to, they can't understand the answer.
The answer leads to a dead end.
Those are what red herrings are.
Click.
Character stories.
Character stories are driven by angst.
Oh, my life is so hard!
In the simplest form,
they begin when a character is unhappy with themselves
and they end when they're happy.
I'll never be popular.
No, I'm popular!
But really, they begin with an identity shift,
a shift in how the character self-defines.
And they end when the character's self-definition solidifies,
when they have a new understanding of self.
So these are coming-of-age stories, romances,
those are classic character stories. Click.
So your character is trying to change.
Stop them.
Don't let them break out of their role.
Fill them with self-loathing.
Have the change backfire.
Those are character stories.
Now, event stories, click, are driven by action.
These begin when the status quo,
or the sense of normal, is disrupted
and they're restored when there's a new status quo.
So, oh, and by the way, yes,
everyone dies does count as a new status quo.
But it is very much an external threat.
Character is internal.
This is external.
So by this point, you understand the drill. Click.
Don't let your character restore the status quo.
You have fight scenes.
You have chase scenes. You have explosions.
You have more disruptions to status quo.
Again, you're just mean.
That is your job. Click.
Super easy to confuse character and event.
So character story is interior.
I'll never be popular.
Character event story is external.
Asteroid coming up the earth.
If the asteroid is thinking I'll never be popular,
the asteroid is having a character story.
Okay. Click.
So that's what individual mice elements look like,
but you almost never see a single thread story.
Most stories are made up of multiple threads
because single thread stories are really boring. Click.
So how do you do it?
Now, for a lot of people in the room,
this will explain how you do it.
For those of you who do not do computers,
let me give you a different analogy.
So this is nesting code.
If you open milieu and then you open inquiry,
you have to close the inquiry before you can close the milieu.
If you think about it as getting a box,
and the box is labeled milieu on the outside of it,
and you open it up and there are a bunch of milieu toys,
and then inside is a smaller box filled with inquiry toys.
And you open that up and you pull out those inquiry toys,
and then you play with all of them while you're telling your story.
And then at the end of the day, you have to put them back in the box.
So you want to put the inquiry ones back into that smaller box
so it will fit inside the larger box of the milieu.
It's kind of like trying to return something to Ikea after you've...
If you don't get it all back in the box,
you can just wind up with that extra piece,
and why are there so many Allen wrenches?
All right.
So to use a concrete example, click,
Wizard of Oz is a beautifully nested story.
It begins as a character story. Click.
Dorothy is dissatisfied with her role as a Kansas farm girl.
Then we open the event.
Oh, then we open the milieu.
Welcome to Oz.
And then we open the inquiry.
What do the ruby slippers do? Click.
At the end of the story, Glinda arrives and says,
Oh, the ruby slippers will carry you home.
Which, honestly, she could have said at the beginning
and would have saved everybody a lot of time,
but it does close the inquiry.
Then we close the milieu by Dorothy leaving Oz,
and then we close the event by arriving back in Kansas,
where the status quo has been restored,
and then Dorothy says,
I didn't need to go looking any farther for adventure
than my own backyard, closing character.
When you have stories, click that feel like they end,
and then end again, and then end again.
Not thinking of any films in particular.
It's often because that ending sequence is out of sync.
One of the things that actually happens to this one
is that it is closing out things in a faithful order
to a film that you haven't seen in quite some time.
That's one of the reasons it feels out of sync.
The other thing that will happen is you remember those boxes.
If you think about it instead as actual thread,
the longer I'm stretching that piece of elastic,
the more tension it's under.
When I release it, it's releasing more energy.
That piece of thread, that elastic thread,
is your reader's attention.
The longer that attention has been under stress,
the more of a cathartic release you're going to get at the end.
If you've released something early,
you don't actually have enough time
to get another piece of thread up to that same tension,
because you aren't spending as much time with it,
which is why sometimes a story will feel like it just fizzles out.
That's the end of the PowerPoint.
All right.
So, we're going to write a story in class today.
Okay.
You're like, wait, wait, I didn't sign up.
I signed up for a lecture class.
Okay.
We're going to write a approximately 250 word piece of flash fiction.
The reason I'm having you do this is that, again,
once you understand how this works, you can unpack it.
But I often find that the easiest way to understand something
is to just put it into effect.
Brandon, I want you to try this too.
I just sent out it from my laptop.
Perfect.
Okay.
So, the opening.
The opening is where we meet to our character
and make promises for our readers.
So, I'm going to talk about the things that you need to establish,
but the order in which you need to establish it is up to you.
The key here is that your reader wants to be oriented.
So, in your first three sentences,
who, where, genre.
That's it.
Who, where, and genre.
Now, there's a bunch of different types of opening.
I will be clear that the type that we're doing right now
is something that's called an action-driven opening.
But, speaking of action.
So, to make things simple,
I'm going to wind up assigning you some things.
I'm going to assign you a character.
I'm going to assign you an object,
and I'm going to go ahead and give you a genre,
just to make it so that you don't have to pick quite so many things
in this moment.
But if you want to do something else, that's also fair game.
So, the things that you're going to be doing
is that you are going to be using,
that you've got, your genre is science fiction.
Your character is a jockey.
So, is it like a horse?
Possible.
It could be a disc jockey.
It could be a karaoke jockey.
This is where you get your freedom,
is you get to define what jockey means in this context.
And, coaster could be a coaster that you set a beverage on.
It could be a roller coaster.
It could be, you know, so any of those things.
Science fiction jockey coaster.
Now, before you start, let me give you just a little bit more
to help you out.
So, I said that you need to establish where.
This is your location.
Your reader wants to be grounded about where they are.
So, for the location, I want you to link to a sensory detail.
So, rather than she stood in the battleship's engine room,
which does tell me the location,
you're going for something more like the thumb of the battleship's engines
resonated through her feet.
Does that make sense?
So, for your location, I want a sensory detail.
For your character, for your character,
you're going to be wanting to use point of view.
How the character sees and interacts with the world.
One of the easy things you can do kind of in your own brain
is define a shorthand for the character.
So, it could be something like sexist boss,
spunky pirate, angsty teenage jockey,
although actually, let's be honest, when we're teenagers,
it's just angsty all the time,
so I could have just said teenage jockey there.
So, but something that gives you an idea of what their attitude is.
That's the thing, that's the piece you're looking for.
So, I've already defined that you've got jockey.
You get to put the adjective that it defines their attitude
in front of that for yourself.
Does that make sense?
So, the way you're going to explain that to me with the who
is that you're going to give me their action.
What are they doing?
What is the thing that they're doing?
What is the action that they're taking?
Does that make sense?
And then the genre, you want to get in a genre-specific detail
as fast as you can.
So, this is going to be something specific and unique.
So, from a battleship's engines.
Sounds specific, not unique.
If I said the thrum of the battleship's warp core drive,
that gives you a much more specific thing.
The thrum of the battleship's steam engine through its iron-clad walls
gives you a different specific unique detail.
Does that make sense?
Okay, so you have three sentences to do this.
Bonus points if you can do it in one.
And this does not mean long sentences.
This means specific sentences.
So, you have three minutes.
That's a minute per sentence, which is a luxury.
All right, time is up.
So, it's okay.
I know that some of you are going to keep writing while I'm lecturing.
I am comfortable with this.
So, my example.
You're all looking at the math equation that I put on the board with fear.
I know, I'll explain it in a second.
So, here's my example.
Two sentences, because I was going for the bonus points.
Hydraulic fluid dripped out of the roller coaster's AI
straight onto Chelsea's jockey ID.
Where the heck was that leak?
So, what do we have?
We have roller coaster.
Roller coaster's AI.
So, that's my genre-specific detail.
Straight onto Chelsea's jockey badge.
So, she's underneath it.
So, you've got location and character.
And where the heck was that leak?
It tells you a little bit about what she's trying to do,
which is to fix the leak.
But it also is giving you a little bit of her attitude
that she's cranky.
Make sense?
Okay.
So, in three sentences, you shouldn't have had room to get into trouble yet.
With this other thing that happens with short stories,
which is that you try to put too much in.
So, for our purposes, you are going to be allowed two characters
and one location.
No more than two characters.
Let me explain why through this magical thing.
Terrifying.
The length of your story is equal to the number of characters
plus the number of stages or scenic locations
times 750 words
times the number of mice threads you have
divided by 1.5.
Why is it like that?
Let me explain.
Each character or location you add has the potential to add,
on average, 500 to 1,000 words to your scene or story.
You can do it with less, but this danger is there.
Every time you put a character in,
they cost something from your word budget.
Every time you put in a scenic location,
it costs something from your word budget
because you have to spend words to describe them.
So, since it's 500 to 1,750 is the average of that.
So, this is you add up the number of characters
and the number of stages or scenic locations
and then you multiply it by 750 words.
Each mice quotient thread has the potential
to make your story half again as long.
Yeah.
And the reason is because you have to keep it alive
every single time all the way through that story.
So, when you multiply it by mice,
the number of mice threads you have,
let's say you have three mice threads,
you'd multiply it by three.
This dividing by 1.5 does the mathematical trick
of making it half again as long
instead of three times as long.
Does that make sense?
In theory, this is useful as a diagnostic tool.
It's useful as a predictor, like a rough predictor.
Like, if I have a story and I'm like,
this is a story about eight brothers
who are on a quest across America
stopping at five different theme parks.
That is not a 250-word story.
It makes it super easy to spot.
It is not perfect.
It's a rough rule of thumb predictor,
but it's a useful thing.
So, for hours, because we're going to try
to keep it to 250 words,
you have a maximum of two characters and one location.
But you see how you're already in danger
if you have two characters.
So, try to keep it short.
Your next sentence is going to be about...
we're going to introduce our conflict.
Conflicts are all about your character
trying to achieve a goal
and failing to achieve the goal.
This is why it's called a try, fail cycle.
Try, fail.
So, in a short story, and sometimes a novel too,
I would normally ask you to develop a...
to give me that first conflict within the first 13 lines.
But in a piece of flash fiction,
for our purposes of this exercise,
you get two sentences,
and those are your next two sentences.
So, your next two sentences are,
what is your character trying to do?
And then, what is this?
Sorry, what is your character trying to do and why?
That's the set up your try, fail cycle.
That's the thing they're trying to do.
And then, once we know what they're trying to do,
what is stopping them?
What is stopping them?
Now, for flash fiction, one of the tricks that you can do
is to have several of the try, fail cycles
be implied as happening before the scene starts.
And I will give you an example of mine,
and then I'll let you dive in and try your own.
So, where the heck was that leak?
If she didn't manage to get the coaster back online
before the race, this is what she's trying to do,
get the coaster back online,
she'd have to forfeit her entry money.
There is the why.
And I'll be why you.
Not a garsh darn suggestion from the troubleshooter
on her heads-up display had isolated the problem,
which implies that she has already done
some troubleshooting before it starts.
You understand what I mean about the implication,
which is useful in flash fiction?
So, you are, again, you're going to write me two sentences.
Any questions about the sentences you're writing?
What is your character trying to do and why?
What is the barrier?
What is stopping them from doing that thing?
All right?
Once again, two sentences.
A minute for sentence.
You can do it.
Luxury.
So, now we're going to start throwing conflicts at them.
What I want you to do is look at what you've got on the page,
and I want you to identify the mice quotient element.
So, are they trying to escape from something?
Are they trying to navigate in a place?
If they are, then you've got a milieu.
How many people have a milieu going on?
Okay, cool.
Are they trying to answer a question?
If they are, then you've got an inquiry story going on.
How many people are trying to answer a question?
Okay.
Are they unhappy with themselves, angsty?
Then you have a character story.
A character story, people?
Yep.
And are they trying to change the status quo or sense of normal?
Change the world.
Event stories.
Okay.
I'm unsurprised.
So, that means you know the kind of conflict to throw at them.
If it's a milieu story for those of you that have it,
stop them from getting to wherever it is that they're trying to go.
Whether that's getting out of a thing or getting into a thing.
Stop them from that.
Stop them from crossing that threshold.
If it's an inquiry, block them from answering their questions.
Character, make them unhappier.
An event story meant more things go wrong.
Here's the trick.
When something fails, they try a different approach.
That's what the tri-fail cycle is.
And again, your job as the author is to knock the character down and pick them up again.
And I'll just note that asking a question and getting snubbed,
it doesn't have to be a big tri-fail cycle.
Just asking and getting snubbed is a tri-fail cycle.
So, each action that your character takes should have a consequence.
We usually describe this as yes, but, no, and.
Find a blank space on the board.
So, yes, but means that they made progress towards their goal,
but they were pushed back from it.
No and, oops, means they did not make progress towards their goal
and they were pushed farther back from it.
So, what we do here is we, let me use an example.
In Star Wars, rescuing the princess is a milieu thread.
While being chased by Vader or those stormtroopers,
being chased, they jump into the, it's like, are they going to get out?
That's the basic question.
Are they going to get off the ship?
What's the first thing they try?
Jumping down a chute.
Does that work?
Yes, but it's a garbage chute.
So, what's the next thing they try?
Blaster.
Does shooting a blaster at the walls work?
No, and it wakes up a creature underneath the water thingies.
Is, does, are they able to deal with the creature?
Yes, but only because the walls of the trash compactors start coming in.
So, you understand what I'm talking about here.
So, what you're going to be looking for here is a try-fail cycle for your character.
And you try to just give them one where they try something and it fails and things are a little bit worse.
You can have it succeed and things still get worse,
but try for a failure, a straight up failure and things get worse.
Does that make sense?
Okay.
For this one, I'm giving you five whole sentences and five minutes.
Again, luxury.
All right.
So, here's how mine shook out.
And again, I know some of you will continue writing while I read.
I'm comfortable with that.
So, she had the heads-up display in our previous thing when I established the problem,
had not, had, that she, she was trying to find the thing.
So, fine.
It was time to improvise.
So, that's the thing she's trying.
She's improvising.
Chelsea stuck her hand into the A.I.'s guts and traced the slippery fluid up as far as she could go.
The interior of the roller coaster was still cold from sitting overnight in the cryo bay.
Condensation clung to the walls and mixed with the hydraulic fluid coating her fingers.
She closed her eyes trying to imagine, I'm being very blatant here,
she closed her eyes trying to imagine the interior as she ran past the junction box and
sudden heat stung her fingers.
Chelsea jerked back, cracking her head on the toolbox behind her.
Gosh darned it all to heck.
But you see what I did there.
There's the thing she tried and it failed and things have now gotten a little bit worse
because she has shocked herself and hit her head.
Does that make sense?
Okay.
So, you understand also proportionally what has happened to your story is that the beginning
is at this point about the first third.
You've got your setup right there proportionally and then we've spent more words on that
tri-fail cycle than we did on the setup.
Does that make sense?
You can see the proportions starting to take place there.
So, now we start into the end of the middle.
So, the tri-fail cycle is the middle.
The end of the middle is where we're coming out of this.
It's about the two-third or three-quarter mark in most things.
You ask questions, you open up problems, you make things worse.
And then you start to resolve them.
You start to close those story questions.
This is why you always bog down, by the way, at the two-third, three-quarter mark because
you're changing mode.
Interestingly, there is a phenomenon in psychology called the three-quarter effect.
That when someone is doing something at about the three-quarter point is when it seems like
they can't possibly finish it.
Part of what's going on apparently mentally is that you assume you have that much longer
to go instead of realizing you only have a quarter of the time to go.
That's some of what's happening.
But most of it is that you're changing mode from starting things to ending things.
So, how do you do that?
The conflicts, yes but no and.
The resolutions are going to be in blue and very large.
The resolutions are faint, yes and.
Because that's a movement towards the goal and a continuation towards the goal.
And represents continuing in same direction in many ways.
Excuse me, yes, yeah.
This marker is terrible.
Can she write on the board?
I have no comments at all on that because I know who's guest room I'm staying in.
No but.
That means that there's been a reversal that they didn't think.
But they still get something towards the goal.
So, that would be something like a yes and would be, you know, are they able to,
someone is hungry, are they able to buy lunch?
Yes and it came with an extra order of churros.
No but would be something like they're trying to diffuse the bomb.
They're able to know but when it explodes it goes out the window and lands on the bad guy.
Thank you.
I mean those are terrible examples but you understand what I mean.
So, you're going to switch to closing mode.
This means that the next try fail cycle that your character does is going to be a try succeed.
Whatever it is that they do is going to solve the problem.
Now in a story or a novel that's more than 250-ish words, you would do multiples of those iterations,
getting them closer to the goal each time.
You would iterate it.
In our case, because we're doing a piece of flash fiction, we're going to solve the problem right now.
Does that make sense?
And again, you get about five sentences to solve this sucker.
Okay?
If you can do it in less, that's great.
So I'm giving you another five minutes.
So, here's how mine plays out.
She has cracked her head on the toolbox behind her.
Gosh darn it all to heck.
Shaking her hand, she glowered at the roller coaster.
You know, if I have to forfeit this entry money, I'm going to sell you, have to sell you just to pay rent
and you'll probably wind up in scrap.
She reached into the chassis again.
Please, please let me find the leak.
Her heads up display lit up with what looked like a diagnostic message.
From the AI that was supposedly offline.
The leak is from the thermocoupler in my right breaking mechanism,
but fluid dynamics make it appear to come from the manifold.
Chelsea's mouth dropped open.
If you knew that all along.
Okay, so you see what I did?
I just, the next thing she tried, worked.
So now we have to end it.
Because that's not an ending, right?
The problem is solved, but it's not satisfying yet.
In the ending, we aim towards closing out the mice elements we opened.
And we're talking about, like, big elements.
You open lots of small ones in there as well.
But you want to nest them the way we were talking about.
So if you've got multiple threads going on,
that you close them out so that they all fit neatly back into their box,
you're mirroring the ending.
Which also means that you're going to mirror those,
if you think about it as mirroring those last three sentences,
that you actually need the same things.
We need to know who, where, and genre or mood.
Things have shifted over the course of the story.
So you want to ground the reader by making sure that they understand
what has shifted, that you kind of draw a line under it.
So hitting those points again will help us see the change.
For the who, you're going to again use an action or reflection,
the character actively thinking about something specific.
For the where, often a sensory detail.
And again, if you look at the beginning,
sometimes pulling a sensory detail from there is useful.
And genre, something specific.
In this case, when I say genre,
I'm really thinking more about the mood,
because often the tone has changed.
If the character starts in a very happy place and you're writing a tragedy,
and it ends in a tragic place, which is why it's called a tragedy,
you would want the mood to be different at the end than it is at the beginning.
And so you want to express that with the words and the language structure that you use.
I'm going to read you my example,
and then I'm going to give you three sentences to wrap up your story.
Chelsea's mouth dropped.
If you knew that all along,
she closed her eyes cursing her own stupidity.
Three years as an AI jockey,
and you'd think she would remember that even in a roller coaster,
the temperamental things needed the magic word.
Next time she'd say please sooner.
Okay, now it feels like it's over, right?
And it's that mirroring that I'm doing.
So you've got three sentences to wrap that up.
Make sure that I know where my character is now emotionally.
If they have changed place, if you're in a milieu,
make sure that I know where that new place is.
Give me a little bit of mood and that genre specific detail,
the thing that makes it feel specific to the story.
Three sentences, three minutes.
So the rules that I was giving you about three sentences, five sentences,
those are rules of thumb.
That's an easy goal for you to hit.
In the real world, it's going to be more flexible than that.
But it's something that's achievable.
How many people have something that now has a beginning, middle, and an end?
Great.
Did you actually write a 250-word short story?
It's 650.
Still.
I take great pride in the fact that that is probably the shortest story I've ever written.
But you can see how you can take the principles from doing this exercise
and apply them at a longer length.
The proportional idea of what these stories look like,
what each of those pieces are doing,
you can probably see how if you put another piece of mice element in there
that you would then have to establish two problems at the beginning rather than just one.
Or you'd establish one problem and then a little bit later you'd introduce the other one.
And that that's again going to make the story proportionally longer when you do that.
So, we now have six minutes for questions.
Any questions?
About...
Yes?
So, I guess how do you...
I guess the model of opening and closing with the same conflicts works really well.
But I guess I'm curious about what if your story changes direction?
The characters set out to do something and then realize something about themselves
or something about the nature of the conflict that causes their goal to change
and what they're trying to accomplish is different from what it was before.
So, what happens when the goal changes partway through the story?
One of the things is that you would actually want to signpost that a little bit to the readers
that this might happen.
And I do that not by basically having something that is thematically linked
to the goal that they will eventually solve.
So, if my character is...
The end of the story is going to be my character saving the world.
But the beginning of the story is them trying to become comfortable with themselves.
I would still start with some disruption to their life,
some external disruption to indicate that there are going to be events,
there's a status quo disruption, a larger one coming. Does that make sense?
So, that's one thing that you would do.
The other thing is that as they're going through,
make sure that...
Make sure that whatever that initial one that they started with was,
that you still do close it out.
For instance, if I start and my character is like,
why is this dead body on the floor?
My husband has been killed.
Oh, my tragedy is a widow and the death of my husband.
And the detective comes in and they're working together to solve this crime.
And then the detective and the widow fall in love.
And she wasn't looking for love, but now she's found it and they get married and live happily ever after.
And we don't know who killed that man.
Okay.
Yes, you understand the problem.
Okay, great.
Anybody else?
Yes.
Yeah, so I don't know if there's a hard and fast rule for this,
but like with longer short fiction,
would you still try to establish like genre within the first three sentences?
So the question was in longer form,
would I still try to establish it within the first three sentences?
I do.
The reason is because when the reader starts,
they have no information at all.
And so they need, the longer it takes to ground them,
the slower the story is going to feel,
and the longer it's going to take,
the more likely they are to put it down if they're confused.
So I do try to get it within the first three sentences,
but I don't try to, I don't,
you don't feel like you have to be like super specific.
Like if you're doing a cryptocurrency noir murder mystery on an interplanetary cruise ship,
I don't need to know all of that in the first three sentences.
Okay, I just need to know,
it looks like we're into the future thing-ish.
Okay?
Yeah.
If it's urban fantasy, what's a good way to do that?
I'd be like start in a normal situation,
then get some new elements like that.
So urban fantasy is a good question.
One of the tricky things with magic and urban fantasy in particular
is that often when you introduce magic,
people will think it's in the past,
and if you introduce technology,
people will think magic isn't going to happen.
So trying to do both at the same time,
if you can in the first sentence is great,
in the first three sentences is great.
However, often with urban fantasy,
you're dealing with a character who is unaware of the fantastical world.
So that gets a little harder,
and that's one of those places where you are,
in some degree, relying on where you're shelved in the bookstore.
But you would still want to establish this is,
you'd still want people to know what time they're in
so that there's only one of those two things
that's going to be a surprise when it changes.
Does that make sense?
All right.
One minute.
I'm going to turn it back to Brandon.
I'm just going to say thank you to Mary right now.
We will have this on YouTube channel
if you want to watch through it again.
But good job, guys.
I expect you all to sell flash fiction pieces now.
