Repeating the category errors of some business as 
usual language, such as saying human resources or  
incentivizing corporations just propagates 
this category error in our thinking. So it's  
like trying to chart out a map, but with like 
very tilted lens, you can't perceive the world,  
right? When we see the internet of things, 
let's make it an internet of beings.
When we see virtual reality, 
let's make it a shared reality.  
When we see machine learning, let's 
make it collaborative learning. When  
we see user experience, let's 
make it about human experience.
Today I am joined by the Taiwanese 
Digital Ambassador at large Audrey  
Tang to discuss their work championing the 
integration of technology and transparency  
into government functions with the gold 
to further empower the voice of people in  
policy decisions. Audrey Tang was the first 
digital minister of Taiwan from 2016 to 2024,  
where they were dedicated to promoting a 
radical level of government transparency with  
aims to make all government information, data, and 
resources as accessible to the public as possible.
Today, we discuss a few of their past. Successful 
projects as well as the philosophy of plurality,  
which guides all of their work in a 
global environment where the topics  
of tech and artificial intelligence 
can feel esoteric and out of reach for  
ordinary people. The projects that Audrey 
has introduced in Taiwan and beyond have  
resulted in real humans communicating 
and enacting effective policy changes.
Personally, I was naive on this topic and 
I was blown away by what Audrey and their  
team were able to accomplish, and I wonder what 
the world might look like if more communities,  
more countries, the whole world 
followed this lead. In my opinion,  
this episode highlights the more hopeful 
side of the great simplification where  
technology could be used towards more pro-social 
community, ecologically aware, oriented goals.
Additionally. If you are enjoying this 
podcast, I invite you to subscribe to our  
substack newsletter where you can read 
more of the system science underpinning  
the human predicament, and where my team 
and I post special announcements and new  
written Franks and other such snippets 
related to the great simplification.
You can find the link to subscribe in the 
show description. With that, I am pleased  
to welcome Audrey Tang. Audrey Tang, welcome to 
the program. Hello. Good time everyone. So glad  
to be here. So you, um, already have quite an 
amazing resume with lots of successful movements  
and governance initiatives in your country of 
Taiwan, especially over the last 10 to 15 years.
You became the first Minister of Digital Affairs 
in Taiwan from 2016 to 2024, and now you are  
Taiwan's Cyber Ambassador at large. Mm-hmm. Um, 
but from what I understand, you'd been studying  
and working in coding and digital innovation 
for quite a long time before that. But much  
of your journey into Taiwanese politics began 
what was called, um, the Sunflower Movement.
Maybe we could start there. Can you tell us a bit 
about what that movement was? What was your role  
and experience within it and how it affected 
your current, uh, worldview and, and work?
So back in 2014, the Taiwanese societies deeply 
polarized. The president at the time was enjoying,  
uh, 9% of approval, which means that 
in the country of 24 million anything,  
the president ma says 20 million people 
are, you know, not so happy with it.
And so at the time, the parliament was 
trying to rush through a trade deal with  
Beijing and using this. Basically, oh, 
it's inevitable. Uh, the GDP will grow,  
uh, we'll enter an acceleration 
phase. Uh, if we don't sign it,  
other people will sign and then we will lose 
out, and so on. So forth. Uh, this kind of logic.
But then there's, uh, people who deeply, uh, 
think about the repercussions that it has,  
not just on our system of telecommunications. For 
example, Huawei and ZTE will be able to enter and  
monitor, um, our communications, but also the, 
uh, impact on environment, our labor on many  
other things. And so, um, in March at a time, 
uh, people took matters with their own hands.
So we peacefully occupied the Parliament for three 
weeks. Now a crucial difference is that we're not,  
uh, protesters who only demand something 
like against something we're demonstrators  
that showed a alternative. And 
so we developed a lot of tools,  
like of the half a million people 
on the street and many more online.
You can show up to a citizen assembly like 
conversation. You can enter your company number,  
uh, and then you can very quickly see how 
exactly does the trade deal affect you. And  
then you can have a conversation with a dozen 
other people who are also interested in this  
matter, to think about ways, uh, to basically 
regulate, uh, future trade deals of this kind.
And so every day we read out, uh, 
like a plenary what was agreed, uh,  
that day. And then every day we push it. Uh, a 
little bit more on the low hanging fruits. Uh,  
that's, uh, basically under debate. And so after 
three weeks, we managed to agree on a set of very  
coherent demands and the Speaker of the Parliament 
basically say, okay, we'll adopt it, go home.
And so it's a very rare occupy that really 
converged instead of diverged. And so at the  
end of that year, I was tapped as a reverse 
mentor, as a young advisor to the cabinets,  
basically for each and every incoming 
polarized, uh, topic. Instead of fighting  
out on social media, which isolates people 
into this anti-social corners, we want to  
make something like the occupied parliament 
space that we did build that year without.
Literally occupying the Parliament. And 
so I basically built many digital public  
squares to tackle things all the way from 
Uber in 2015 to counter pandemic in 2020,  
all the way to generative AI and so on 
in 2023 and 24. And so by 2020 already,  
the approval rate is back to more than 70% because 
we systemically discovered the uncommon grounds  
that can pull people together despite their very 
polarized ideologies or political affiliations.
Um, I have so many questions, Audrey, so, 
mm-hmm. Uh, I'm, I'm glad you're here today.  
Let me set the context a little. We, uh, in 
the world today realize the algorithms and  
social media and the polarization and the 
echo chambers, and the inability to really  
have civic discourse about the things that 
matter, and we don't even know what's true.
Uh, I am not an expert on that other than I. 
I am an expert in knowing how it important it,  
it is to solve these issues 
if we're going to have, uh,  
any hope of solving the larger issues 
that I discuss on this platform. So you  
just mentioned that instead of protest, 
you wanted to have alternatives. Mm-hmm.
And, um, I'd like you to unpack that 
a little bit because so much of our,  
uh, postmodern, uh, critique of the world is 
just pointing out what's wrong and what's bad,  
and it's just like an anger sort of thing instead 
of actually proactive. So can you mm-hmm. Describe  
why, why that's so important, uh, and, and 
your experience with offering alternatives.
Yeah, definitely. So I'll use one recent 
example a year ago, um, about, uh, March,  
uh, 2024. We saw a problem online, uh, 
with a lot of deep fake advertisements,  
uh, running fraudulent, uh, 
ads that pertains to, you know,  
sell crypto or sell stocks or so on. In Taiwan 
is always from Jensen, Juan, uh, you know,  
the Nvidia guy, uh, the richest Taiwanese, uh, 
and sometime also from other entrepreneurs.
And then, uh, if you click on Jenssen's, 
uh, likeness, um, he actually talks to you,  
not just chat, but also, you know, voice 
and the whole deal. Uh, and that's because  
the generative AI has grown to such a 
point where it can run such persuasion,  
um, what we call info attacks, uh, with no 
human supervision. And so, uh, to solve that.
We sent SMS text messages to 200,000 random 
numbers in Taiwan from 1 1 1. That's the  
trusted number. People know it come from the 
government asking just one simple question,  
how do you feel about the 
information integrity online,  
what to do about it? And so people gave 
us, uh, their ideas and then. A thousand,  
2000 or so, uh, people, uh, volunteered, 
uh, to basically have online conversation.
And now at the end, we did not engage 
all the thousands of people. Uh,  
we chose 450 people that is a statistical 
representative of the Taiwanese population  
in terms of place they live, age, 
bracket, gender, so on and so forth.  
And so this microcosm, this mini public, 
um, deliberated online for almost a day.
And the way it works is that people enter, 
and it's like a Zoom call with nine other  
people. So 10 people each in each room and the 45 
rooms deliberated about the potential responses  
to this incoming issue of the fake fraud. So 
maybe one room would say. Okay. Uh, if Jensen  
did not sign off on that advertisement, 
it should actually be assumed as skim.
We shouldn't assume human unless proven 
otherwise. We should assume skim unless,  
uh, proven by the human. Another roommate say, 
uh, if Facebook doesn't secure the signature  
and somebody gets skimmed outta $5 million, 
then Facebook should be liable for that $5  
million because otherwise they would just pay 
the fine, which is, um, you know, negligible.
Uh, and another room says if Facebook also, 
you know, doesn't even agree on this framework,  
we should slow down. Connection to the Facebook 
servers so that the business goes to Google,  
uh, and so on and so forth. And so all these 
ideas are facilitated not by human, but by the  
room itself as a AI facilitator that encourages 
the quiet people to speak up and make real time  
transcripts and identify what we call sensemaking, 
uh, the uncommon ground between those rim.
And then we read it back to everyone and people 
agreed more than 85% regardless of their party  
affiliation on the package of measures. 
And then we check with the stakeholders,  
the big tech in April, and they really cannot 
lobby against it because there's no fraud,  
uh, party. And we can show 
that everybody agree on that.
And then finally, in May, we push 
out the draft. And it's one of the  
very rare legislation in Taiwan where all the 
three parties now of which have a majority,  
um. Just fast track through. And so 
now this year, if you open Facebook  
or YouTube in Taiwan, you just don't see 
any fraudulent advertisements anymore.
That's a solved problem. And that is because we 
can show that that was the sense-making result  
from this broad listening exercise. So this 
was an anecdote, but you can get the intuition.
That is pretty amazing. I 
actually didn't know that,  
but let me ask you some questions 
about that. So you said, uh,  
you started with 200,000, you got it down to 
several thousand, and then you chose mm-hmm.
450 mm-hmm. Based on demographics and then they 
were in 45 rooms of 10. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And,  
and so there would be, because that itself 
kind of reflects Dunbar's number of sorts  
that you have to bring it down mm-hmm. To a 
manageable Yes. Human interaction level and  
then scale a little upwards. So did each room 
of 10 come up with its own kind of verdict?
Yes. And then Exactly. And then you compiled 
those 45 verdicts in a, in sort of a, a way
that is exactly the case. And so 
the, uh, of the 45, uh, 30 rooms,  
uh, were from lay people and 15 
rooms were from practitioners,  
like people who are actually media people or 
social media, uh, professionals. And we made sure.
That these, uh, cross, um, pollination, uh, works 
in the plenary. So, uh, people had one segment of  
conversation and during the plenary we weave 
together those questions and suggestions and  
so on. We read them back, uh, with interpretation 
by experts, and then we enter the second segment,  
uh, which then, uh, basically ratify uh, 
on this, um, plenary, uh, conclusions.
The good thing about AI is that 
previously you will need a lot  
of people to like read individually those comments  
in order to make sense. But now AI 
can do that without hallucinating,  
so you can get a pretty grounded report 
based on those 45 rims, individual verdicts.
So what about someone that 
wasn't part of the 200,000?
Um, you said there's 20 some million people 
in Taiwan and they see the results of this,  
wouldn't they? Their initial reaction be, oh, this 
was just some AI scam that put this together. Why,  
why should I believe what, what 
ended up being in in legislation?
Yeah. Uh, part of the reason why is 
that we've been doing this for 10 years,  
and so starting from 2015, uh, during the 
Uber consultation where again, we just ask  
people how do you feel about someone with no 
professional driver license, driving to work,  
meeting a stranger on an app and charging them 
for it, um, people already had like more than  
100 of those online either petition or the online 
sortition, uh, or this kind of, uh, conversations.
So people can refer to the prior experiences and 
they know they can kind of force a response, uh,  
just by going to the national participation 
platform and to get 5,000 other people to,  
uh, basically produce a counter signature, 
uh, so that for any regulation or for any  
policy. If they're not happy about 
the draft that we come up with, uh,  
if they get 5,000 people, they can 
force another round of this exchange.
How scalable is this? Can't this be applied 
to almost any issue in, in the world and,  
and technically, um, maybe not politically, 
but technically in any country in the world.
Yeah, I think the trigger point, uh, really 
is that you need a topic that is urgent enough  
and politically is not the sole 
purview of an existing department.
Mm-hmm. So if it is already a single department,  
then they tend to feel that they've already got 
a solution figured out. They do not actually  
need the collective intelligence. And if 
it's not urgent, then it does not warrant  
this kind of instant sense making technologies 
you can afford to do that over years and so on.
So just a couple weeks ago in California, 
uh, we launched, uh, engaged California and  
the first topic to be discussed, uh, is how 
to recover from the wildfire for Eaton and  
poly Sade. And that is the kind of topic that 
has this urgency for clarity and is far from a  
single department's purview. And so I do think 
that for this kind of topics like Calfornia is.
40 million people. It's not 
a scale thing. It is the, uh,  
will of the people and the 
actual urgency for clarity,  
these two, um, merging together that creates 
opportunity to launch this sort of platform.
So there's the technology 
itself, like what it does,  
but then kind of separate from that is 
the people's trust in the technology.
Mm-hmm. And you said since you did it for 
10 years in Taiwan, there was like a social  
approval mm-hmm. Because people were used to 
it. What's the threshold beyond which people  
believe this? Like, could this happen in the 
United States, um, now on some issue that isn't  
existential, but, but is interesting to 
people and, and relevant to their lives?
Yeah, I think it's also now, uh, ongoing 
in Bowling Green, Kentucky, uh, for the,  
uh, better bowling green, uh, consultation. 
Uh, and so it's not like urgency, urgency,  
but uh, obviously people do feel 
that there is some value, uh,  
in closing the loop of the conversations in the 
neighborhood, the mayor paying attention to it,  
and then using AI to figure out what's the 
uncommon grounds, um, despite the differences  
that people have in the society and how those 
measures, uh, can really improve people's lives.
And closing the loop and telling the people 
who initially propose those ideas is because  
these words you wrote, and of course the other 
3000, uh, people that this measure was taken,
was there any evidence that 
within the 45 groups of 10 people,  
each or any other recent example 
that the 10 people themselves.
In the, the process of discussion and debate 
that was facilitated, facilitated by AI that  
they learned and changed their mind, or they, 
they altered their position on the issue? Yes,
definitely. Uh, if you look for the, uh, 
deliberative Democracy lab in Stanford,  
uh, which we partner with, uh, for 
both Engaged California and for this  
information integrity consultation, 
uh, they have a lot of research.
And the most, uh, important takeaway for 
me is that this inoculation works in the  
long term. So not just p do people, uh, 
entertain. The other side's, uh, visions,  
uh, in a kind of surprising validator kind 
of way. So, I, I may not like your politics,  
but your suggestion makes sense to me. 
This actually influenced their decisions  
even like a year after such exposure to a 
citizen assembly, so that when they vote,  
uh, they tend to look at the actual 
measures, uh, the actual issues at hunt.
Uh, instead of just jumping 
into partisan politics.
And the people, the 10 people in each group,  
did they know that the facilitator 
was an AI and not a real human?
Yeah, because it's not an avatar 
or anything. You just see, uh,  
that the transcript, uh, appears, uh, as you 
speak. You just see a kind of little poke,  
uh, when you've been too quiet, uh, and so on.
So it's not like a AI pretending to 
be a human facilitator. It's more  
like this room itself has a facilitating function.
So, so in addition to facilitating, uh, 
different, uh, priors and, um, ideologies,  
it also, um. Equalizes in a, in a different way. 
Because if you get 10 humans together, uh, various  
power laws ensue and one or two or three of the 
people are gonna do 80 to 90% of the talking.
Mm-hmm. But this actually upregulates the 
quiet and downregulates the, the chatty.
Yes, that is correct. And the reason why is 
that we do want the voices, um, that, uh,  
reach this uncommon ground, uh, to have some way 
of, um. Amplifying their reach. This is in stark  
contrast with the antisocial corner of social 
media where the only most polarized, most extreme,  
the dunking, uh, that gets amplification 
because that's a broadcasting network.
It's not a conversation network. And so in 
weaving together a conversation network,  
we want to upregulate the kind of voice that 
resonates with the entire room. And to do that,  
you probably have to make sure that people, 
uh, take turns, uh, listen as well as speak.
It's really quite impressive, 
and I am not such a fan of ai,  
uh, to be blunt, but this, this is 
one of the good, good sides of ai.
Yes.
I think that's because it's using 
AI as assistive intelligence. So  
just as the assistive technology 
you are wearing the eyeglass, uh,  
it's not replacing a human in the human to human 
relationship. Rather, it is enhancing the human  
to human relationship. And this assistive 
use of AI also respects the dignity of the.
People, uh, in a conversation so 
that they feel they can steer, uh,  
this conversation, not your eye glass 
steering, uh, the conversation. And so  
I think when we talk about ai, we often 
think in a kind of automating fashion,  
like replacing a human in a human to human 
relationship or reducing humans to machines.
But assistive kind of intelligence doesn't do 
that, is task only and is not trying to be this  
general, super intelligent that dictates the 
human's logic. And so it's not about aligning,  
uh, humanity to. The digital AI logic, 
it's about the individual digital tools  
like eyeglasses that can align 
to the human to human logic.
This is very impressive, Audrey, and I 
know it's, uh, it's approaching midnight  
in Taiwan. Mm-hmm. And, and your clarity, 
uh, on this is, is very, um, helpful. Uh,  
let me, let me take a step back in, in 
your history. Mm-hmm. Eventually, your,  
your work with the Sunflower Movement turned 
into some other projects, uh, gov Zero and Paul.
Mm-hmm. Um, can you give a brief account of what 
those two projects were and, and specifically how  
they relate to a concept that you describe 
as demonstrating rather than protesting.
Definitely. So G zero V tw, 
that's the domain name, uh,  
was registered before Sunflower in 
in 2012, um, by some of my friends.
Uh, I joined almost full-time, uh, in 2013. 
And the way we work is we look at all the  
government services, like something 
the Go v tw, and if we don't like it,  
whether it's budget or something, 
instead of, uh, just, you know,  
protesting that it's bad, we actually make a 
better version as something that G zero V tw.
So I talk about the National 
Participation Platform, join the gov tw,  
and if you don't like that, you 
can change your O to A zero and go  
to join the G zero V tw, uh, which is the 
gov zero version. But because gov zero is  
always. Free software, uh, and open culture, 
meaning that our products, uh, are Forex.
That's to say alternate versions of the government 
versions. But we also relinquish sufficient amount  
of copyright so that if a government wants to, 
they can always merge it back into government  
service. So quite, uh, famously, uh, 
during the pandemic, um, the gov zero  
people developed a alternate way to do contact 
tracing that does not compromise privacy at all.
So instead of government version, 
the government simply say, okay,  
let's use the gov zero version. And 
that resulted in Taiwan, you know,  
not locking down any cities, uh, during 
the three years and actually held for,  
until Omicron, uh, which is no mean feat. And 
TSMC just keeps running. Um, anyway, I digress.  
And so the gov zero, uh, try many different 
things, but including Polis and Polis was.
Before generative ai, before language models 
for sensemaking, um, you can think of it as a,  
um, visualization of where people stand 
on a issue. So for Uber, for example,  
we ask people to chime in and they go online 
and they see a fellow citizens, uh, feeling. For  
example, somebody may feel that, uh, undercutting 
existing meters is very bad, but search pricing.
During, uh, high demand. That's very good. 
Uh, so somebody may, may have this statement,  
you can agree, you can disagree or 
you can pass, but there is no ance,  
so no room for truth to grow. And so it 
is in a synchronous way, simulating a  
little bit of the 10 people room dynamics by 
highlighting what's the most resonating idea.
And so you see your avatar being sorted to 
one room and this room, uh, have these kind  
of agreements, but you also see across all the 
different cluster, different rooms, what are the  
ideas that are currently gaining grounds that 
everybody, regardless of where they're coming  
from. Do agree. And so after three weeks in 2015, 
we agree on the set, a very coherent idea about  
Uber, which we then pass into law so that, uh, 
the local co-ops and so on can also operate.
And Uber is a legal taxi fleet, uh, 
in Taiwan for quite some years now.  
So the idea is to use asynchronous, 
uh, contribution, uh, and discovery  
of the uncommon ground so that even if we 
don't have, uh, the language models, uh,  
to weave things together, people can still kind 
of see the community notes that flows to the top.
And the same algorithm has been 
adopted by YouTube, by meta,  
and by X as the community knows algorithm.
Wow. So, um. Embedded in there, uh, is your 
emphasis on data about feelings, specifically the  
feelings of the citizens living under these laws 
and, and regulations that a government enacts?  
Mm-hmm. Why is that so important to incorporate, 
uh, those values into decision making?
And by the way, do you know, um, Nora Bateson and 
her work in what's called, uh, warm Data Labs?
Mm-hmm.
Yes, I've heard of, I've not worked 
directly, but yes. Okay. But go ahead. What,  
what about, uh, data and feelings? 
The integration of that? Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Uh, first of all, I think 
we're all experts of our feelings.
Uh, and so that is actually what can easily 
resonate with our fellow citizens. Had we  
start our Uber consultation with, 
what's your ideal economic model  
for sharing economy versus extractive gig 
economy? Uh, probably nobody will come,  
right? Because it was, um, like. Extremely 
abstract, but feeling is not abstract at all.
Feeling is very personal. And so based on 
feeling, then people want to take care of  
each other's feelings. So you can see 
like the Uber driver, the taxi drivers,  
the passengers, the people worrying 
about rural development and someone,  
um, they all center around shared feelings. And 
so naturally when people start proposing ideas,  
those idea that take care of everybody's 
feelings will float to the top.
And so this speaks to a very different ethical, 
uh, foundation of policy making. This is more  
about the ethics of care. That is to say, 
how much do we want to take care of each  
other instead of what's. Single abstract 
value, um, like in a scholar value sense,  
do we want to optimize? Right? Uh, and care 
also has the benefits of, um, its positive sum.
So if I take care of your ideas, then you 
are probably going to propose an idea that  
also take care of my feelings, uh, as opposed 
to if you put it to referendum or something  
as Uber did in other jurisdictions, 
maybe 51% people feel they have won,  
maybe 49, feel they have lost, but their 
feelings are hurt and are therefore more  
likely to engage in negative sum uh, 
conversations from that point onward.
So what did those projects, um, tell you about 
the divisiveness and polarization of the societies  
where they were enacted, and did people respond 
well to, to these technologies? Like, oh, I, this  
feels more, uh, positive, some and, and caring, 
and, and did they notice that? Yeah, definitely.
Um, so, uh, we can, uh, look 
at very objective numbers,  
uh, especially the very young people in 2019.
We changed our curriculum. So instead of, 
uh, the standardized answers, you know,  
that the East Asians are very famous 
about, uh, we switched. To prioritize,  
uh, the civic competencies, uh, namely, uh, 
autonomy, that's curiosity, interaction with  
people who are unlike you, and also the common 
ground, uh, the ability to construct common good.
And so the idea here. Is that if we do not have 
this shared, uncommon ground in for young people,  
young people will feel they're very 
detached from politics. They're just 14,  
15. They have no way to contribute to 
agenda setting, even though they do know,  
uh, what is actually better, 
uh, for the planet and people.
But by making sure that the young people 
have agenda setting power, uh, in setting,  
for example, e petitions or even becoming, as 
I mentioned, cabinet level advisors and so on,  
the Taiwanese 15 year olds, according to ICCS in 
2022 are now. Populative world when it comes to  
the agency. They feel that they can affect 
the society for people and planet issues,  
and they still, uh, maintain the number 
three to number five, uh, PS a score.
So people are also happy that their stem isn't 
actually degrading. It's not the trade off, uh,  
but I think the young people's empowerment as 
well as the depolarizing effect across, um,  
religious, uh, urban, rural, uh, 
age brackets, uh, and these, uh,  
Taiwan is also the least polarized among 
OECD equivalents A couple years ago.
That's amazing and important, uh, 
because there's two issues. One is  
using this technology to actually change policy 
and regulations and, and things. But the other is,  
irrespective of that, this technology, um, 
uh, suppresses apathy and provides agency,  
which is essential in our current world 
because there's more and more people  
with, um, mental illness and, and just 
checking out because it's so much,  
because they don't feel they have agency 
against all the things that are going on.
So this technology could be really 
important just as a, a vector to,  
um, to increase the feeling of agency. Yes. Yes.
And it also has what we call a pre 
bunking effect because if there's  
already a polarized fight between the two 
memes, uh, then trying to arbitrate it, um,  
like especially from the government, uh, 
tend to just, uh, kindle the fire even  
more and people become even more polarized, 
uh, and fuel conspiracy theories and so on.
Uh, but this kind of technology 
allows us to discover, uh,  
the uncommon ground and share it as 
pre bunking. So one very early, um,  
example, pre is pre bunking. Yes. So it's not 
debunking Oh, oh, it's not debunking. It's pre  
bunking. Yes. Debunking is After something goes 
viral, you say, oh, that's not quite the case.
Uh, pre bunking is that before something 
goes viral, you already say, by the way,  
this is actually like this. Right? So, so it's, 
uh. Many people feel that if they pre bunk each  
other, they are less likely to be polarized. 
And there's many ways to pre bunk and humor  
is one large part of it. So in early 2020, uh, 
when people are not sure what the coronavirus  
interaction with Musk are in Taiwan, we already 
observe as in other places, like one side says,  
because we had a SARS experience a 
few years ago, people feel only N95.
The highest gray mask are useful 
and every other mask are actually,  
you know, a, a scam or something. Uh, and 
the other side says it's ventilation is  
aerosol. So wearing a mask hurts you 
and wearing N95 hurts you the most,  
right? So, uh, if we just let these two 
polarized memes, uh, grow, then they  
tend to fight each other and people will, um, 
basically polarized into mask anti-US camps.
Uh, but the science, uh, was still not 
very clear then. So we basically. Pushed  
out the meme of a uncommon ground, uh, very 
quickly, and it's a Shiba inu, a very cute dog,  
putting her pole to her mouth, saying, wear a 
mask to remind each other to keep your dirty  
and wash hand from your face. So, so that's a 
uncommon ground no matter which part you are.
You probably agree that hand washing is 
good. Uh, we actually measure tap water  
usage. It actually increased, uh, and because 
the dog is just so cute, if you laugh at it,  
the next time you see somebody wearing a mask or 
not wearing a mask, you would just think about,  
uh, you know, hand washing, uh, 
which is like not polarizing at all.
Uh, everybody washes their hands. So just like, 
there's no pro fraud camp in Taiwan. There's no,  
you know, anti hand washing camp in Taiwan. And 
so it just diffused the polarization into just,  
you know, hand washing. There's also songs about 
it and the cute dog dancing and things like that.
So, um. Yeah, this is like literally, I'm.
Soaking this all up because I think it's, 
it's so important and I take our current  
social media landscape as a, as a given, 
and I, I've stopped using Facebook and, uh,  
I do use the other things to post the content 
of, of this website, but I'm become really  
disenchanted with social media and this, this is 
exciting to learn that these things are possible.
LL let me continue. Ultimately, I 
believe you've rooted your work, uh,  
in the idea of plurality. Mm-hmm. Uh, which I 
think is the name of the book you co-authored  
with Glen Weil. Mm-hmm. Can you describe 
what is at the core of, of pl plurality?
Yeah, certainly. So, um, singularity. Means,  
uh, an AI that can improve itself, uh, 
increasingly without human uh, control.
And at some point the AI can automate everything 
there is to automate about AI research. And then  
either, I guess, grow a self preservation instinct 
and refuse to develop the next generation of AI  
and kind of see us as competing carbon-based 
species, or, uh, they don't get that. Uh,  
and just recursively self-improve and serve 
not themselves, but maybe, you know, a CEO.
And then the CEO becomes. Transhuman, uh,  
and then become a very different species than 
the rest of us, right? So that's singularity.
Thank you for that. I've, 
I've heard that word a lot,  
and that was the best description, 
uh, as horrifying as it is. Um, but
thank you, you for
that.
Please continue. Uh, it is, uh, kind of 
losing the race, um, of humanity, right?
Yeah. It's not a race of, um, ascension, uh, 
as sometimes portrayed, but for the rest of us,  
it's just the humanity race loses. And so 
plurality says, um, instead of making an AI  
that's even more powerful by the day 
recursively, we should, uh, actually  
enhance the way that people can work across 
differences. So design each piece of technology.
It could be ai, it could be immersive 
reality, many technologies, um, with this  
eye on fostering. The differences, but seeing the 
conflict that ensues not as fire to be put out,  
but as energy can be harnessed, uh, 
for co-creation. And so any sort of  
technology that enhances this collaboration across 
differences, uh, is in the direction of plurality.
So instead of a vertical race, uh, 
of takeoff, uh, escape velocity,  
you see a lot of space based, uh, metaphors. 
Uh, the plurality is entirely horizontal. It is,  
uh, a lateral diffusion of technical 
capabilities. And each capability is  
steerable by the community that's deploying 
it. And so the more we invest in plurality,  
the better we're prepared, uh, 
to face all the emerging harms.
That's. Being caused by advanced AI and so 
on. And the hope is that at some point people  
will just discover that this is a better, 
a more worthwhile direction. Maybe it's not  
worthwhile at all to replace our, uh, human 
race, uh, with some other, uh, silicon based,  
uh, stuff. Un unless you're the CEO. Yes. Uh, and 
as we have seen, uh, when people said to the CEOs  
of big tech, uh, from Taiwan that you need to 
be liable for whichever scams advertisement  
that you put on because you've been earning, 
uh, advertisement dollars from those scammers.
Uh, and the entire society is paying the 
consequences, the cost of such negative  
pollution, externalities. This is the 
kind of plurality technology that quickly  
lets the decision makers reign in the 
CEOs. And so I do believe that this  
steerability comes from the button up, 
but it also does need, uh, endorsements,  
uh, from the regulators, uh, to say 
basically, okay, it's not my idea.
It's like a trade, uh, negotiation. 
It is the people's idea.
So is that kind of, uh, a plurality is kind of 
like a decentralized singularity. Well, it's
a acceleration for decentralization, for 
democracy, and also for defense. Uh, so Vitalik  
Buting caused this d slash acc or defensive 
democratic decentralization acceleration.
So it is an kind of acceleration in that we want,  
uh, the most possible equitable way 
of diffusion. Uh, but it's accelerates  
not in the sense of self-improvement, 
like the vertical singularity one. This
could be applied in a lot of different areas. 
I'm specifically interested in how it could be  
used for the ongoing battle of what the 
future of social media could look like.
Mm-hmm. Especially with our. Aims of, 
of this podcast and your work and a lot  
of our colleagues and people in the 
world for a pro social, uh, future,  
what would be specific features of a 
social media platform rooted in the  
ideas of plurality and how would those look 
different than the platforms we have today?
I'm, I'm sure you've thought about 
this and if not, are working on it.
Yes, certainly. So, uh, I co-authored a paper 
called Pro-Social Media that talks about this.  
The idea very simply put is that in your newsfeed, 
instead of being ranked by the engagement or  
addiction that it generates, it can rank instead 
by the various communities that you belong to  
and how much coherence, how much uncommon ground 
each post can generate between those communities.
So. Each of us have very different like spiritual, 
professional, family and so on circles. And it's  
often the case that we ourselves are also figuring 
out how to take something that we feel cherished  
from one context across to another context. 
And the idea is that there are creators, uh,  
on social media that specialize in creating this 
kind of bridges so that people can understand  
the other community more and vice versa just 
by viewing and engaging with such content.
And so for each post, you can then see 
of the communities you belong to, uh,  
which communities find this to be bridging. And 
which communities find this to be debatable.  
So it's like the polish interface, but 
apply to social media. We already have  
that in the form of community notes, 
but it is kind of a debunking thing.
Uh, you already have a trending, polarizing post, 
and then you can look at the community notes, uh,  
to have this kind of resonance and bridging. 
So the intuition is to move this into the  
main feed so that the main feed itself becomes, 
uh, pro-social. And in the paper we talk about,  
for example, I'm involved, uh, in advising 
the Project Liberty Institute, uh, who, uh,  
works out a new economic model, uh, for TikTok if 
the people's bid succeeds, uh, in buying TikTok.
Us. And so instead of the advertisers paying 
to bid for the highest bid, uh, getting the  
attention of each individual kind of strip mining 
the social fabric and making each person look  
at a wildly different feed, uh, this idea is 
recreate this common experience so that people  
can know, oh, um, your community and that 
community are enjoying this, um, together.
So a little bit like those 
10 people in the same room,  
people will be able to know that this is, uh, 
white resonance with the extended communities  
and it creates kind of a Super Bowl effect 
and things like that. And we conjecture  
that the communities as well as brands will, 
uh, pay for this kind of shared experiences.
So how prevalent are these various technologies? 
Some of the things, uh, the project you,  
you've mentioned in Taiwan. Mm-hmm. And 
is there any evidence that on some, uh,  
um, group of issues that Taiwanese population is 
less polarized than mm-hmm. Than other countries?
Definitely, as I mentioned, across urban, rural, 
across, uh, age groups, across religion and so on.
Taiwanese people are the least, uh, polarized. And 
we can also simply compare the pro-social ranking  
algorithm that's deployed in LinkedIn, uh, versus 
say in Facebook, um, LinkedIn Q rates. Uh, its,  
uh, feed in a way that is not maximizing 
the time you spend on advertisement,  
but rather on the, uh, cohesion, the 
coherence that we just talked about.
And so feed is quite different, or LinkedIn 
In Taiwan? No, no, LinkedIn globally. Uh,  
when they first introduced the newsfeed to 
LinkedIn, they were very intentional and  
then they curated this kind of common ground 
bridging, uh, posts from. Business leaders,  
uh, from people who follow, uh, who are 
followed by a lot of people on LinkedIn.
And then they gradually, uh, open up commenting 
and things like that. But the whole idea is to  
shape a norm where, uh, engaging with the 
feed actually adds to your, uh, sense of  
social cohesion instead of, uh, distracting, 
uh, from, its like Facebook did since 2015.
So what are the barriers to this scaling, uh, 
pro-social, plurality based, um, social media?
What, why isn't this I. Taking off more, this 
feels like something that people would want, uh,  
of all political ideologies and and backgrounds.
Yeah, definitely. Um, and it is true that I've 
been talking with, uh, many different people on  
different sides of ideologies and they all feel 
that it's time to move past peak polarization.
And I do think that what we need now is, 
uh, both strategies. One is working with,  
uh, free software communities that runs those 
smaller but still very respectable sized, uh,  
networks such as Blue Sky with 30 million people 
on one side, and also choose social on the other,  
which is also free software. Uh, and, 
uh, in a way to show that we can bridge.
The contents so that people across true social 
and blue sky can find the uncommon ground,  
the, uh, surprising validators. So this 
is what we're doing. And the other is  
just to take an existing network like 
TikTok and just change its algorithm.  
And the idea of people spit is 
that TikTok needs to interoperate.
Meaning if you post on TikTok, you should 
be able to consume the same content and  
link to the same friends on Blue Sky or 
on true social or on any other places.  
And so people will then be able to 
curate their own experience instead  
of feeling locked in to the core, uh, 
recommendation algorithm of TikTok.
And so this gives us much more grounds to 
experiment with the pro-social ranking.
Just like everything else in our world though, 
isn't, um, our global economic system, uh,  
our national economic system, our corporate 
economic incentives are based on, uh, dollars and  
we get clicks for dollars. So, you know, when we 
use social media, we get some benefit and mm-hmm.
A lot of times it's dopamine based 
instead of oxytocin based. Mm-hmm. Um,  
to, to make a generality, but it 
results in an economic, uh, uh,  
gain for some individual or corporation. 
Mm-hmm. Does, does this still, um,  
does this combat that at all? Or how, 
how does that play into this? Yeah,
the, the hope here is just as LinkedIn has 
demonstrated, there is a way to pay for.
Common experiences and oxy toin based, uh, 
feelings, uh, while still making sure that  
whatever advertisement, whatever messages, uh, 
that you pay, um, can result, uh, in like Super  
Bowl, uh, which is the kind of pinnacle of 
common experience. And then you can build  
narratives and brands and so on in a way that 
individualized dopamine hits, uh, really cannot.
Seriously. I, I think our culture has 
like a massive dopamine hangover. Um,  
they may not know that, but we're so depleted. 
Uh, it's like we've all been on this Las Vegas  
junket and have lost all our coins and our 
brains are kind of fried and we're hungry for  
serotonin and oxytocin. Other of our ancestral 
neurotransmitters that we've been craving,  
and we get that through community and 
community engagement and social interactions,  
and the fact that we can possibly 
get that from social media mm-hmm.
Is encouraging. Um. Don't you think?
Yes. Uh, and there's a famous 
study a year and a half ago,  
uh, a average undergrad in the US using 
TikTok. If you ask them to move off TikTok,  
then you will have to pay them almost $60 a month 
so they lose that much utility like fomo. Uh,  
while everybody else is still on that hamster 
wheel, but if there's a magic button you can  
press that can transplant everybody around them 
and themself into some other like non dopamine  
based, uh, platform, uh, then they're 
willing to pay you almost $30 a month.
Um, and so it's obvious we're in a product 
market trap. Mm-hmm. Everybody lose utility  
on the hamster wheel, but the 
first one to move off suffers  
so much fomo so that nobody want 
to be the first that moves off.
Hmm. That's quite profound and 
dopamine is still worth two x,  
uh, serotonin and oxytocin in 
our current economic system.
But that might change. Yes, that 
might change. Um, so, so you are,  
uh, in your work, um, you're very specific 
in your projects and initiatives about the  
use of language and the importance of 
it. So why is language so important,  
uh, in these movements and for civic 
engagement and, and participation in general?
Yeah, I think repeating, uh, the category errors, 
uh, of some business as usual language such as,  
I dunno saying human resources, uh, or 
incentivizing corporations, uh, just.  
Propagates this category error in our thinking. 
So it's like, um, trying to chart out a map, uh,  
but with like very tilted, uh, lens, uh, 
you, you can't perceive the world, right?
Uh, if you use that sort of category error, um, 
where it's, and so in 2016, uh, when I first  
entered the cabinet as the digital minister, 
uh, I made a word play because in Taiwan,  
digital shuway also means plural. So I'm not just 
a digital minister, I'm also the minister for  
plurality. I. So even though there's no ministry 
at the time, the ministry will come in 2022.
I still wrote a job description, uh, as a shuway 
uh, minister. It goes like this very quick. When  
we see the internet of things, let's make it an 
internet of beings. When we see virtual reality,  
let's make it a shared reality. When we see 
machine learning, let's make it collaborative  
learning. When we see user experience, 
let's make it about human experience.
And whenever we hear that the singularity is near, 
let's always remember the plurality is here. Nice
work, Audrey. Thank you. Um, I do think law, um,  
um, language is so important. Like fossil 
fuels. They're not fossil fuels. Mm-hmm. Um,  
they're fossil hydrocarbons. We're just 
choosing to use them as fuels. Mm-hmm.
As, as one example, or we refer to the 
United States consumer spent more this month,  
like we're human beings who buy food and other 
things. We're not necessarily consumers, uh,  
unless the true ecological sense, but yeah. 
Language is super important. Mm-hmm. Um, mm-hmm.
Yes. Because we're marketing to each other.
Yes. Consumer of foods is like, you know, 
referring to your users and, and it sums this,  
you know, drug subscription, uh, case, right? So 
I think when I say user experience, uh, should be,  
instead, human experience, we're pointing 
out the same thing. That is to say there's  
much more to being human than just consuming 
something or getting addicted on something.
So I've heard you, um, describe liberal democracy 
as a sort of social technology. Mm-hmm. That  
should be in constant innovation, uh, alongside 
other technologies. Mm-hmm. H how would you  
describe the current state of innovation for 
democracy itself and what is needed for it  
to keep pace mm-hmm. Uh, with other things 
in parallel that are going on in our world,  
like artificial intelligence 
and other disruptive technology?
Yeah, that's a great question. So, um, I 
analyze, uh, democracy as a communication  
technology that has, uh, bandwidth 
and latency. Bandwidth is how much,  
uh, information can each citizen communicate 
to their communities and also into decision  
making. So if you have a referendum, that's 
one bit of information. If you have a, um,  
votes on mayor, uh, with four plausible 
candidates, that's two bits of information.
The problem is that the emerging technologies, 
they change our world in a way that demands, um,  
solutions to what's called wicked problems. 
Meaning that issues that require coordinated  
action of many, many different parts of 
the society. But if each part of society.  
Can have two bits, three bits of information 
uploaded, then that's not sufficient information  
to piece together a solution, a kind of 
jigsaw puzzle, uh, to the wicked issue.
And this is one part, and another part is latency. 
If you have to wait for four years for the next,  
uh, mayor or the next referendum and so on. 
Well, um, many incoming transformative threats,  
uh, can change the society to the point of no 
return in less than four years. And so think,  
um, not just pandemic, but also the info 
dynamic, uh, the polarization issue,  
the, uh, generative ai, power 
scams, phishing, and so on.
So all of these, you, you do not wait for four 
years and start a new referendum or vote in a new  
mayor or things like that. You. Immediately 
gets people together and very quickly gets  
much more bits than just a vote. Maybe you 
get conversations which is much more bits,  
or instead you get, uh, reflections 
on each other's posts and so on.
Like in poll, no matter which way, you need to 
close the loop very quickly so that people know  
that within weeks or at most months, your idea 
results in the steering of the, uh, direction  
of the technology and its responses. And then 
people can come around again and again to learn  
the steerability. So I'm the cyber ambassador 
and cybernetics in Greek means steering.
So this is about the art of steering.
I didn't know that. Um, so is there a risk 
that if we don't continue to innovate, uh,  
democracy as it is today mm-hmm. And all 
the liberties and freedoms that we've come  
to take for granted, uh, in our generations, that 
democracy will simply become obsolete in the face  
of accelerating AI towards the singularity 
and the changing global political landscape.
Um, how worried are you about that and 
how do those concepts, uh, interrelate?
I think, uh, there are various ways that people 
can see the incoming crisis, which is not just  
one but many. So some people say PO crisis, 
uh, but they're all isomorphic in the sense  
that if you see one crisis, you've also seen 
the shape of some of the other crisis as well.
So like a meta. Crisis. And so I 
do feel that, uh, our experience  
when it comes to whether it is occupying the 
parliament peacefully and keep it peaceful,  
or whether it is about countering the algorithmic, 
um, dispatch of Uber and of social media and,  
uh, the infoam and also the pandemic, 
uh, and generative AI harms and so on.
Each of these examples, uh, shows that 
maybe a crisis, uh, as in weight is both  
in a danger and an opportunity. And so 
the shared danger is likely to. Make sure  
that people see the societal resilience as 
not a nice to have, but rather something  
that people must contribute to. So 
the wildfire, um, recovery issue,  
uh, on engaged California is a great, uh, 
result of this infrastructure level building.
And then when such a topic comes in, then people 
can pivot and respond very quickly to it. So I'm  
not pessimistic at all. I feel that each of 
those incoming threats actually accelerate  
the diffusion and the common knowledge 
of the people that democracy does need,  
uh, improvement as the social technology.
Audrey, why are, are concepts, uh, like 
responsibility, liability, inclusivity,  
and transparency, um, important, uh, 
for creating and maintaining an open  
democratic governance system of, of the 
type that you've been describing? I.
Yeah. Um, I learned this, uh, when I entered the 
cabinet, um, because, uh, in 2016, uh, I entered  
the cabinet with some of that doge energy, you 
know, uh, wanting to make everything transparent,  
want to make a procurement, like a leaderboard 
of people comparing, uh, and things like that.
Shortening the, uh, tax filing from three hours 
to three minutes, uh, through direct file, um,  
and so on. And so all these, like what 
we did that in like 2016 and so on,  
but we very quickly found out people in the 
career, public service, the career public  
servants. They also had the same idea, 
and they are also like great reformers.
They actually know how to do things 
better. It was just they lack a air  
cover. There's no one who say, 
uh, if you do this well then, um,  
it's you who get a credit and if you do this, uh, 
but it doesn't work and I can take the blame. Uh,  
and so I made sure that we align our, this 
energy of democratic innovation to the.
Languages and the logic, uh, that the 
career, public service, uh, especially the,  
uh, planning and research and development 
departments use. And so in Taiwan we have  
the National Development Council, and to them 
always, uh, transparency, accountability, uh,  
is I. The norm. Uh, and if we add participation 
and inclusive participation at that to it,  
they want to know that this participation 
is accountable so that we can regulate, um,  
this institution into new institutions, not just 
challenging and taking down existing institutions.
So we announced our every move, 
everything like the join platform,  
the participation office and so on. Uh, instead 
of just doing it, uh, as code, we said, okay,  
six days from now we're going to do it and 
here's a public commentary period. And we made  
sure that there's no exceptions. Everything 
needs to be pre announced publicly this way.
And so even though that each of our move takes 
like 60 days more, I think we want much more  
support from the career public service because 
they can see that. I'm designing myself out,  
so to speak. Uh, if I'm no longer 
the minister, all those institutions,  
the new designs are still around because it 
conforms to the logic of the bureaucracy.
I imagine that there are many other countries in 
the world, some countries are very interested in  
copying your success in Taiwan. Mm-hmm. And 
others are also afraid of, of implementing  
some of these things. Mm-hmm. I mean, 
in your opinion, should countries, uh,  
be doing more to regulate social media platforms 
to be in line with these principles and, and what  
are some of the, uh, the benefits and risks to 
such government oversight and any comments there?
So for this kind of broad listening and 
sense making, I think the smaller the polity,  
the easier it is to implement. Uh, to your point 
about Dunbar's number, pretty much any polity,  
if it's just 150 people, they don't 
have to run a sortition. They just  
invite, uh, everybody right to a conversation. 
Uh, and we do see that in many countries,  
like in Japan there's a long tradition of 
citizen assemblies, but on a hyper local level,  
like literally township level, 
uh, and that, uh, has worked well.
Do we have the
technology to do that at 
a township level now? Yes,
we do. It's the same technology. It's just 
easier to implement, uh, and gets buy-in  
from a mayor of a town as opposed to say, you 
know, a federal government. Right. So it's
usually easier to start. I want you 
to finish answering this question,  
but just so I understand, I.
In the United States right now, people in 
Topeka, Kansas, or Red Wing, Minnesota mm-hmm. Or  
Sebastopol, California mm-hmm. Could access some 
existing technology right now to do Oh, yeah. Some  
of the things You're ta what, what would that 
be? Yes. What TE technology. Yeah. As, as
I mentioned, the Bowling Green, 
uh, process is ongoing, right?
So if you just search for Bowling Green, 
uh, Kentucky, uh, sensemaking, uh, or polis,  
uh, or better Bowling Green, uh, you can see 
exactly how it's done. It's all open source,  
not just the P platform, but 
also the sensemaking tool. Uh,  
they're all free software free for anyone to 
use. And so there are some US states, uh, with.
Citizen assembly tradition already in 
an in-person kind like in Oregon. Uh,  
and so in that sense then it's not 
about convincing them to move online,  
but rather using digital tools 
to augment the conversation and  
to improve its reach. So like Democracy Next 
has been working with Oregon people on that.
So the Bowling Green and the Oregon, there are,  
there are entities that are working 
and chaperoning that process.
Mm-hmm. But in theory, anyone listening to this 
show could look at the Bowling Green example,  
access the source code, and start 
something in their own community.
Yes,
definitely
you can roll out Polis installations. Uh, 
at PL is, and the sales making tools, uh,  
you just search for Jigsaw, sensemaking and 
Polis, I think now have integrated that logic.
So it can also use language models 
to do a very balanced reporting of  
people's ideas. So you can close 
the loop like literally within,  
um, a minute or so for the mayor, 
uh, to maybe read every morning.
Let, let me ask you a, a related question. 
Not, uh, to do with democracy per se. Um,  
but I've noticed, um, over the years, 
um, decades of convening groups of.
High status scientists and activists, that 
everyone's got an opinion and they're very smart,  
and you get 80 or a hundred people 
together. But what ends up happening  
is when you're in person or when your 
name is attached to something, people,  
since we're social primates, uh, and we 
compare and look at status metrics, they  
defer to the senior wealthiest, or most famous, 
or most influential per person in the group.
And so they don't mm-hmm. Let their, their 
real thoughts, um, be known. So I'm wondering,  
the technology that you just described 
about the Bowling Green, could that be  
used mm-hmm. In an institution itself where 
there's 200 people and you really wanna know  
what people are thinking without fear of saying 
the wrong thing and getting demoted or anything?
Is, would this apply to those situations as well?
Yes. And, uh, there are technologies for 
the in-person, uh, kind like cortico,  
C-O-R-T-I-C-O, and develop out of MIT. This 
tool, uh, you can just put your phone or a  
round microphone on table, and then it ensures 
that the facilitator is guided by not just, uh,  
the conversation guide, the turn taking, 
you know, not letting the single senior  
person dominate conversation, but can also carry 
other conversations from previous, uh, talks, uh,  
to this particular conversation pod so that 
the conversation network can cross pollinate.
So when the most senior person speaks something,  
the facilitator can then press a key and 
then a method, uh, place from some other  
conversations that counterbalances, 
uh, the point that was just made.
Why didn't I know about this? And what is, what 
is holding this sort of technology back? Is it,  
is it awareness, uh, like in my 
case, or is it money or is it,  
um, big tech is, uh, afraid of these 
things, uh, or is it social organization?
Why aren't these things scaling more rapidly?
I think, uh, one of the main reason, uh, 
was that all these things run on oxy,  
toin and serotonin, right? And so it is a, 
it is a vibe thing. Once you're in this vibe,  
uh, then it's more likely that you 
will participate in one of those, um,  
conversations and you will discover a very 
large rise on like, conversation network.
But if you're dopamine bound, it's very difficult.
Yes. So actually we need to heal 
people's dopamine addictions, uh,  
concurrently so that they move into this more, uh, 
um, zen, uh, holistic human experience. And then  
obviously this is the type of social media that 
I would prefer rather than clicks and likes and,  
and unexpect reward of, of some goat that claps 
and falls down and a snake crawls under it.
And woo, I never saw that before. Um,  
which doesn't really give us much meaning 
or depth or purpose to our lives Anyways.
Oh yeah, definitely. In my phone I have, uh, 
turned on the color filter. Uh, you can go  
to settings and choose color filters, so it's 
almost entirely gray scale, just with a little  
hint of color, uh, so that the phone is never 
more vivid than reality and it works wonders.
Uh, so I cannot get pulled into the do 
because, um, this, uh, Las Vegas thing,  
uh, this slot machine, uh, simply does 
not give, uh, high enough, uh, rewards,  
uh, when your phone is grayscale. Oh, 
that's a great idea. Yes. I'm gonna
do that starting today. It's called color 
filter. I'm gonna do that. Mm-hmm. So, uh,  
moving on to a more serious topic, not that the 
things we've been discussing aren't serious,  
but how might the events we're seeing 
right now, especially in the United States,  
playing out with, uh, with big tech 
and tech oligarchs, damage people's.
Inherent trust in technology that might limit,  
um, some of the opportunities you've been 
describing. Um, what do you think about that?
Yeah, so on one side, uh, we do 
see that people are collectively  
feeling it's time to move past. Peak 
polarization. On the other hand, uh,  
aside from like more people using say 
blue sky or true social or signal or  
proton or things like that, um, there's yet 
to be a very coherent movement out of the.
Big tech dominated social media landscape toward a 
more pluralistic, uh, pro-social media landscape.  
That is true. So this is partly what we are trying 
to achieve, uh, with this paper and advising the  
Project, Liberty Institute doing the TikTok 
bid. But regardless of whether the TikTok goes  
to become a prosocial space, I do think that, uh, 
there are pockets of good within those big tech.
So the Bowling Green Experiment, for example, is 
done by the Jigsaw Group within Google. So there,  
the group within Google that try to work, uh, 
in a prosocial way to counter the antisocial  
damage that the algorithm of say YouTube has 
done to the society. Uh, far as I understand,  
the Community Forum, community Notes 
team within Meta is doing a similar job.
Um, and so it's not all. Black and 
white, so to speak. Uh, everyone, uh,  
who look at these big tech CM monolith, 
but what we're doing is that we're also  
building a network between the people who 
kind of act like conscience within those  
big tech so that we can band together 
and build a horizontal social network.
So I've heard you, uh, in a conversation with 
our mutual friend, uh, Tristan Harris mm-hmm. Who  
introduced us. I've heard you use the phrase, the 
most careful should win the prize. Mm-hmm. Yes. In  
reference to how our current systems incentivize 
people and companies with dopamine and dollars,  
et cetera. Can you unpack by what you 
mean by that statement and how is your  
work, uh, creating those, those 
mechanisms to incentivize care?
Yeah, definitely. Uh, I would say it's not 
just incentivizing care, it is also assisting  
and augmenting care because it is like very, um, 
energy and time consuming, uh, to do care work.  
And, uh, a facilitator like realistically cannot 
facilitate 450 people at once, even if they really  
care a lot. There's some wet wear limitations, 
uh, to the amount of care you can put.
As a facilitator to a conversation. And so think 
of, uh, like for like personal care. Sometime if  
you want to move, uh, people who are heavy and so 
on, you can use a exoskeleton, uh, that does not  
automate away your work, but allow you to lift, 
uh, better weights. Um, you, you can also think  
of cortico and similar conversation network 
plurality, technologies like Exo, uh, cortex,  
uh, that helps, uh, somebody who perform care 
work like facilitation to make sense of more  
people or to close the loop slightly faster, 
but it's not replacing, uh, the care workers.
Um. To replace them would be like, you know, 
sending my avatar to talk to your avatar and  
have AI summarize all the avatars and 
have avatars be the mayor. It's like,  
you know, going to the gym and seeing the robot 
lifting the weights, I'm sure very impressive,  
but it does not help our civic muscles. So at this 
care work, uh, pairs with the idea of assistive  
intelligence in that it cease the people to 
people, promises people to people attention  
as the most important, the most cherished, 
and then technology is just to foster it.
So this is very eyeopening and, and exciting  
and, um, we've approached, um, what I call a 
species level conversation. Mm-hmm. And almost  
a rite of passage for our species at large. 
And there's lots of countries in the world.  
Do you ever think that there's something unique 
about Taiwan and the population of Taiwan, uh,  
and the culture that made it a more viable place 
for these strategies and movements to take hold?
Uh, is it, or is it, is it 
uh, applicable anywhere?
I think it's applicable anywhere. Uh, I 
think Taiwan simply has to innovate along  
these domain because all our people, 
at least people above 40 years old,  
including myself, remember the martial law 
and, uh, we've suffered, uh, the longest,  
uh, martial period, multiple 
decades, uh, in the world.
And so we know how it is like to have our 
freedom of expression of assembly and moving  
and so on taken away. And so nobody want to 
go back there. And so when we face. Such,  
um, as you put it, uh, civilization skill, 
um, threats, existential threats. We have  
no choice but to double down on freedom 
because we cannot even suffer a little bit  
of democracy and freedom backsliding the 
people simply would not put up with it.
And so, uh, whichever solution we come up with 
needs to be with the people, not just for the  
people. People do not accept this authoritarian 
for the people rhetoric in Taiwan. But that's just  
for, uh, the necessity to come up with these 
ideas, to apply these ideas. You do not need  
the same configuration as Taiwan, and you do not 
need the same, um, existential opportunity, uh,  
of like facing every day as potentially the, 
you know, last day of democracy and so on.
As we did since 1996 when we first voted 
for our presidents and our not so friendly  
neighbors started, uh, missile trails. And so, 
yes, so while it originates in Taiwan, it can  
work everywhere. It's not just, you know, Finland 
or Tokyo, California or Bowling Green or Oregon  
and so on. But it can also just be in your family, 
in your school, um, and in your local community.
So before becoming, uh, the Minister 
of Digital Affairs in Taiwan,  
you were a very engaged youth activist. 
Mm-hmm. Uh, and as I understand it,  
you were also a reverse mentor mm-hmm. In 
the Taiwanese parliament. Yes. Which is a  
role for people under 35 to advise mm-hmm. Older 
officials. Yes. So, in your opinion, what is the  
role of young people today in governance 
and in particip participatory democracy?
Mm-hmm. And what lessons do you take 
away from being now? Uh, both sides  
of the reverse mentor mentorship, uh, in Taiwan.
I believe in intergenerational solidarity 
where the young people sets the direction  
and the senior people provide the support 
and resources on the Taiwanese participation  
platform. The most active age groups are 
the 17 years olds and the 70 years olds.
Um, both have more time on their hands, I suppose, 
uh, but also both care more about the oxy toin  
serotonin thing of sustainability rather than the 
dopamine thing of the next quarter. Right? So.  
The idea is not to arbitrarily put 
them kind of against each other,  
but rather to find the common topics where 
the younger people see a new possibility.
But the more senior people have the wisdom 
to see how that can be made possible,  
like the adjacent possible, how adjacent 
really is that possibility. And so through  
reverse mentoring and through this kind 
of intergenerational solidarity design,  
we incentivize the local social 
entrepreneurs and so on, uh, to form  
the kind of leadership team that has different 
generations, uh, in their board basically.
Uh, and so this I think is a great 
way to heal. One of the most, um,  
you know, divisive thing currently in our society,  
which is the senior people with the resources 
think that the society should go this way. And  
then the young people already with proof, 
the society cannot sustain this way.
Do you have any specific 
recommendations, Audrey, on how mm-hmm.
The listeners and viewers of this program can 
create a better relationship with technology  
as an average citizen, uh, who wants to be 
informed and engaged with their governments, uh,  
and institutions. What, what advice do you have 
on for the viewers to, to better use technology?
Uh, on a personal level 
color filter is really great.
Uh, I've also seen people 
using, uh, like a stylus, uh,  
or a keyboard or really anything 
that is not a touch screen,  
and that also works great. So one of the two 
can probably switch you off dopamine. So it's
creating a, it's, it's 
creating a dopamine speed bump.
Of sorts. Exactly, yes. So making sure that the 
slot machine doesn't immediately respond to you,  
uh, to increase the latency, uh, and 
reduce the bandwidth, so to speak.
Uh, so yes, uh, it works, um, very reliably 
for me and hopefully for you, uh, as well,  
uh, on the community, uh, level. Uh, one can in. 
Encourage each other to try like more in-person  
gatherings or synchronous online gatherings and 
learn about active listening and facilitation. So  
the facilitation school that I use, uh, is dynamic 
facilitation and focus conversation method.
But you don't need to, uh, go into any particular 
school, even in a meeting if you say, okay,  
now let's speak clockwise and now 
let's speak counterclockwise. That  
can already break this defer to the 
most senior highest status person. Uh,  
so that's the easiest facilitation method, 
uh, that can be transmitted on a live show.
Uh, but there's a lot of facilitation 
methods and so learn about it and also  
get into the community of, uh, open space 
technology and other ways to scale this, uh,  
conversations and facilitation upward so that you 
can scale not just horizontally, but also deeply.
So you said there's a lots of different methods.
Um, where would someone go 
to learn about those methods?
Yeah, you can, uh, search, uh, 
for facilitation techniques, uh,  
or group facilitation, and you will see pretty 
much everything there is. Uh, or you can also,  
uh, reach out to your local facilitation groups 
and enter some facilitated conversations selves.
So, uh, this, this has been just 
an amazing discussion because I,  
I realized the importance of this 
topic, and I'm not even a novice in it.
So I've learned, uh, quite a bit. Um, if 
you could take your, um, open society, uh,  
software, um, plurality hat off, and 
just as a citizen of the world today,  
facing the poly crisis, um, and what 
I refer to as the human predicament,  
what sort of advice do you have for, 
for people being alive at this time?  
Being aware of the issues that we face and, and 
the challenges just as a, as a human to human.
Yeah, I think, um, a shared sense of 
urgency, whether it's ecological or social,  
and. Whichever in between, uh, I think 
that helps people to build solidarity,  
to build this kind of care. Uh, that 
makes it far easier for us to say,  
yeah, this is too much for just a single 
person. I need your help, and vice versa.
And then if we can keep asking each 
other, okay, so what's your feeling,  
um, right now, uh, around these issues? And 
if we can help each other by facilitating  
conversations and uncovering uncommon 
ground so that like active listening,  
you can, uh, entertain listening to 
people who are very much unlike you.
Maybe coming from very different 
background, very different ideology,  
but if you can just listen for five minutes 
without interrupting them. Even in your head,  
uh, and then repeat back what you have, 
um, heard with clarifying questions, uh,  
also with curiosity and the other person take 
turns and so on. Such simple practices of  
literally facilitation with just two people 
can really get us out of this domine loop.
And the topics to explore together 
again, is this shared urgency,  
this crisis feeling that I'm sure that all of 
us have, um, at least some time during the day.
With the possible exception of 
maybe Daniel Schmucker. I don't  
know if I've ever listened to someone for 
five minutes without interrupting them.
Um, so I, I, I think it's good advice. What about 
young people? I, I know you care deeply about  
young humans, uh, because you were quite active 
mm-hmm. Uh, in your younger years. What, what  
specific recommendations do you have for young 
humans, uh, in my country, in your country, around  
the world listening to this, who become aware of 
our economic, uh, social ecological, uh, problems?
Yeah. Um, so certainly get organized. 
Uh, and the young people of today knows  
a lot about horizontal organization 
of discovering a shared purpose and  
how those shared purpose can bring people 
together. And so if you are organized. Then  
just as the Taiwanese 15 year olds, 
you feel you are already a adult.
You feel that you can already contribute 
meaningfully to the agenda setting of the society.  
The Taiwanese people, even before they turned 
18, started some of the most, uh, impactful,  
uh, petitions. Uh, not just changing, you know, 
the, uh, recycling or plastic straw policy or  
things like that on the ecological sense, but 
also changed, uh, like their school schedule.
So they go to school one hour later, uh, because 
they prove that one more hour sleep is better  
for grace than one more hour of the study. And 
the Ministry of Education just accepted that,  
uh, or, uh, even funding, uh, one of 
the kind, uh, menstruation museum,  
uh, in Taiwan and just slashed that 
taboo from all the society in just.
Two or three years and so on and so forth. 
So any of these contributions, um, made,  
uh, cabinet level advisor, reverse mentor, 
uh, status, uh, but even without a status,  
just organizing yourselves enable you to 
have this kind of, uh, conversations that  
are societal scale. And again, organization 
starts by listening, uh, towards shared purpose.
And I recommend, um, people power, uh, from 
Marshall Guns, uh, on how to get organized.
So I have a couple, uh, closing questions 
that I ask, uh, all my guests. I hope you  
don't mind it. I know it's approaching, uh, 
midnight mm-hmm. Uh, in where you are. Um,  
what do you care most about in the world, Audrey? 
I care the most about our ability to care.
Thank you. Um. If you could wave a magic wand,  
what is one thing you would do to 
improve human and planetary futures? I
would make sure that, uh, anytime people speak 
of utilitarian, uh, logic, uh, they automatically  
have some care or virtue or, uh, spiritual, really 
whichever edition, uh, Intuit. So, uh, a little  
bit of infusion or inception, uh, of a different 
ethics into the current utilitarian logic.
And that, uh, as we have been 
observing is what we've been doing,  
uh, for the past hour and a half.
Jao? Yes. Um. So what are you working 
on now and what are you most, uh,  
enthusiastic about? Mm-hmm. 
That, that you can share?
Yeah, so, um, I'm going to South by 
Southwest, uh, in a couple days from  
now. And, uh, my short biopic, uh, good enough 
ancestor, uh, will be premiered, uh, online.
Good enough,
ancestor. I love that.
Yes. Uh, and, um, so potentially also working 
on the film links, uh, adaptation. Uh, but yeah,  
I encourage you to check out good enough 
ancestor, uh, go how, as we say in Mandarin,  
because if we were perfect, we actually robbed 
the future, uh, from the creativity and the  
canvas. But if we're just good enough, then 
we can make peace with future generations.
I love it. I love it. If you were to come 
back on this show sometime in the future,  
6, 9, 12 months from now, what is one topic, 
um, that is relevant to our future that you  
are personally passionate about that you 
would like to take a deep dive on? So
we talked about, uh, this idea of a vertical 
takeoff singularity when it comes to ai,  
and we also talk about this horizontal care 
based diffusion of capabilities of plurality.
So a deep dive of how these two directions 
work with each other, against each other. Uh,  
the dynamic between those two approaches, 
I think we can do a deep dive on it.
Awesome. Um, this has been great. Audrey, do you 
have any closing words, uh, for our viewers today?
Yeah, definitely. So I often quote, uh, from 
my favorite, uh, singer songwriter Lena Cohen,  
on the importance of being just 
good enough but not perfect.
Because if you're perfect, there's no way 
to say I need help, and no way for others  
to express care. So to quote Lena Cohen, um, 
my favorite stanza from Anthem goes like this,  
ring the bells that still can ring. Forget 
your perfect offering. There's a crack,  
a crack in everything, and 
that's how the light gets in.
Thank you for your time today and for your 
very important work and, uh, to be continued,  
my friend. Thank you. Take care. Take good care. 
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the  
Great Simplification, please follow us on your 
favorite podcast platform. You can also visit  
the great simplification.com for references 
and show notes from today's conversation.
And to connect with fellow listeners 
of this podcast, check out our Discord  
channel. This show is hosted by me, Nate 
Hagens, edited by No Troublemakers Media,  
and produced by Misty Stinnett. Leslie 
Balu, Brady Hayan, and Lizzie Sir.