three classes of greatest puzzles. I mean, if I could, I could tell a story that biology
is the greatest puzzle because without, without something to care about the universe in which
it lives, this is all completely sterile to begin with. And I can also make a different
case for mathematics, which is that physics is but one example of a universe. We don't
know if there are other universes that can, could be constructed.
So, so biology, I mean, it's, it's, I agree it's intricate and, and it can be a pure pursuit,
but it's not pure in the sense that so much of the foundations of biology are somewhat
arbitrary. Like whether, you know, DNA helix is going to spiral to the left or the right
and, and, and what its chemical components are precisely, that might vary. Other planets,
you know, other civilizations, biology is going to be different.
You could make a decent argument that systems of selective pressures as described by Darwin
and Wallace might be conserved even if you had, didn't have carbon-based life.
There will be convergent evolution, of course, but, but the details will, will be slightly
different. So if you're studying biology, by the time you get up to something like cells
or animals, it's going to be wildly different in different, different places in the, in
the galaxy. All right. Whereas, whereas physics is the same everywhere. Okay. It's, it's independent
of biology and it's independent of humanity. And it's a, I think, and then when you go
to mathematics, um, mathematics, the pursuit of mathematics, like how things get proved
and how structures get built up through axioms that are then proved, it's a, it's a larger
playing field than physics. So within that huge arena of possible mathematical structures.
Okay. We see, appear to live in one mathematical structure. So, I mean, a physicist only has
to focus on the, the mathematics that we, that describes reality.
And I, by the way, I share your intuition that in a certain sense, this is the best
and most interesting place to play in part, um, because there's this very weird feature
that we've seemingly unearthed about the physical universe, which is that it unexpectedly has
this bizarrely good taste about what to care about within. It's, it's as if you let it
loose in the mathematical, um, jewelry store and it, it selects only the finest pieces.
Yeah. Yeah. And we have to wonder if that's, you know, is that just our human take on it?
Because our, our human aesthetics have evolved within this beautiful world and universe.
So is it that, uh, I mean, Douglas Adams described the anthropic principle as a, as a puddle
of water, right? And thinking it's like, wow, this, this, this whole I'm in is just perfectly
formed to my shape, right? Isn't it wonderful how it just fits me so perfectly in it? And
it's so comfortable here, just like it was made for me. Well, it's like, no, the puddle
got there and filled the shape of the, the whole. I mean, the water got there and filled
that shape. And as humans, we, we ended up here and we filled this niche and our aesthetic
taste was shaped by what's around us, including the, the mathematics that underlies the physics
of this universe. And so when we look at the universe, you might say, Oh no, uh, maybe it's
just our tastes evolved within this universe. So this is why we find physics aesthetically
pleasing. Do you actually believe what you're saying right now?
No, I think it's wrong. I mean,
I think this is so cowardly. I know, I agree. And I have to wonder about it. I have to, I mean,
I understand. I have to pay lip service. You know, it's not just lip service. I think about
this. I mean, I think, I mean, is it really my proclivities have been shaped by my environment
in order to think this? Cause I have to question everything all the time.
Sure. Mostly cause I don't talk to enough other people. But, but also it's, it's because
you know, yeah, when you're questioning things and you're delving with fundamental building
blocks, you want to make sure as you build things up that you have things right. And in
looking at the fundamental pieces of physics, you know, the fundamental mathematical physics,
I really think that the mathematical pieces, as you say, are the ones that are extraordinarily
beautiful. And it's not just my aesthetic taste has been shaped by evolution that causes me to
think that I really think objectively, these are very pretty mathematical objects be underlying
our physical reality. Yeah, I think we just lack the courage to say what this appears to be, which
is there is something that we do not understand about the universe in which it is selected for
the most mysterious, most beautiful stuff with which to write what we, I mean, the closest thing
we have to source code.
