08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Public Opinion, by Walter Lippmann  

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most  
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions  
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of  
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at  
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have  
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.  

Title: Public Opinion  

Author: Walter Lippmann  

Posting Date: October 3, 2014 [EBook #6456]  
Release Date: September, 2004  
[This file was first posted on December 15, 2002]  

Language: English  

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUBLIC OPINION ***  

Produced by David Phillips, Charles Franks and the Online  
Distributed Proofreading Team.  

PUBLIC OPINION  

BY  

WALTER LIPPMANN  

TO  
FAYE LIPPMANN  

Wading River,  
Long Island.  
1921.  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

1/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

_"Behold! human beings living in a sort of underground den,  
which has a mouth open towards the light and reaching all across  
the den; they have been here from their childhood, and have their  
legs and necks chained so that they cannot move, and can only  
see before them; for the chains are arranged in such a manner as  
to prevent them from turning round their heads. At a distance  
above and behind them the light of a fire is blazing, and between  
the fire and the prisoners there is a raised way; and you will  
see, if you look, a low wall built along the way, like the screen  
which marionette players have before them, over which they show  
the puppets.  

I see, he said.  

And do you see, I said, men passing along the wall carrying  
vessels, which appear over the wall; also figures of men and  
animals, made of wood and stone and various materials; and some  
of the prisoners, as you would expect, are talking, and some of  
them are silent?  

This is a strange image, he said, and they are strange prisoners.  

Like ourselves, I replied; and they see only their own shadows,  
or the shadows of one another, which the fire throws on the  
opposite wall of the cave?  

True, he said: how could they see anything but the shadows if  
they were never allowed to move their heads?  

And of the objects which are being carried in like manner they  
would see only the shadows?  

Yes, he said.  

And if they were able to talk with one another, would they not  
suppose that they were naming what was actually before them?"_  
--The Republic of Plato, Book Seven. (Jowett Translation.)  

CONTENTS  

PART I. INTRODUCTION  

I. The World Outside and the Pictures in Our Heads  

PART II. APPROACHES TO THE WORLD OUTSIDE  

II. Censorship and Privacy  

III. Contact and Opportunity  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

2/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
IV. Time and Attention  

V. Speed, Words, and Clearness  

PART III. STEREOTYPES  

VI. Stereotypes  

VII. Stereotypes as Defense  

VIII. Blind Spots and Their Value  

IX. Codes and Their Enemies  

X. The Detection of Stereotypes  

PART IV. INTERESTS  

XI. The Enlisting of Interest  

XII. Self-Interest Reconsidered  

PART V. THE MAKING OF A COMMON WILL  

XIII. The Transfer of Interest  

XIV. Yes or No  

XV. Leaders and the Rank and File  

PART VI. THE IMAGE OF DEMOCRACY  

XVI. The Self-Centered Man  

XVII. The Self-Contained Community  

XVIII. The Role of Force, Patronage, and Privilege  

XIX. The Old Image in a New Form: Guild Socialism  

XX. A New Image  

PART VII. NEWSPAPERS  

XXI. The Buying Public  

XXII. The Constant Reader  

XXIII. The Nature of News  

XXIV. News, Truth, and a Conclusion  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

3/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

PART VIII. ORGANIZED INTELLIGENCE  

XXV. The Entering Wedge  

XXVI. Intelligence Work  

XXVII. The Appeal to the Public  

XXVIII. The Appeal to Reason  

PART I  

INTRODUCTION  

CHAPTER I  

THE WORLD OUTSIDE AND THE PICTURES  
IN OUR HEADS  

CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTION  

THE WORLD OUTSIDE AND THE PICTURES  
IN OUR HEADS  

There is an island in the ocean where in 1914 a few Englishmen,  
Frenchmen, and Germans lived. No cable reaches that island, and the  
British mail steamer comes but once in sixty days. In September it had  
not yet come, and the islanders were still talking about the latest  
newspaper which told about the approaching trial of Madame Caillaux  
for the shooting of Gaston Calmette. It was, therefore, with more than  
usual eagerness that the whole colony assembled at the quay on a day  
in mid-September to hear from the captain what the verdict had been.  
They learned that for over six weeks now those of them who were  
English and those of them who were French had been fighting in behalf  
of the sanctity of treaties against those of them who were Germans.  
For six strange weeks they had acted as if they were friends, when in  
fact they were enemies.  

But their plight was not so different from that of most of the  
population of Europe. They had been mistaken for six weeks, on the  
continent the interval may have been only six days or six hours. There  
was an interval. There was a moment when the picture of Europe on  
which men were conducting their business as usual, did not in any way  
correspond to the Europe which was about to make a jumble of their  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

4/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
lives. There was a time for each man when he was still adjusted to an  
environment that no longer existed. All over the world as late as July  
25th men were making goods that they would not be able to ship, buying  
goods they would not be able to import, careers were being planned,  
enterprises contemplated, hopes and expectations entertained, all in  
the belief that the world as known was the world as it was. Men were  
writing books describing that world. They trusted the picture in their  
heads. And then over four years later, on a Thursday morning, came the  
news of an armistice, and people gave vent to their unutterable relief  
that the slaughter was over. Yet in the five days before the real  
armistice came, though the end of the war had been celebrated, several  
thousand young men died on the battlefields.  

Looking back we can see how indirectly we know the environment in  
which nevertheless we live. We can see that the news of it comes to us  
now fast, now slowly; but that whatever we believe to be a true  
picture, we treat as if it were the environment itself. It is harder  
to remember that about the beliefs upon which we are now acting, but  
in respect to other peoples and other ages we flatter ourselves that  
it is easy to see when they were in deadly earnest about ludicrous  
pictures of the world. We insist, because of our superior hindsight,  
that the world as they needed to know it, and the world as they did  
know it, were often two quite contradictory things. We can see, too,  
that while they governed and fought, traded and reformed in the world  
as they imagined it to be, they produced results, or failed to produce  
any, in the world as it was. They started for the Indies and found  
America. They diagnosed evil and hanged old women. They thought they  
could grow rich by always selling and never buying. A caliph, obeying  
what he conceived to be the Will of Allah, burned the library at  
Alexandria.  

Writing about the year 389, St. Ambrose stated the case for the  
prisoner in Plato's cave who resolutely declines to turn his head. "To  
discuss the nature and position of the earth does not help us in our  
hope of the life to come. It is enough to know what Scripture states.  
'That He hung up the earth upon nothing' (Job xxvi. 7). Why then argue  
whether He hung it up in air or upon the water, and raise a  
controversy as to how the thin air could sustain the earth; or why, if  
upon the waters, the earth does not go crashing down to the bottom?...  
Not because the earth is in the middle, as if suspended on even  
balance, but because the majesty of God constrains it by the law of  
His will, does it endure stable upon the unstable and the void."  
[Footnote: Hexaemeron, i. cap 6, quoted in _The Mediæval Mind_,  
by Henry Osborn Taylor, Vol. i, p. 73.]  

It does not help us in our hope of the life to come. It is enough to  
know what Scripture states. Why then argue? But a century and a half  
after St. Ambrose, opinion was still troubled, on this occasion by the  
problem of the antipodes. A monk named Cosmas, famous for his  
scientific attainments, was therefore deputed to write a Christian  
Topography, or "Christian Opinion concerning the World." [Footnote:  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

5/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

Lecky, _Rationalism in Europe_, Vol. I, pp. 276-8.] It is clear  
that he knew exactly what was expected of him, for he based all his  
conclusions on the Scriptures as he read them. It appears, then, that  
the world is a flat parallelogram, twice as broad from east to west as  
it is long from north to south., In the center is the earth surrounded  
by ocean, which is in turn surrounded by another earth, where men  
lived before the deluge. This other earth was Noah's port of  
embarkation. In the north is a high conical mountain around which 
revolve the sun and moon. When the sun is behind the mountain it is  
night. The sky is glued to the edges of the outer earth. It consists  
of four high walls which meet in a concave roof, so that the earth is  
the floor of the universe. There is an ocean on the other side of the  
sky, constituting the "waters that are above the firmament." The space  
between the celestial ocean and the ultimate roof of the universe  
belongs to the blest. The space between the earth and sky is inhabited  
by the angels. Finally, since St. Paul said that all men are made to  
live upon the "face of the earth" how could they live on the back  
where the Antipodes are supposed to be? With such a passage before  
his eyes, a Christian, we are told, should not 'even speak of the  
Antipodes.'" [Footnote: _Id._]  

Far less should he go to the Antipodes; nor should any Christian  
prince give him a ship to try; nor would any pious mariner wish to  
try. For Cosmas there was nothing in the least absurd about his map.  
Only by remembering his absolute conviction that this was the map of  
the universe can we begin to understand how he would have dreaded  
Magellan or Peary or the aviator who risked a collision with the  
angels and the vault of heaven by flying seven miles up in the air. In  
the same way we can best understand the furies of war and politics by  
remembering that almost the whole of each party believes absolutely in  
its picture of the opposition, that it takes as fact, not what is, but  
what it supposes to be the fact. And that therefore, like Hamlet, it  
will stab Polonius behind the rustling curtain, thinking him the king,  
and perhaps like Hamlet add:  

  "Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!  
  I took thee for thy better; take thy fortune."  

2  

Great men, even during their lifetime, are usually known to the public  
only through a fictitious personality. Hence the modicum of truth in  
the old saying that no man is a hero to his valet. There is only a  
modicum of truth, for the valet, and the private secretary, are often  
immersed in the fiction themselves. Royal personages are, of course,  
constructed personalities. Whether they themselves believe in their  
public character, or whether they merely permit the chamberlain to  
stage-manage it, there are at least two distinct selves, the public  
and regal self, the private and human. The biographies of great people  
fall more or less readily into the histories of these two selves. The  
official biographer reproduces the public life, the revealing memoir  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

6/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
the other. The Charnwood Lincoln, for example, is a noble portrait,  
not of an actual human being, but of an epic figure, replete with  
significance, who moves on much the same level of reality as Aeneas or  
St. George. Oliver's Hamilton is a majestic abstraction, the sculpture  
of an idea, "an essay" as Mr. Oliver himself calls it, "on American  
union." It is a formal monument to the state-craft of federalism,  
hardly the biography of a person. Sometimes people create their own  
facade when they think they are revealing the interior scene. The  
Repington diaries and Margot Asquith's are a species of  
self-portraiture in which the intimate detail is most revealing as an  
index of how the authors like to think about themselves.  

But the most interesting kind of portraiture is that which arises  
spontaneously in people's minds. When Victoria came to the throne,  
says Mr. Strachey, [Footnote: Lytton Strachey, _Queen Victoria_,  
p. 72.] "among the outside public there was a great wave of  
enthusiasm. Sentiment and romance were coming into fashion; and the  
spectacle of the little girl-queen, innocent, modest, with fair hair  
and pink cheeks, driving through her capital, filled the hearts of the  
beholders with raptures of affectionate loyalty. What, above all,  
struck everybody with overwhelming force was the contrast between  
Queen Victoria and her uncles. The nasty old men, debauched and  
selfish, pigheaded and ridiculous, with their perpetual burden of  
debts, confusions, and disreputabilities--they had vanished like the  
snows of winter and here at last, crowned and radiant, was the  
spring."  

M. Jean de Pierrefeu [Footnote: Jean de Pierrefeu, _G. Q. G. Trois  
ans au Grand Quartier General_, pp 94-95.] saw hero-worship at  
first hand, for he was an officer on Joffre's staff at the moment of  
that soldier's greatest fame:  

"For two years, the entire world paid an almost divine homage to the  
victor of the Marne. The baggage-master literally bent under the  
weight of the boxes, of the packages and letters which unknown people  
sent him with a frantic testimonial of their admiration. I think that  
outside of General Joffre, no commander in the war has been able to  
realize a comparable idea of what glory is. They sent him boxes of  
candy from all the great confectioners of the world, boxes of  
champagne, fine wines of every vintage, fruits, game, ornaments and  
utensils, clothes, smoking materials, inkstands, paperweights. Every  
territory sent its specialty. The painter sent his picture, the  
sculptor his statuette, the dear old lady a comforter or socks, the  
shepherd in his hut carved a pipe for his sake. All the manufacturers  
of the world who were hostile to Germany shipped their products,  
Havana its cigars, Portugal its port wine. I have known a hairdresser  
who had nothing better to do than to make a portrait of the General  
out of hair belonging to persons who were dear to him; a professional  
penman had the same idea, but the features were composed of thousands  
of little phrases in tiny characters which sang the praise of the  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

7/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
Main
General. As to letters, he had them in all scripts, from all  
countries, written in every dialect, affectionate letters, grateful,  
overflowing with love, filled with adoration. They called him Savior  
of the World, Father of his Country, Agent of God, Benefactor of  
Humanity, etc.... And not only Frenchmen, but Americans, Argentinians,  
Australians, etc. etc.... Thousands of little children, without their  
parents' knowledge, took pen in hand and wrote to tell him their love:  
most of them called him Our Father. And there was poignancy about  
their effusions, their adoration, these sighs of deliverance that  
escaped from thousands of hearts at the defeat of barbarism. To all  
these naif little souls, Joffre seemed like St. George crushing the  
dragon. Certainly he incarnated for the conscience of mankind the  
victory of good over evil, of light over darkness.  

Lunatics, simpletons, the half-crazy and the crazy turned their  
darkened brains toward him as toward reason itself. I have read the  
letter of a person living in Sydney, who begged the General to save  
him from his enemies; another, a New Zealander, requested him to send  
some soldiers to the house of a gentleman who owed him ten pounds and  
would not pay.  

Finally, some hundreds of young girls, overcoming the timidity of  
their sex, asked for engagements, their families not to know about it;  
others wished only to serve him."  

This ideal Joffre was compounded out of the victory won by him, his  
staff and his troops, the despair of the war, the personal sorrows,  
and the hope of future victory. But beside hero-worship there is the  
exorcism of devils. By the same mechanism through which heroes are  
incarnated, devils are made. If everything good was to come from  
Joffre, Foch, Wilson, or Roosevelt, everything evil originated in the  
Kaiser Wilhelm, Lenin and Trotsky. They were as omnipotent for evil as  
the heroes were omnipotent for good. To many simple and frightened  
minds there was no political reverse, no strike, no obstruction, no  
mysterious death or mysterious conflagration anywhere in the world of  
which the causes did not wind back to these personal sources of evil.  

3  

Worldwide concentration of this kind on a symbolic personality is rare  
enough to be clearly remarkable, and every author has a weakness for  
the striking and irrefutable example. The vivisection of war reveals  
such examples, but it does not make them out of nothing. In a more  
normal public life, symbolic pictures are no less governant of  
behavior, but each symbol is far less inclusive because there are so  
many competing ones. Not only is each symbol charged with less feeling  
because at most it represents only a part of the population, but even  
within that part there is infinitely less suppression of individual  
difference. The symbols of public opinion, in times of moderate  
security, are subject to check and comparison and argument. They come  
and go, coalesce and are forgotten, never organizing perfectly the  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

8/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
emotion of the whole group. There is, after all, just one human  
activity left in which whole populations accomplish the union sacrée.  
It occurs in those middle phases of a war when fear, pugnacity, and  
hatred have secured complete dominion of the spirit, either to crush  
every other instinct or to enlist it, and before weariness is felt.  

Main

At almost all other times, and even in war when it is deadlocked, a  
sufficiently greater range of feelings is aroused to establish  
conflict, choice, hesitation, and compromise. The symbolism of public  
opinion usually bears, as we shall see, [Footnote: Part V.] the marks  
of this balancing of interest. Think, for example, of how rapidly,  
after the armistice, the precarious and by no means successfully  
established symbol of Allied Unity disappeared, how it was followed  
almost immediately by the breakdown of each nation's symbolic picture  
of the other: Britain the Defender of Public Law, France watching at  
the Frontier of Freedom, America the Crusader. And think then of how  
within each nation the symbolic picture of itself frayed out, as party  
and class conflict and personal ambition began to stir postponed  
issues. And then of how the symbolic pictures of the leaders gave way,  
as one by one, Wilson, Clemenceau, Lloyd George, ceased to be the  
incarnation of human hope, and became merely the negotiators and  
administrators for a disillusioned world.  

Whether we regret this as one of the soft evils of peace or applaud it  
as a return to sanity is obviously no matter here. Our first concern  
with fictions and symbols is to forget their value to the existing  
social order, and to think of them simply as an important part of the  
machinery of human communication. Now in any society that is not  
completely self-contained in its interests and so small that everyone  
can know all about everything that happens, ideas deal with events  
that are out of sight and hard to grasp. Miss Sherwin of Gopher  
Prairie, [Footnote: See Sinclair Lewis, _Main Street_.] is aware  
that a war is raging in France and tries to conceive it. She has never  
been to France, and certainly she has never been along what is now the  
battlefront.  

Pictures of French and German soldiers she has seen, but it is  
impossible for her to imagine three million men. No one, in fact, can 
imagine them, and the professionals do not try. They think of them as,  
say, two hundred divisions. But Miss Sherwin has no access to the  
order of battle maps, and so if she is to think about the war, she  
fastens upon Joffre and the Kaiser as if they were engaged in a  
personal duel. Perhaps if you could see what she sees with her mind's  
eye, the image in its composition might be not unlike an Eighteenth  
Century engraving of a great soldier. He stands there boldly unruffled  
and more than life size, with a shadowy army of tiny little figures  
winding off into the landscape behind. Nor it seems are great men  
oblivious to these expectations. M. de Pierrefeu tells of a  
photographer's visit to Joffre. The General was in his "middle class  
office, before the worktable without papers, where he sat down to  
write his signature. Suddenly it was noticed that there were no maps  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

9/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
on the walls. But since according to popular ideas it is not possible  
to think of a general without maps, a few were placed in position for  
the picture, and removed soon afterwards." [Footnote: _Op. cit._,  
p. 99.]  

Main

The only feeling that anyone can have about an event he does not  
experience is the feeling aroused by his mental image of that event.  
That is why until we know what others think they know, we cannot truly  
understand their acts. I have seen a young girl, brought up in a  
Pennsylvania mining town, plunged suddenly from entire cheerfulness  
into a paroxysm of grief when a gust of wind cracked the kitchen  
window-pane. For hours she was inconsolable, and to me incomprehensible.  
But when she was able to talk, it transpired that if a window-pane  
broke it meant that a close relative had died. She was, therefore,  
mourning for her father, who had frightened her into running away  
from home. The father was, of course, quite thoroughly alive as a  
telegraphic inquiry soon proved. But until the telegram came, the  
cracked glass was an authentic message to that girl. Why it was  
authentic only a prolonged investigation by a skilled psychiatrist  
could show. But even the most casual observer could see that the girl,  
enormously upset by her family troubles, had hallucinated a complete  
fiction out of one external fact, a remembered superstition, and a  
turmoil of remorse, and fear and love for her father.  

Abnormality in these instances is only a matter of degree. When an  
Attorney-General, who has been frightened by a bomb exploded on his  
doorstep, convinces himself by the reading of revolutionary literature  
that a revolution is to happen on the first of May 1920, we recognize  
that much the same mechanism is at work. The war, of course, furnished  
many examples of this pattern: the casual fact, the creative  
imagination, the will to believe, and out of these three elements, a  
counterfeit of reality to which there was a violent instinctive  
response. For it is clear enough that under certain conditions men  
respond as powerfully to fictions as they do to realities, and that in  
many cases they help to create the very fictions to which they  
respond. Let him cast the first stone who did not believe in the  
Russian army that passed through England in August, 1914, did not 
accept any tale of atrocities without direct proof, and never saw a  
plot, a traitor, or a spy where there was none. Let him cast a stone  
who never passed on as the real inside truth what he had heard someone  
say who knew no more than he did.  

In all these instances we must note particularly one common factor. It  
is the insertion between man and his environment of a pseudo-environment.  
To that pseudo-environment his behavior is a response. But because it  
_is_ behavior, the consequences, if they are acts, operate not in  
the pseudo-environment where the behavior is stimulated, but in the  
real environment where action eventuates. If the behavior is not a  
practical act, but what we call roughly thought and emotion, it may  
be a long time before there is any noticeable break in the texture of  
the fictitious world. But when the stimulus of the pseudo-fact results  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

10/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
in action on things or other people, contradiction soon develops.  
Then comes the sensation of butting one's head against a stone wall, 
of learning by experience, and witnessing Herbert Spencer's tragedy  
of the murder of a Beautiful Theory by a Gang of Brutal Facts, the  
discomfort in short of a maladjustment. For certainly, at the level of  
social life, what is called the adjustment of man to his environment  
takes place through the medium of fictions.  

Main

By fictions I do not mean lies. I mean a representation of the  
environment which is in lesser or greater degree made by man himself.  
The range of fiction extends all the way from complete hallucination  
to the scientists' perfectly self-conscious use of a schematic model,  
or his decision that for his particular problem accuracy beyond a  
certain number of decimal places is not important. A work of fiction  
may have almost any degree of fidelity, and so long as the degree of  
fidelity can be taken into account, fiction is not misleading. In  
fact, human culture is very largely the selection, the rearrangement,  
the tracing of patterns upon, and the stylizing of, what William James  
called "the random irradiations and resettlements of our  
ideas." [Footnote: James, _Principles of Psychology_, Vol. II, p.  
638] The alternative to the use of fictions is direct exposure to the  
ebb and flow of sensation. That is not a real alternative, for however  
refreshing it is to see at times with a perfectly innocent eye,  
innocence itself is not wisdom, though a source and corrective of  
wisdom. For the real environment is altogether too big, too complex,  
and too fleeting for direct acquaintance. We are not equipped to deal  
with so much subtlety, so much variety, so many permutations and  
combinations. And although we have to act in that environment, we have  
to reconstruct it on a simpler model before we can manage with it. To  
traverse the world men must have maps of the world. Their persistent  
difficulty is to secure maps on which their own need, or someone  
else's need, has not sketched in the coast of Bohemia.  

4  

The analyst of public opinion must begin then, by recognizing the  
triangular relationship between the scene of action, the human picture  
of that scene, and the human response to that picture working itself  
out upon the scene of action. It is like a play suggested to the  
actors by their own experience, in which the plot is transacted in the  
real lives of the actors, and not merely in their stage parts. The  
moving picture often emphasizes with great skill this double drama of  
interior motive and external behavior. Two men are quarreling,  
ostensibly about some money, but their passion is inexplicable. Then  
the picture fades out and what one or the other of the two men sees  
with his mind's eye is reënacted. Across the table they were  
quarreling about money. In memory they are back in their youth when 
the girl jilted him for the other man. The exterior drama is  
explained: the hero is not greedy; the hero is in love.  

A scene not so different was played in the United States Senate. At  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

11/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
breakfast on the morning of September 29, 1919, some of the Senators  
read a news dispatch in the _Washington Post_ about the landing 
of American marines on the Dalmatian coast. The newspaper said:  

Main

FACTS NOW ESTABLISHED  

"The following important facts appear already _established_. The  
orders to Rear Admiral Andrews commanding the American naval forces in  
the Adriatic, came from the British Admiralty via the War Council and  
Rear Admiral Knapps in London. The approval or disapproval of the  
American Navy Department was not asked....  

WITHOUT DANIELS' KNOWLEDGE  

"Mr. Daniels was admittedly placed in a peculiar position when cables  
reached here stating that the forces over which he is presumed to have  
exclusive control were carrying on what amounted to naval warfare  
without his knowledge. It was fully realized that the _British  
Admiralty might desire to issue orders to Rear Admiral Andrews_ to  
act on behalf of Great Britain and her Allies, because the situation  
required sacrifice on the part of some nation if D'Annunzio's  
followers were to be held in check.  

"It was further realized that _under the new league of nations plan  
foreigners would be in a position to direct American Naval forces in  
emergencies_ with or without the consent of the American Navy  
Department...." etc. (Italics mine).  

The first Senator to comment is Mr. Knox of Pennsylvania. Indignantly  
he demands investigation. In Mr. Brandegee of Connecticut, who spoke  
next, indignation has already stimulated credulity. Where Mr. Knox  
indignantly wishes to know if the report is true, Mr. Brandegee, a  
half a minute later, would like to know what would have happened if  
marines had been killed. Mr. Knox, interested in the question, forgets  
that he asked for an inquiry, and replies. If American marines had  
been killed, it would be war. The mood of the debate is still  
conditional. Debate proceeds. Mr. McCormick of Illinois reminds the  
Senate that the Wilson administration is prone to the waging of small  
unauthorized wars. He repeats Theodore Roosevelt's quip about "waging  
peace." More debate. Mr. Brandegee notes that the marines acted "under  
orders of a Supreme Council sitting somewhere," but he cannot recall  
who represents the United States on that body. The Supreme Council is  
unknown to the Constitution of the United States. Therefore Mr. New of  
Indiana submits a resolution calling for the facts.  

So far the Senators still recognize vaguely that they are discussing a  
rumor. Being lawyers they still remember some of the forms of  
evidence. But as red-blooded men they already experience all the  
indignation which is appropriate to the fact that American marines  
have been ordered into war by a foreign government and without the  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

12/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
consent of Congress. Emotionally they want to believe it, because they  
are Republicans fighting the League of Nations. This arouses the  
Democratic leader, Mr. Hitchcock of Nebraska. He defends the Supreme  
Council: it was acting under the war powers. Peace has not yet been  
concluded because the Republicans are delaying it. Therefore the  
action was necessary and legal. Both sides now assume that the report  
is true, and the conclusions they draw are the conclusions of their  
partisanship. Yet this extraordinary assumption is in a debate over a  
resolution to investigate the truth of the assumption. It reveals how  
difficult it is, even for trained lawyers, to suspend response until  
the returns are in. The response is instantaneous. The fiction is  
taken for truth because the fiction is badly needed.  

A few days later an official report showed that the marines were not  
landed by order of the British Government or of the Supreme Council.  
They had not been fighting the Italians. They had been landed at the  
request of the Italian Government to protect Italians, and the  
American commander had been officially thanked by the Italian  
authorities. The marines were not at war with Italy. They had acted  
according to an established international practice which had nothing  
to do with the League of Nations.  

The scene of action was the Adriatic. The picture of that scene in the  
Senators' heads at Washington was furnished, in this case probably  
with intent to deceive, by a man who cared nothing about the Adriatic,  
but much about defeating the League. To this picture the Senate  
responded by a strengthening of its partisan differences over the  
League.  

5  

Whether in this particular case the Senate was above or below its  
normal standard, it is not necessary to decide. Nor whether the Senate  
compares favorably with the House, or with other parliaments. At the  
moment, I should like to think only about the world-wide spectacle of  
men acting upon their environment, moved by stimuli from their  
pseudo-environments. For when full allowance has been made for  
deliberate fraud, political science has still to account for such  
facts as two nations attacking one another, each convinced that it is  
acting in self-defense, or two classes at war each certain that it  
speaks for the common interest. They live, we are likely to say, in  
different worlds. More accurately, they live in the same world, but 
they think and feel in different ones.  

It is to these special worlds, it is to these private or group, or  
class, or provincial, or occupational, or national, or sectarian  
artifacts, that the political adjustment of mankind in the Great  
Society takes place. Their variety and complication are impossible to  
describe. Yet these fictions determine a very great part of men's  
political behavior. We must think of perhaps fifty sovereign  
parliaments consisting of at least a hundred legislative bodies. With  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

13/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
them belong at least fifty hierarchies of provincial and municipal  
assemblies, which with their executive, administrative and legislative  
organs, constitute formal authority on earth. But that does not begin  
to reveal the complexity of political life. For in each of these  
innumerable centers of authority there are parties, and these parties  
are themselves hierarchies with their roots in classes, sections,  
cliques and clans; and within these are the individual politicians,  
each the personal center of a web of connection and memory and fear  
and hope.  

Somehow or other, for reasons often necessarily obscure, as the result  
of domination or compromise or a logroll, there emerge from these  
political bodies commands, which set armies in motion or make peace,  
conscript life, tax, exile, imprison, protect property or confiscate  
it, encourage one kind of enterprise and discourage another,  
facilitate immigration or obstruct it, improve communication or censor  
it, establish schools, build navies, proclaim "policies," and  
"destiny," raise economic barriers, make property or unmake it, bring  
one people under the rule of another, or favor one class as against  
another. For each of these decisions some view of the facts is taken  
to be conclusive, some view of the circumstances is accepted as the  
basis of inference and as the stimulus of feeling. What view of the  
facts, and why that one?  

And yet even this does not begin to exhaust the real complexity. The  
formal political structure exists in a social environment, where there  
are innumerable large and small corporations and institutions,  
voluntary and semi-voluntary associations, national, provincial, urban  
and neighborhood groupings, which often as not make the decision that  
the political body registers. On what are these decisions based?  

"Modern society," says Mr. Chesterton, "is intrinsically insecure  
because it is based on the notion that all men will do the same thing  
for different reasons.... And as within the head of any convict may be  
the hell of a quite solitary crime, so in the house or under the hat  
of any suburban clerk may be the limbo of a quite separate philosophy.  
The first man may be a complete Materialist and feel his own body as a  
horrible machine manufacturing his own mind. He may listen to his  
thoughts as to the dull ticking of a clock. The man next door may be a  
Christian Scientist and regard his own body as somehow rather less  
substantial than his own shadow. He may come almost to regard his own  
arms and legs as delusions like moving serpents in the dream of  
delirium tremens. The third man in the street may not be a Christian  
Scientist but, on the contrary, a Christian. He may live in a fairy  
tale as his neighbors would say; a secret but solid fairy tale full of  
the faces and presences of unearthly friends. The fourth man may be a  
theosophist, and only too probably a vegetarian; and I do not see why  
I should not gratify myself with the fancy that the fifth man is a  
devil worshiper.... Now whether or not this sort of variety is  
valuable, this sort of unity is shaky. To expect that all men for all 
time will go on thinking different things, and yet doing the same  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

14/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
things, is a doubtful speculation. It is not founding society on a  
communion, or even on a convention, but rather on a coincidence. Four  
men may meet under the same lamp post; one to paint it pea green as  
part of a great municipal reform; one to read his breviary in the  
light of it; one to embrace it with accidental ardour in a fit of  
alcoholic enthusiasm; and the last merely because the pea green post  
is a conspicuous point of rendezvous with his young lady. But to  
expect this to happen night after night is unwise...." [Footnote: G.  
K. Chesterton, "The Mad Hatter and the Sane Householder," _Vanity  
Fair_, January, 1921, p. 54]  

For the four men at the lamp post substitute the governments, the  
parties, the corporations, the societies, the social sets, the trades  
and professions, universities, sects, and nationalities of the world.  
Think of the legislator voting a statute that will affect distant  
peoples, a statesman coming to a decision. Think of the Peace  
Conference reconstituting the frontiers of Europe, an ambassador in a  
foreign country trying to discern the intentions of his own government  
and of the foreign government, a promoter working a concession in a  
backward country, an editor demanding a war, a clergyman calling on  
the police to regulate amusement, a club lounging-room making up its  
mind about a strike, a sewing circle preparing to regulate the  
schools, nine judges deciding whether a legislature in Oregon may fix  
the working hours of women, a cabinet meeting to decide on the  
recognition of a government, a party convention choosing a candidate 
and writing a platform, twenty-seven million voters casting their  
ballots, an Irishman in Cork thinking about an Irishman in Belfast, a  
Third International planning to reconstruct the whole of human  
society, a board of directors confronted with a set of their  
employees' demands, a boy choosing a career, a merchant estimating  
supply and demand for the coming season, a speculator predicting the  
course of the market, a banker deciding whether to put credit behind a  
new enterprise, the advertiser, the reader of advertisments.... Think  
of the different sorts of Americans thinking about their notions of  
"The British Empire" or "France" or "Russia" or "Mexico." It is not so  
different from Mr. Chesterton's four men at the pea green lamp post.  

6  

And so before we involve ourselves in the jungle of obscurities about  
the innate differences of men, we shall do well to fix our attention  
upon the extraordinary differences in what men know of the world.  
[Footnote: _Cf_. Wallas, _Our Social Heritage_, pp. 77 _et seq_.]  
I do not doubt that there are important biological differences. Since  
man is an animal it would be strange if there were not. But as  
rational beings it is worse than shallow to generalize at all  
about comparative behavior until there is a measurable similarity  
between the environments to which behavior is a response.  

The pragmatic value of this idea is that it introduces a much needed  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

15/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
refinement into the ancient controversy about nature and nurture,  
innate quality and environment. For the pseudo-environment is a hybrid  
compounded of "human nature" and "conditions." To my mind it shows the  
uselessness of pontificating about what man is and always will be from  
what we observe man to be doing, or about what are the necessary  
conditions of society. For we do not know how men would behave in 
response to the facts of the Great Society. All that we really know is  
how they behave in response to what can fairly be called a most  
inadequate picture of the Great Society. No conclusion about man or  
the Great Society can honestly be made on evidence like that.  

This, then, will be the clue to our inquiry. We shall assume that what  
each man does is based not on direct and certain knowledge, but on  
pictures made by himself or given to him. If his atlas tells him that  
the world is flat he will not sail near what he believes to be the  
edge of our planet for fear of falling off. If his maps include a  
fountain of eternal youth, a Ponce de Leon will go in quest of it. If  
someone digs up yellow dirt that looks like gold, he will for a time  
act exactly as if he had found gold. The way in which the world is  
imagined determines at any particular moment what men will do. It does  
not determine what they will achieve. It determines their effort,  
their feelings, their hopes, not their accomplishments and results.  
The very men who most loudly proclaim their "materialism" and their  
contempt for "ideologues," the Marxian communists, place their entire  
hope on what? On the formation by propaganda of a class-conscious  
group. But what is propaganda, if not the effort to alter the picture  
to which men respond, to substitute one social pattern for another?  
What is class consciousness but a way of realizing the world? National  
consciousness but another way? And Professor Giddings' consciousness  
of kind, but a process of believing that we recognize among the  
multitude certain ones marked as our kind?  

Try to explain social life as the pursuit of pleasure and the  
avoidance of pain. You will soon be saying that the hedonist begs the  
question, for even supposing that man does pursue these ends, the 
crucial problem of why he thinks one course rather than another likely  
to produce pleasure, is untouched. Does the guidance of man's  
conscience explain? How then does he happen to have the particular  
conscience which he has? The theory of economic self-interest? But how  
do men come to conceive their interest in one way rather than another?  
The desire for security, or prestige, or domination, or what is  
vaguely called self-realization? How do men conceive their security,  
what do they consider prestige, how do they figure out the means of  
domination, or what is the notion of self which they wish to realize?  
Pleasure, pain, conscience, acquisition, protection, enhancement,  
mastery, are undoubtedly names for some of the ways people act. There  
may be instinctive dispositions which work toward such ends. But no  
statement of the end, or any description of the tendencies to seek it, 
can explain the behavior which results. The very fact that men  
theorize at all is proof that their pseudo-environments, their  
interior representations of the world, are a determining element in  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

16/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
thought, feeling, and action. For if the connection between reality  
and human response were direct and immediate, rather than indirect and  
inferred, indecision and failure would be unknown, and (if each of us  
fitted as snugly into the world as the child in the womb), Mr. Bernard  
Shaw would not have been able to say that except for the first nine  
months of its existence no human being manages its affairs as well as  
a plant.  

Main

The chief difficulty in adapting the psychoanalytic scheme to  
political thought arises in this connection. The Freudians are  
concerned with the maladjustment of distinct individuals to other  
individuals and to concrete circumstances. They have assumed that if  
internal derangements could be straightened out, there would be little  
or no confusion about what is the obviously normal relationship. But  
public opinion deals with indirect, unseen, and puzzling facts, and  
there is nothing obvious about them. The situations to which public  
opinions refer are known only as opinions. The psychoanalyst, on the  
other hand, almost always assumes that the environment is knowable,  
and if not knowable then at least bearable, to any unclouded  
intelligence. This assumption of his is the problem of public opinion.  
Instead of taking for granted an environment that is readily known,  
the social analyst is most concerned in studying how the larger  
political environment is conceived, and how it can be conceived more  
successfully. The psychoanalyst examines the adjustment to an X,  
called by him the environment; the social analyst examines the X,  
called by him the pseudo-environment.  

He is, of course, permanently and constantly in debt to the new 
psychology, not only because when rightly applied it so greatly helps  
people to stand on their own feet, come what may, but because the  
study of dreams, fantasy and rationalization has thrown light on how  
the pseudo-environment is put together. But he cannot assume as his  
criterion either what is called a "normal biological career"  
[Footnote: Edward J. Kempf, _Psychopathology_, p. 116.] within  
the existing social order, or a career "freed from religious  
suppression and dogmatic conventions" outside. [Footnote: _Id_.,  
p. 151.] What for a sociologist is a normal social career? Or one  
freed from suppressions and conventions? Conservative critics do, to  
be sure, assume the first, and romantic ones the second. But in 
assuming them they are taking the whole world for granted. They are  
saying in effect either that society is the sort of thing which  
corresponds to their idea of what is normal, or the sort of thing  
which corresponds to their idea of what is free. Both ideas are merely  
public opinions, and while the psychoanalyst as physician may perhaps  
assume them, the sociologist may not take the products of existing  
public opinion as criteria by which to study public opinion.  

7  

The world that we have to deal with politically is out of reach, out  
of sight, out of mind. It has to be explored, reported, and imagined.  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

17/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
Man is no Aristotelian god contemplating all existence at one glance.  
He is the creature of an evolution who can just about span a  
sufficient portion of reality to manage his survival, and snatch what  
on the scale of time are but a few moments of insight and happiness.  
Yet this same creature has invented ways of seeing what no naked eye  
could see, of hearing what no ear could hear, of weighing immense  
masses and infinitesimal ones, of counting and separating more items  
than he can individually remember. He is learning to see with his mind  
vast portions of the world that he could never see, touch, smell,  
hear, or remember. Gradually he makes for himself a trustworthy  
picture inside his head of the world beyond his reach.  

Those features of the world outside which have to do with the behavior  
of other human beings, in so far as that behavior crosses ours, is  
dependent upon us, or is interesting to us, we call roughly public  
affairs. The pictures inside the heads of these human beings, the  
pictures of themselves, of others, of their needs, purposes, and  
relationship, are their public opinions. Those pictures which are  
acted upon by groups of people, or by individuals acting in the name  
of groups, are Public Opinion with capital letters. And so in the  
chapters which follow we shall inquire first into some of the reasons  
why the picture inside so often misleads men in their dealings with  
the world outside. Under this heading we shall consider first the  
chief factors which limit their access to the facts. They are the  
artificial censorships, the limitations of social contact, the  
comparatively meager time available in each day for paying attention  
to public affairs, the distortion arising because events have to be  
compressed into very short messages, the difficulty of making a small  
vocabulary express a complicated world, and finally the fear of facing  
those facts which would seem to threaten the established routine of  
men's lives.  

The analysis then turns from these more or less external limitations  
to the question of how this trickle of messages from the outside is  
affected by the stored up images, the preconceptions, and prejudices  
which interpret, fill them out, and in their turn powerfully direct  
the play of our attention, and our vision itself. From this it  
proceeds to examine how in the individual person the limited messages  
from outside, formed into a pattern of stereotypes, are identified  
with his own interests as he feels and conceives them. In the  
succeeding sections it examines how opinions are crystallized into  
what is called Public Opinion, how a National Will, a Group Mind, a  
Social Purpose, or whatever you choose to call it, is formed.  

The first five parts constitute the descriptive section of the book.  
There follows an analysis of the traditional democratic theory of  
public opinion. The substance of the argument is that democracy in its  
original form never seriously faced the problem which arises because  
the pictures inside people's heads do not automatically correspond  
with the world outside. And then, because the democratic theory is  
under criticism by socialist thinkers, there follows an examination of  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

18/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
the most advanced and coherent of these criticisms, as made by the  
English Guild Socialists. My purpose here is to find out whether these  
reformers take into account the main difficulties of public opinion.  
My conclusion is that they ignore the difficulties, as completely as  
did the original democrats, because they, too, assume, and in a much  
more complicated civilization, that somehow mysteriously there exists  
in the hearts of men a knowledge of the world beyond their reach.  

Main

I argue that representative government, either in what is ordinarily  
called politics, or in industry, cannot be worked successfully, no  
matter what the basis of election, unless there is an independent,  
expert organization for making the unseen facts intelligible to those  
who have to make the decisions. I attempt, therefore, to argue that  
the serious acceptance of the principle that personal representation  
must be supplemented by representation of the unseen facts would alone  
permit a satisfactory decentralization, and allow us to escape from  
the intolerable and unworkable fiction that each of us must acquire a  
competent opinion about all public affairs. It is argued that the  
problem of the press is confused because the critics and the  
apologists expect the press to realize this fiction, expect it to make  
up for all that was not foreseen in the theory of democracy, and that  
the readers expect this miracle to be performed at no cost or trouble  
to themselves. The newspapers are regarded by democrats as a panacea 
for their own defects, whereas analysis of the nature of news and of  
the economic basis of journalism seems to show that the newspapers  
necessarily and inevitably reflect, and therefore, in greater or  
lesser measure, intensify, the defective organization of public  
opinion. My conclusion is that public opinions must be organized for  
the press if they are to be sound, not by the press as is the case  
today. This organization I conceive to be in the first instance the  
task of a political science that has won its proper place as  
formulator, in advance of real decision, instead of apologist, critic,  
or reporter after the decision has been made. I try to indicate that  
the perplexities of government and industry are conspiring to give  
political science this enormous opportunity to enrich itself and to  
serve the public. And, of course, I hope that these pages will help a  
few people to realize that opportunity more vividly, and therefore to  
pursue it more consciously.  

PART II  

APPROACHES TO THE WORLD OUTSIDE  

CHAPTER 2. CENSORSHIP AND PRIVACY  
   "    3. CONTACT AND OPPORTUNITY  
   "    4. TIME AND ATTENTION  
   "    5. SPEED, WORDS, AND CLEARNESS  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

19/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

CHAPTER II  

CENSORSHIP AND PRIVACY  

1  

The picture of a general presiding over an editorial conference at the  
most terrible hour of one of the great battles of history seems more  
like a scene from The Chocolate Soldier than a page from life. Yet we  
know at first hand from the officer who edited the French communiqués  
that these conferences were a regular part of the business of war;  
that in the worst moment of Verdun, General Joffre and his cabinet met  
and argued over the nouns, adjectives, and verbs that were to be  
printed in the newspapers the next morning.  

"The evening communiqué of the twenty-third (February 1916)" says M.  
de Pierrefeu, [Footnote: _G. Q. G_., pp. 126-129.] "was edited in  
a dramatic atmosphere. M. Berthelot, of the Prime Minister's office,  
had just telephoned by order of the minister asking General Pellé to  
strengthen the report and to emphasize the proportions of the enemy's  
attack. It was necessary to prepare the public for the worst outcome  
in case the affair turned into a catastrophe. This anxiety showed  
clearly that neither at G. H. Q. nor at the Ministry of War had the  
Government found reason for confidence. As M. Berthelot spoke, General  
Pellé made notes. He handed me the paper on which he had written the  
Government's wishes, together with the order of the day issued by  
General von Deimling and found on some prisoners, in which it was  
stated that this attack was the supreme offensive to secure peace.  
Skilfully used, all this was to demonstrate that Germany was letting  
loose a gigantic effort, an effort without precedent, and that from  
its success she hoped for the end of the war. The logic of this was  
that nobody need be surprised at our withdrawal. When, a half hour  
later, I went down with my manuscript, I found gathered together in  
Colonel Claudel's office, he being away, the major-general, General  
Janin, Colonel Dupont, and Lieutenant-Colonel Renouard. Fearing that I  
would not succeed in giving the desired impression, General Pellé had  
himself prepared a proposed communiqué. I read what I had just done.  
It was found to be too moderate. General Pellé's, on the other hand,  
seemed too alarming. I had purposely omitted von Deimling's order of  
the day. To put it into the communiqué _would be to break with the  
formula to which the public was accustomed_, would be to transform  
it into a kind of pleading. It would seem to say: 'How do you suppose  
we can resist?' There was reason to fear that the public would be  
distracted by this change of tone and would believe that everything  
was lost. I explained my reasons and suggested giving Deimling's text  
to the newspapers in the form of a separate note.  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

20/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

"Opinion being divided, General Pellé went to ask General de Castelnau  
to come and decide finally. The General arrived smiling, quiet and  
good humored, said a few pleasant words about this new kind of  
literary council of war, and looked at the texts. He chose the simpler  
one, gave more weight to the first phrase, inserted the words 'as had  
been anticipated,' which supply a reassuring quality, and was flatly  
against inserting von Deimling's order, but was for transmitting it to  
the press in a special note ... " General Joffre that evening read the  
communiqué carefully and approved it.  

Within a few hours those two or three hundred words would be read all  
over the world. They would paint a picture in men's minds of what was  
happening on the slopes of Verdun, and in front of that picture people  
would take heart or despair. The shopkeeper in Brest, the peasant in  
Lorraine, the deputy in the Palais Bourbon, the editor in Amsterdam or  
Minneapolis had to be kept in hope, and yet prepared to accept  
possible defeat without yielding to panic. They are told, therefore,  
that the loss of ground is no surprise to the French Command. They are  
taught to regard the affair as serious, but not strange. Now, as a  
matter of fact, the French General Staff was not fully prepared for  
the German offensive. Supporting trenches had not been dug,  
alternative roads had not been built, barbed wire was lacking. But to  
confess that would have aroused images in the heads of civilians that  
might well have turned a reverse into a disaster. The High Command  
could be disappointed, and yet pull itself together; the people at  
home and abroad, full of uncertainties, and with none of the  
professional man's singleness of purpose, might on the basis of a  
complete story have lost sight of the war in a melee of faction and  
counter-faction about the competence of the officers. Instead,  
therefore, of letting the public act on all the facts which the  
generals knew, the authorities presented only certain facts, and these  
only in such a way as would be most likely to steady the people.  

In this case the men who arranged the pseudo-environment knew what the  
real one was. But a few days later an incident occurred about which  
the French Staff did not know the truth. The Germans announced  
[Footnote: On February 26, 1916. Pierrefeu, _G. Q. G._, pp. 133  
_et seq_.] that on the previous afternoon they had taken Fort  
Douaumont by assault. At French headquarters in Chantilly no one  
could understand this news. For on the morning of the twenty-fifth,  
after the engagement of the XXth corps, the battle had taken a turn  
for the better. Reports from the front said nothing about Douaumont.  
But inquiry showed that the German report was true, though no one as  
yet knew how the fort had been taken. In the meantime, the German  
communiqué was being flashed around the world, and the French had to  
say something. So headquarters explained. "In the midst of total  
ignorance at Chantilly about the way the attack had taken place, we  
imagined, in the evening communiqué of the 26th, a plan of the attack  
which certainly had a thousand to one chance of being true." The  
communiqué of this imaginary battle read:  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

21/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

"A bitter struggle is taking place around Fort de Douaumont which is  
an advanced post of the old defensive organization of Verdun. The  
position taken this morning by the enemy, _after several  
unsuccessful assaults that cost him very heavy losses_, has been  
reached again and passed by our troops whom the enemy has not been  
able to drive back." [Footnote: This is my own translation: the  
English translation from London published in the New York Times of  
Sunday, Feb. 27, is as follows:  

London, Feb. 26 (1916). A furious struggle has been in progress around  
Fort de Douaumont which is an advance element of the old defensive  
organization of Verdun fortresses. The position captured this morning  
by the enemy after several fruitless assaults which cost him extremely  
heavy losses, [Footnote: The French text says "pertes tres elevees."  
Thus the English translation exaggerates the original text.] was  
reached again and gone beyond by our troops, which all the attempts of  
the enemy have not been able to push back."]  

What had actually happened differed from both the French and German  
accounts. While changing troops in the line, the position had somehow  
been forgotten in a confusion of orders. Only a battery commander and  
a few men remained in the fort. Some German soldiers, seeing the door  
open, had crawled into the fort, and taken everyone inside prisoner. A  
little later the French who were on the slopes of the hill were 
horrified at being shot at from the fort. There had been no battle at  
Douaumont and no losses. Nor had the French troops advanced beyond it  
as the communiqués seemed to say. They were beyond it on either side,  
to be sure, but the fort was in enemy hands.  

Yet from the communiqué everyone believed that the fort was half  
surrounded. The words did not explicitly say so, but "the press, as  
usual, forced the pace." Military writers concluded that the Germans  
would soon have to surrender. In a few days they began to ask  
themselves why the garrison, since it lacked food, had not yet  
surrendered. "It was necessary through the press bureau to request  
them to drop the encirclement theme." [Footnote: Pierrefeu, _op.  
cit._, pp. 134-5.]  

2  

The editor of the French communiqué tells us that as the battle  
dragged out, his colleagues and he set out to neutralize the  
pertinacity of the Germans by continual insistence on their terrible  
losses. It is necessary to remember that at this time, and in fact  
until late in 1917, the orthodox view of the war for all the Allied  
peoples was that it would be decided by "attrition." Nobody believed  
in a war of movement. It was insisted that strategy did not count, or  
diplomacy. It was simply a matter of killing Germans. The general  
public more or less believed the dogma, but it had constantly to be  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

22/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
reminded of it in face of spectacular German successes.  

Main

"Almost no day passed but the communiqué.... ascribed to the Germans  
with some appearance of justice heavy losses, extremely heavy, spoke  
of bloody sacrifices, heaps of corpses, hecatombs. Likewise the  
wireless constantly used the statistics of the intelligence bureau at  
Verdun, whose chief, Major Cointet, had invented a method of  
calculating German losses which obviously produced marvelous results.  
Every fortnight the figures increased a hundred thousand or so. These  
300,000, 400,000, 500,000 casualties put out, divided into daily,  
weekly, monthly losses, repeated in all sorts of ways, produced a  
striking effect. Our formulae varied little: 'according to prisoners  
the German losses in the course of the attack have been considerable' ...  
'it is proved that the losses' ... 'the enemy exhausted by his losses  
has not renewed the attack' ... Certain formulae, later abandoned  
because they had been overworked, were used each day: 'under  
our artillery and machine gun fire' ... 'mowed down by our artillery  
and machine gun fire' ... Constant repetition impressed the neutrals  
and Germany itself, and helped to create a bloody background in spite  
of the denials from Nauen (the German wireless) which tried vainly to  
destroy the bad effect of this perpetual repetition." [Footnote: _Op.  
cit._, pp. 138-139.]  

The thesis of the French Command, which it wished to establish  
publicly by these reports, was formulated as follows for the guidance  
of the censors:  

"This offensive engages the active forces of our opponent whose  
manpower is declining. We have learned that the class of 1916 is  
already at the front. There will remain the 1917 class already being  
called up, and the resources of the third category (men above  
forty-five, or convalescents). In a few weeks, the German forces  
exhausted by this effort, will find themselves confronted with all the  
forces of the coalition (ten millions against seven millions)."  
[Footnote: _Op. cit._, p. 147.]  

According to M. de Pierrefeu, the French command had converted itself  
to this belief. "By an extraordinary aberration of mind, only the  
attrition of the enemy was seen; it appeared that our forces were not  
subject to attrition. General Nivelle shared these ideas. We saw the  
result in 1917."  

We have learned to call this propaganda. A group of men, who can  
prevent independent access to the event, arrange the news of it to  
suit their purpose. That the purpose was in this case patriotic does  
not affect the argument at all. They used their power to make the  
Allied publics see affairs as they desired them to be seen. The  
casualty figures of Major Cointet which were spread about the world  
are of the same order. They were intended to provoke a particular kind  
of inference, namely that the war of attrition was going in favor of  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

23/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
the French. But the inference is not drawn in the form of argument. It  
results almost automatically from the creation of a mental picture of  
endless Germans slaughtered on the hills about Verdun. By putting the  
dead Germans in the focus of the picture, and by omitting to mention  
the French dead, a very special view of the battle was built up. It  
was a view designed to neutralize the effects of German territorial  
advances and the impression of power which the persistence of the  
offensive was making. It was also a view that tended to make the  
public acquiesce in the demoralizing defensive strategy imposed upon  
the Allied armies. For the public, accustomed to the idea that war  
consists of great strategic movements, flank attacks, encirclements,  
and dramatic surrenders, had gradually to forget that picture in favor  
of the terrible idea that by matching lives the war would be won.  
Through its control over all news from the front, the General Staff  
substituted a view of the facts that comported with this strategy.  

The General Staff of an army in the field is so placed that within  
wide limits it can control what the public will perceive. It controls  
the selection of correspondents who go to the front, controls their  
movements at the front, reads and censors their messages from the  
front, and operates the wires. The Government behind the army by its  
command of cables and passports, mails and custom houses and blockades  
increases the control. It emphasizes it by legal power over  
publishers, over public meetings, and by its secret service. But in  
the case of an army the control is far from perfect. There is always  
the enemy's communiqué, which in these days of wireless cannot be kept  
away from neutrals. Above all there is the talk of the soldiers, which  
blows back from the front, and is spread about when they are on  
leave. [Footnote: For weeks prior to the American attack at St. Mihiel  
and in the Argonne-Meuse, everybody in France told everybody else the  
deep secret.] An army is an unwieldy thing. And that is why the naval  
and diplomatic censorship is almost always much more complete. Fewer  
people know what is going on, and their acts are more easily  
supervised.  

3  

Without some form of censorship, propaganda in the strict sense of the  
word is impossible. In order to conduct a propaganda there must be  
some barrier between the public and the event. Access to the real  
environment must be limited, before anyone can create a  
pseudo-environment that he thinks wise or desirable. For while people  
who have direct access can misconceive what they see, no one else can  
decide how they shall misconceive it, unless he can decide where they  
shall look, and at what. The military censorship is the simplest form  
of barrier, but by no means the most important, because it is known to  
exist, and is therefore in certain measure agreed to and discounted.  

At different times and for different subjects some men impose and  
other men accept a particular standard of secrecy. The frontier  
between what is concealed because publication is not, as we say,  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

24/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
"compatible with the public interest" fades gradually into what is  
concealed because it is believed to be none of the public's business.  
The notion of what constitutes a person's private affairs is elastic.  
Thus the amount of a man's fortune is considered a private affair, and  
careful provision is made in the income tax law to keep it as private  
as possible. The sale of a piece of land is not private, but the price  
may be. Salaries are generally treated as more private than wages,  
incomes as more private than inheritances. A person's credit rating is  
given only a limited circulation. The profits of big corporations are  
more public than those of small firms. Certain kinds of conversation,  
between man and wife, lawyer and client, doctor and patient, priest  
and communicant, are privileged. Directors' meetings are generally  
private. So are many political conferences. Most of what is said at a  
cabinet meeting, or by an ambassador to the Secretary of State, or at  
private interviews, or dinner tables, is private. Many people regard  
the contract between employer and employee as private. There was a  
time when the affairs of all corporations were held to be as private  
as a man's theology is to-day. There was a time before that when his  
theology was held to be as public a matter as the color of his eyes.  
But infectious diseases, on the other hand, were once as private as  
the processes of a man's digestion. The history of the notion of  
privacy would be an entertaining tale. Sometimes the notions violently  
conflict, as they did when the bolsheviks published the secret  
treaties, or when Mr. Hughes investigated the life insurance  
companies, or when somebody's scandal exudes from the pages of Town  
Topics to the front pages of Mr. Hearst's newspapers.  

Whether the reasons for privacy are good or bad, the barriers exist.  
Privacy is insisted upon at all kinds of places in the area of what is  
called public affairs. It is often very illuminating, therefore, to  
ask yourself how you got at the facts on which you base your opinion.  
Who actually saw, heard, felt, counted, named the thing, about which  
you have an opinion? Was it the man who told you, or the man who told  
him, or someone still further removed? And how much was he permitted  
to see? When he informs you that France thinks this and that, what  
part of France did he watch? How was he able to watch it? Where was he  
when he watched it? What Frenchmen was he permitted to talk to, what  
newspapers did he read, and where did they learn what they say? You  
can ask yourself these questions, but you can rarely answer them. They  
will remind you, however, of the distance which often separates your  
public opinion from the event with which it deals. And the reminder is  
itself a protection.  

CHAPTER III  

CONTACT AND OPPORTUNITY  

1  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

25/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

While censorship and privacy intercept much information at its source,  
a very much larger body of fact never reaches the whole public at all,  
or only very slowly. For there are very distinct limits upon the  
circulation of ideas.  

A rough estimate of the effort it takes to reach "everybody" can be  
had by considering the Government's propaganda during the war.  
Remembering that the war had run over two years and a half before  
America entered it, that millions upon millions of printed pages had  
been circulated and untold speeches had been delivered, let us turn to 
Mr. Creel's account of his fight "for the minds of men, for the  
conquest of their convictions" in order that "the gospel of  
Americanism might be carried to every corner of the globe."  
[Footnote: George Creel, _How We Advertised America._]  

Mr. Creel had to assemble machinery which included a Division of News  
that issued, he tells us, more than six thousand releases, had to  
enlist seventy-five thousand Four Minute Men who delivered at least  
seven hundred and fifty-five thousand, one hundred and ninety speeches  
to an aggregate of over three hundred million people. Boy scouts  
delivered annotated copies of President Wilson's addresses to the  
householders of America. Fortnightly periodicals were sent to six  
hundred thousand teachers. Two hundred thousand lantern slides were  
furnished for illustrated lectures. Fourteen hundred and thirty-eight  
different designs were turned out for posters, window cards, newspaper  
advertisements, cartoons, seals and buttons. The chambers of commerce,  
the churches, fraternal societies, schools, were used as channels of  
distribution. Yet Mr. Creel's effort, to which I have not begun to do  
justice, did not include Mr. McAdoo's stupendous organization for the  
Liberty Loans, nor Mr. Hoover's far reaching propaganda about food,  
nor the campaigns of the Red Cross, the Y. M. C. A., Salvation Army,  
Knights of Columbus, Jewish Welfare Board, not to mention the  
independent work of patriotic societies, like the League to Enforce  
Peace, the League of Free Nations Association, the National Security  
League, nor the activity of the publicity bureaus of the Allies and of  
the submerged nationalities.  

Probably this is the largest and the most intensive effort to carry  
quickly a fairly uniform set of ideas to all the people of a nation.  
The older proselyting worked more slowly, perhaps more surely, but  
never so inclusively. Now if it required such extreme measures to  
reach everybody in time of crisis, how open are the more normal  
channels to men's minds? The Administration was trying, and while the  
war continued it very largely succeeded, I believe, in creating  
something that might almost be called one public opinion all over  
America. But think of the dogged work, the complicated ingenuity, the  
money and the personnel that were required. Nothing like that exists  
in time of peace, and as a corollary there are whole sections, there  
are vast groups, ghettoes, enclaves and classes that hear only vaguely  
about much that is going on.  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

26/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

They live in grooves, are shut in among their own affairs, barred out  
of larger affairs, meet few people not of their own sort, read little.  
Travel and trade, the mails, the wires, and radio, railroads,  
highways, ships, motor cars, and in the coming generation aeroplanes,  
are, of course, of the utmost influence on the circulation of ideas.  
Each of these affects the supply and the quality of information and  
opinion in a most intricate way. Each is itself affected by technical,  
by economic, by political conditions. Every time a government relaxes  
the passport ceremonies or the customs inspection, every time a new  
railway or a new port is opened, a new shipping line established,  
every time rates go up or down, the mails move faster or more slowly,  
the cables are uncensored and made less expensive, highways built, or  
widened, or improved, the circulation of ideas is influenced. Tariff  
schedules and subsidies affect the direction of commercial enterprise,  
and therefore the nature of human contracts. And so it may well  
happen, as it did for example in the case of Salem, Massachusetts,  
that a change in the art of shipbuilding will reduce a whole city from  
a center where international influences converge to a genteel  
provincial town. All the immediate effects of more rapid transit are  
not necessarily good. It would be difficult to say, for example, that  
the railroad system of France, so highly centralized upon Paris, has  
been an unmixed blessing to the French people.  

It is certainly true that problems arising out of the means of  
communication are of the utmost importance, and one of the most 
constructive features of the program of the League of Nations has been  
the study given to railroad transit and access to the sea. The  
monopolizing of cables, [Footnote: Hence the wisdom of taking Yap  
seriously.] of ports, fuel stations, mountain passes, canals, straits,  
river courses, terminals, market places means a good deal more than  
the enrichment of a group of business men, or the prestige of a  
government. It means a barrier upon the exchange of news and opinion.  
But monopoly is not the only barrier. Cost and available supply are  
even greater ones, for if the cost of travelling or trading is  
prohibitive, if the demand for facilities exceeds the supply, the  
barriers exist even without monopoly.  

2  

The size of a man's income has considerable effect on his access to  
the world beyond his neighborhood. With money he can overcome almost  
every tangible obstacle of communication, he can travel, buy books and  
periodicals, and bring within the range of his attention almost any  
known fact of the world. The income of the individual, and the income  
of the community determine the amount of communication that is  
possible. But men's ideas determine how that income shall be spent,  
and that in turn affects in the long run the amount of income they  
will have. Thus also there are limitations, none the less real,  
because they are often self-imposed and self-indulgent. 

https://standardgalactic.github.io

27/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
There are portions of the sovereign people who spend most of their  
spare time and spare money on motoring and comparing motor cars, on  
bridge-whist and post-mortems, on moving-pictures and potboilers,  
talking always to the same people with minute variations on the same  
old themes. They cannot really be said to suffer from censorship, or  
secrecy, the high cost or the difficulty of communication. They suffer  
from anemia, from lack of appetite and curiosity for the human scene.  
Theirs is no problem of access to the world outside. Worlds of  
interest are waiting for them to explore, and they do not enter.  

They move, as if on a leash, within a fixed radius of acquaintances  
according to the law and the gospel of their social set. Among men the  
circle of talk in business and at the club and in the smoking car is  
wider than the set to which they belong. Among women the social set  
and the circle of talk are frequently almost identical. It is in the  
social set that ideas derived from reading and lectures and from the  
circle of talk converge, are sorted out, accepted, rejected, judged  
and sanctioned. There it is finally decided in each phase of a  
discussion which authorities and which sources of information are  
admissible, and which not.  

Our social set consists of those who figure as people in the phrase  
"people are saying"; they are the people whose approval matters most  
intimately to us. In big cities among men and women of wide interests  
and with the means for moving about, the social set is not so rigidly  
defined. But even in big cities, there are quarters and nests of  
villages containing self-sufficing social sets. In smaller communities  
there may exist a freer circulation, a more genuine fellowship from  
after breakfast to before dinner. But few people do not know,  
nevertheless, which set they really belong to, and which not.  

Usually the distinguishing mark of a social set is the presumption  
that the children may intermarry. To marry outside the set involves,  
at the very least, a moment of doubt before the engagement can be  
approved. Each social set has a fairly clear picture of its relative  
position in the hierarchy of social sets. Between sets at the same  
level, association is easy, individuals are quickly accepted,  
hospitality is normal and unembarrassed. But in contact between sets  
that are "higher" or "lower," there is always reciprocal hesitation, a  
faint malaise, and a consciousness of difference. To be sure in a  
society like that of the United States, individuals move somewhat  
freely out of one set into another, especially where there is no  
racial barrier and where economic position changes so rapidly.  

Economic position, however, is not measured by the amount of income.  
For in the first generation, at least, it is not income that  
determines social standing, but the character of a man's work, and it  
may take a generation or two before this fades out of the family  
tradition. Thus banking, law, medicine, public utilities, newspapers,  
the church, large retailing, brokerage, manufacture, are rated at a  
different social value from salesmanship, superintendence, expert  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

28/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
technical work, nursing, school teaching, shop keeping; and those, in  
turn, are rated as differently from plumbing, being a chauffeur,  
dressmaking, subcontracting, or stenography, as these are from being a  
butler, lady's maid, a moving picture operator, or a locomotive  
engineer. And yet the financial return does not necessarily coincide  
with these gradations.  

Main

3  

Whatever the tests of admission, the social set when formed is not a  
mere economic class, but something which more nearly resembles a  
biological clan. Membership is intimately connected with love,  
marriage and children, or, to speak more exactly, with the attitudes  
and desires that are involved. In the social set, therefore, opinions  
encounter the canons of Family Tradition, Respectability, Propriety,  
Dignity, Taste and Form, which make up the social set's picture of 
itself, a picture assiduously implanted in the children. In this  
picture a large space is tacitly given to an authorized version of  
what each set is called upon inwardly to accept as the social standing  
of the others. The more vulgar press for an outward expression of the  
deference due, the others are decently and sensitively silent about  
their own knowledge that such deference invisibly exists. But that  
knowledge, becoming overt when there is a marriage, a war, or a social  
upheaval, is the nexus of a large bundle of dispositions classified by  
Trotter [Footnote: W. Trotter, Instincts of the Herd in War and Peace.]  
under the general term instinct of the herd.  

Within each social set there are augurs like the van der Luydens and  
Mrs. Manson Mingott in "The Age of Innocence," [Footnote: Edith  
Wharton, _The Age of Innocence._] who are recognized as the  
custodians and the interpreters of its social pattern. You are made,  
they say, if the van der Luydens take you up. The invitations to their  
functions are the high sign of arrival and status. The elections to  
college societies, carefully graded and the gradations universally  
accepted, determine who is who in college. The social leaders,  
weighted with the ultimate eugenic responsibility, are peculiarly  
sensitive. Not only must they be watchfully aware of what makes for  
the integrity of their set, but they have to cultivate a special gift  
for knowing what other social sets are doing. They act as a kind of  
ministry of foreign affairs. Where most of the members of a set live  
complacently within the set, regarding it for all practical purposes  
as the world, the social leaders must combine an intimate knowledge of  
the anatomy of their own set with a persistent sense of its place in  
the hierarchy of sets.  

The hierarchy, in fact, is bound together by the social leaders. At  
any one level there is something which might almost be called a social  
set of the social leaders. But vertically the actual binding together  
of society, in so far as it is bound together at all by social  
contact, is accomplished by those exceptional people, frequently  
suspect, who like Julius Beaufort and Ellen Olenska in "The Age of  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

29/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
Innocence" move in and out. Thus there come to be established personal  
channels from one set to another, through which Tarde's laws of  
imitation operate. But for large sections of the population there are  
no such channels. For them the patented accounts of society and the  
moving pictures of high life have to serve. They may develop a social  
hierarchy of their own, almost unnoticed, as have the Negroes and the  
"foreign element," but among that assimilated mass which always  
considers itself the "nation," there is in spite of the great  
separateness of sets, a variety of personal contacts through which a  
circulation of standards takes place.  

Some of the sets are so placed that they become what Professor Ross  
has called "radiant points of conventionality." [Footnote: Ross,  
_Social Psychology_, Ch. IX, X, XI.] Thus the social superior is  
likely to be imitated by the social inferior, the holder of power is  
imitated by subordinates, the more successful by the less successful,  
the rich by the poor, the city by the country. But imitation does not  
stop at frontiers. The powerful, socially superior, successful, rich,  
urban social set is fundamentally international throughout the western  
hemisphere, and in many ways London is its center. It counts among its  
membership the most influential people in the world, containing as it  
does the diplomatic set, high finance, the upper circles of the army  
and the navy, some princes of the church, a few great newspaper  
proprietors, their wives and mothers and daughters who wield the  
scepter of invitation. It is at once a great circle of talk and a real  
social set. But its importance comes from the fact that here at last  
the distinction between public and private affairs practically  
disappears. The private affairs of this set are public matters, and  
public matters are its private, often its family affairs. The  
confinements of Margot Asquith like the confinements of royalty are,  
as the philosophers say, in much the same universe of discourse as a  
tariff bill or a parliamentary debate.  

There are large areas of governments in which this social set is not  
interested, and in America, at least, it has exercised only a  
fluctuating control over the national government. But its power in  
foreign affairs is always very great, and in war time its prestige is  
enormously enhanced. That is natural enough because these  
cosmopolitans have a contact with the outer world that most people do  
not possess. They have dined with each other in the capitals, and  
their sense of national honor is no mere abstraction; it is a concrete  
experience of being snubbed or approved by their friends. To Dr.  
Kennicott of Gopher Prairie it matters mighty little what Winston  
thinks and a great deal what Ezra Stowbody thinks, but to Mrs. Mingott  
with a daughter married to the Earl of Swithin it matters a lot when  
she visits her daughter, or entertains Winston himself. Dr. Kennicott  
and Mrs. Mingott are both socially sensitive, but Mrs. Mingott is  
sensitive to a social set that governs the world, while Dr.  
Kennicott's social set governs only in Gopher Prairie. But in matters  
that effect the larger relationships of the Great Society, Dr.  
Kennicott will often be found holding what he thinks is purely his own  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

30/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
opinion, though, as a matter of fact, it has trickled down to Gopher  
Prairie from High Society, transmuted on its passage through the  
provincial social sets.  

Main

4  

It is no part of our inquiry to attempt an account of the social  
tissue. We need only fix in mind how big is the part played by the  
social set in our spiritual contact with the world, how it tends to  
fix what is admissible, and to determine how it shall be judged.  
Affairs within its immediate competence each set more or less  
determines for itself. Above all it determines the detailed  
administration of the judgment. But the judgment itself is formed on  
patterns [Footnote: _Cf_. Part III] that may be inherited from  
the past, transmitted or imitated from other social sets. The highest  
social set consists of those who embody the leadership of the Great  
Society. As against almost every other social set where the bulk of  
the opinions are first hand only about local affairs, in this Highest  
Society the big decisions of war and peace, of social strategy and the  
ultimate distribution of political power, are intimate experiences  
within a circle of what, potentially at least, are personal  
acquaintances.  

Since position and contact play so big a part in determining what can  
be seen, heard, read, and experienced, as well as what it is  
permissible to see, hear, read, and know, it is no wonder that moral  
judgment is so much more common than constructive thought. Yet in  
truly effective thinking the prime necessity is to liquidate  
judgments, regain an innocent eye, disentangle feelings, be curious  
and open-hearted. Man's history being what it is, political opinion on  
the scale of the Great Society requires an amount of selfless  
equanimity rarely attainable by any one for any length of time. We are  
concerned in public affairs, but immersed in our private ones. The  
time and attention are limited that we can spare for the labor of not  
taking opinions for granted, and we are subject to constant  
interruption.  

CHAPTER IV  

TIME AND ATTENTION  

NATURALLY it is possible to make a rough estimate only of the amount  
of attention people give each day to informing themselves about public  
affairs. Yet it is interesting that three estimates that I have  
examined agree tolerably well, though they were made at different  
times, in different places, and by different methods. [Footnote: July,  
1900. D. F. Wilcox, _The American Newspaper: A Study in Social  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

31/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

Psychology_, Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social  
Science, vol. xvi, p. 56. (The statistical tables are reproduced in  
James Edward Rogers, _The American Newspaper_.)  

1916 (?) W. D. Scott, _The Psychology of Advertising_, pp.  
226-248. See also Henry Foster Adams, _Advertising and its Mental  
Laws_, Ch. IV.  

1920 _Newspaper Reading Habits of College Students_, by Prof.  
George Burton Hotchkiss and Richard B. Franken, published by the  
Association of National Advertisers, Inc., 15 East 26th Street, New  
York City.]  

A questionnaire was sent by Hotchkiss and Franken to 1761 men and  
women college students in New York City, and answers came from all but  
a few. Scott used a questionnaire on four thousand prominent business  
and professional men in Chicago and received replies from twenty-three  
hundred. Between seventy and seventy-five percent of all those who  
replied to either inquiry thought they spent a quarter of an hour a  
day reading newspapers. Only four percent of the Chicago group guessed  
at less than this and twenty-five percent guessed at more. Among the  
New Yorkers a little over eight percent figured their newspaper  
reading at less than fifteen minutes, and seventeen and a half at  
more.  

Very few people have an accurate idea of fifteen minutes, so the  
figures are not to be taken literally. Moreover, business men,  
professional people, and college students are most of them liable to a  
curious little bias against appearing to spend too much time over the  
newspapers, and perhaps also to a faint suspicion of a desire to be  
known as rapid readers. All that the figures can justly be taken to  
mean is that over three quarters of those in the selected groups rate  
rather low the attention they give to printed news of the outer world.  

These time estimates are fairly well confirmed by a test which is less 
subjective. Scott asked his Chicagoans how many papers they read each  
day, and was told that  

  14 percent read but one paper  
  46    "      "  two papers  
  21    "      "  three papers  
  10    "      "  four papers  
   3    "      "  five papers  
   2    "      "  six papers  
   3    "      "  all the papers (eight  
          at the time of this inquiry).  

The two- and three-paper readers are sixty-seven percent, which comes  
fairly close to the seventy-one percent in Scott's group who rate 
themselves at fifteen minutes a day. The omnivorous readers of from  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

32/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
four to eight papers coincide roughly with the twenty-five percent who  
rated themselves at more than fifteen minutes.  

Main

2  

It is still more difficult to guess how the time is distributed. The  
college students were asked to name "the five features which interest  
you most." Just under twenty percent voted for "general news," just  
under fifteen for editorials, just under twelve for "politics," a  
little over eight for finance, not two years after the armistice a  
little over six for foreign news, three and a half for local, nearly  
three for business, and a quarter of one percent for news about  
"labor." A scattering said they were most interested in sports,  
special articles, the theatre, advertisements, cartoons, book reviews,  
"accuracy," music, "ethical tone," society, brevity, art, stories,  
shipping, school news, "current news," print. Disregarding these,  
about sixty-seven and a half percent picked as the most interesting  
features news and opinion that dealt with public affairs.  

This was a mixed college group. The girls professed greater interest  
than the boys in general news, foreign news, local news, politics,  
editorials, the theatre, music, art, stories, cartoons,  
advertisements, and "ethical tone." The boys on the other hand were  
more absorbed in finance, sports, business page, "accuracy" and  
"brevity." These discriminations correspond a little too closely with  
the ideals of what is cultured and moral, manly and decisive, not to  
make one suspect the utter objectivity of the replies.  

Yet they agree fairly well with the replies of Scott's Chicago  
business and professional men. They were asked, not what features  
interested them most, but why they preferred one newspaper to another.  
Nearly seventy-one percent based their conscious preference on local  
news (17.8%), or political (15.8%) or financial (11.3%), or foreign  
(9.5%), or general (7.2%), or editorials (9%). The other thirty  
percent decided on grounds not connected with public affairs. They  
ranged from not quite seven who decided for ethical tone, down to one  
twentieth of one percent who cared most about humor.  

How do these preferences correspond with the space given by newspapers  
to various subjects? Unfortunately there are no data collected on this  
point for the newspapers read by the Chicago and New York groups at  
the time the questionnaires were made. But there is an interesting  
analysis made over twenty years ago by Wilcox. He studied one hundred  
and ten newspapers in fourteen large cities, and classified the  
subject matter of over nine thousand columns.  

Averaged for the whole country the various newspaper matter was found  
to fill:  

                        { (a) War News       17.9  
                        {                          { Foreign   1.2  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

33/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
                        { (b) General "      21.8  { Politics  6.4  
I. News            55.3 {                          { Crime     3.1  
                        {                          { Misc.    11.1  
                        {  
                        {                          { Business  8.2  
                        { (c) Special "       15.6  { Sport     5.1  
                                                   { Society   2.3  

Main

II. Illustrations   3.1  

III. Literature     2.4  
                        { (a) Editorials          3.9  
IV. Opinion         7.1 { (b) Letters & Exchange  3.2  

V. Advertisements  32.1  

In order to bring this table into a fair comparison, it is necessary  
to exclude the space given to advertisements, and recompute the  
percentages. For the advertisements occupied only an infinitesimal  
part of the conscious preference of the Chicago group or the college  
group. I think this is justifiable for our purposes because the press  
prints what advertisements it can get, [Footnote: Except those which it  
regards as objectionable, and those which, in rare instances, are  
crowded out.] whereas the rest of the paper is designed to the taste  
of its readers. The table would then read:  

                         {War News      26.4-  
                         {                    {Foreign   1.8-  
  I. News           81.4+{General News  32.0+ {Political 9.4+  
                         {                    {Crime     4.6-  
                         {                    {Misc.    16.3+  
                         {  
                         {                    {Business 12.1-  
                         {Special  "    23.0- {Sporting  7.5+  
                                              {Society   3.3-  
 II. Illustrations   4.6-  
III. Literature      3.5+  
 IV. Opinion        10.5- {Editorials       5.8-  
                          {Letters          4.7+  

In this revised table if you add up the items which may be supposed to  
deal with public affairs, that is to say war, foreign, political,  
miscellaneous, business news, and opinion, you find a total of 76.5%  
of the edited space devoted in 1900 to the 70.6% of reasons given by  
Chicago business men in 1916 for preferring a particular newspaper,  
and to the five features which most interested 67.5% of the New York  
College students in 1920.  

This would seem to show that the tastes of business men and college  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

34/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
students in big cities to-day still correspond more or less to the  
averaged judgments of newspaper editors in big cities twenty years  
ago. Since that time the proportion of features to news has  
undoubtedly increased, and so has the circulation and the size of  
newspapers. Therefore, if to-day you could secure accurate replies  
from more typical groups than college students or business and  
professional men, you would expect to find a smaller percentage of  
time devoted to public affairs, as well as a smaller percentage of  
space. On the other hand you would expect to find that the average man  
spends more than the quarter of an hour on his newspaper, and that  
while the percentage of space given to public affairs is less than  
twenty years ago the net amount is greater.  

No elaborate deductions are to be drawn from these figures. They help  
merely to make somewhat more concrete our notions of the effort that  
goes day by day into acquiring the data of our opinions. The  
newspapers are, of course, not the only means, but they are certainly  
the principal ones. Magazines, the public forum, the chautauqua, the  
church, political gatherings, trade union meetings, women's clubs, and  
news serials in the moving picture houses supplement the press. But  
taking it all at the most favorable estimate, the time each day is  
small when any of us is directly exposed to information from our  
unseen environment.  

CHAPTER V  

SPEED, WORDS, AND CLEARNESS  

1  

The unseen environment is reported to us chiefly by words. These words  
are transmitted by wire or radio from the reporters to the editors who  
fit them into print. Telegraphy is expensive, and the facilities are  
often limited. Press service news is, therefore, usually coded. Thus a  
dispatch which reads,--  

"Washington, D. C. June I.--The United States regards the question of  
German shipping seized in this country at the outbreak of hostilities  
as a closed incident,"  

may pass over the wires in the following form:  

"Washn i. The Uni Stas rgds tq of Ger spg seized in ts cou at t outbk  
o hox as a clod incident." [Footnote: Phillip's Code.]  

A news item saying:  

"Berlin, June 1, Chancellor Wirth told the Reichstag to-day in  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

35/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
outlining the Government's program that 'restoration and  
reconciliation would be the keynote of the new Government's policy.'  
He added that the Cabinet was determined disarmament should be carried  
out loyally and that disarmament would not be the occasion of the  
imposition of further penalties by the Allies."  

Main

may be cabled in this form:  

"Berlin 1. Chancellor Wirth told t Reichstag tdy in outlining the gvts  
pgn tt qn restoration & reconciliation wd b the keynote f new gvts  
policy. qj He added ttt cabinet ws dtmd disarmament sd b carried out  
loyally & tt disarmament wd n b. the ocan f imposition of further  
penalties bi t alis."  

In this second item the substance has been culled from a long speech  
in a foreign tongue, translated, coded, and then decoded. The  
operators who receive the messages transcribe them as they go along,  
and I am told that a good operator can write fifteen thousand or even  
more words per eight hour day, with a half an hour out for lunch and  
two ten minute periods for rest.  

2  

A few words must often stand for a whole succession of acts, thoughts,  
feelings and consequences. We read:  

"Washington, Dec. 23--A statement charging Japanese military  
authorities with deeds more 'frightful and barbarous' than anything  
ever alleged to have occurred in Belgium during the war was issued  
here to-day by the Korean Commission, based, the Commission said, on  
authentic reports received by it from Manchuria."  

Here eyewitnesses, their accuracy unknown, report to the makers of  
'authentic reports'; they in turn transmit these to a commission five  
thousand miles away. It prepares a statement, probably much too long  
for publication, from which a correspondent culls an item of print  
three and a half inches long. The meaning has to be telescoped in such  
a way as to permit the reader to judge how much weight to give to the  
news.  

It is doubtful whether a supreme master of style could pack all the  
elements of truth that complete justice would demand into a hundred  
word account of what had happened in Korea during the course of  
several months. For language is by no means a perfect vehicle of  
meanings. Words, like currency, are turned over and over again, to  
evoke one set of images to-day, another to-morrow. There is no  
certainty whatever that the same word will call out exactly the same  
idea in the reader's mind as it did in the reporter's. Theoretically,  
if each fact and each relation had a name that was unique, and if  
everyone had agreed on the names, it would be possible to communicate  
without misunderstanding. In the exact sciences there is an approach  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

36/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
to this ideal, and that is part of the reason why of all forms of  
world-wide cooperation, scientific inquiry is the most effective.  

Main

Men command fewer words than they have ideas to express, and language,  
as Jean Paul said, is a dictionary of faded metaphors. [Footnote:  
Cited by White, _Mechanisms of Character Formation._] The  
journalist addressing half a million readers of whom he has only a dim  
picture, the speaker whose words are flashed to remote villages and  
overseas, cannot hope that a few phrases will carry the whole burden  
of their meaning. "The words of Lloyd George, badly understood and  
badly transmitted," said M. Briand to the Chamber of Deputies,  
[Footnote: Special Cable to _The New York Times,_ May 25, 1921,  
by Edwin L, James. ] "seemed to give the Pan-Germanists the idea that  
the time had come to start something." A British Prime Minister,  
speaking in English to the whole attentive world, speaks his own  
meaning in his own words to all kinds of people who will see their  
meaning in those words. No matter how rich or subtle--or rather the  
more rich and the more subtle that which he has to say, the more his  
meaning will suffer as it is sluiced into standard speech and then  
distributed again among alien minds. [Footnote: In May of 1921,  
relations between England and France were strained by the insurrection  
of M. Korfanty in Upper Silesia. The London Correspondence of the  
_Manchester Guardian_ (May 20, 1921), contained the following  
item:  

"The Franco-English Exchange in Words.  

"In quarters well acquainted with French ways and character I find a  
tendency to think that undue sensibility has been shown by our press  
and public opinion in the lively and at times intemperate language of  
the French press through the present crisis. The point was put to me  
by a well-informed neutral observer in the following manner.  

"Words, like money, are tokens of value. They represent meaning,  
therefore, and just as money, their representative value goes up and  
down. The French word 'etonnant' was used by Bossuet with a terrible  
weight of meaning which it has lost to-day. A similar thing can be  
observed with the English word 'awful.' Some nations constitutionally  
tend to understate, others to overstate. What the British Tommy called  
an unhealthy place could only be described by an Italian soldier by  
means of a rich vocabulary aided with an exuberant mimicry. Nations  
that understate keep their word-currency sound. Nations that overstate  
suffer from inflation in their language.  

"Expressions such as 'a distinguished scholar,' 'a clever writer,'  
must be translated into French as 'a great savant,' 'an exquisite  
master.' It is a mere matter of exchange, just as in France one pound  
pays 46 francs, and yet one knows that that does not increase its  
value at home. Englishmen reading the French press should endeavour to  
work out a mental operation similar to that of the banker who puts  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

37/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
back francs into pounds, and not forget in so doing that while in  
normal times the change was 25 it is now 46 on account of the war. For  
there is a war fluctuation on word exchanges as well as on money  
exchanges.  

Main

"The argument, one hopes, works both ways, and Frenchmen do not fail  
to realize that there is as much value behind English reticence as  
behind their own exuberance of expression."]  

Millions of those who are watching him can read hardly at all.  
Millions more can read the words but cannot understand them. Of those  
who can both read and understand, a good three-quarters we may assume  
have some part of half an hour a day to spare for the subject. To them  
the words so acquired are the cue for a whole train of ideas on which  
ultimately a vote of untold consequences may be based. Necessarily the  
ideas which we allow the words we read to evoke form the biggest part  
of the original data of our opinions. The world is vast, the  
situations that concern us are intricate, the messages are few, the  
biggest part of opinion must be constructed in the imagination.  

When we use the word "Mexico" what picture does it evoke in a resident  
of New York? Likely as not, it is some composite of sand, cactus, oil  
wells, greasers, rum-drinking Indians, testy old cavaliers flourishing 
whiskers and sovereignty, or perhaps an idyllic peasantry à la Jean  
Jacques, assailed by the prospect of smoky industrialism, and fighting  
for the Rights of Man. What does the word "Japan" evoke? Is it a vague  
horde of slant-eyed yellow men, surrounded by Yellow Perils, picture  
brides, fans, Samurai, banzais, art, and cherry blossoms? Or the word  
"alien"? According to a group of New England college students, writing 
in the year 1920, an alien was the following: [Footnote: _The New  
Republic_: December 29, 1920, p. 142. ]  

"A person hostile to this country."  
"A person against the government."  
"A person who is on the opposite side."  
"A native of an unfriendly country."  
"A foreigner at war."  
"A foreigner who tries to do harm to the country he is in."  
"An enemy from a foreign land."  
"A person against a country." etc....  

Yet the word alien is an unusually exact legal term, far more exact  
than words like sovereignty, independence, national honor, rights,  
defense, aggression, imperialism, capitalism, socialism, about which  
we so readily take sides "for" or "against."  

3  

The power to dissociate superficial analogies, attend to differences  
and appreciate variety is lucidity of mind. It is a relative faculty.  
Yet the differences in lucidity are extensive, say as between a newly  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

38/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
born infant and a botanist examining a flower. To the infant there is  
precious little difference between his own toes, his father's watch,  
the lamp on the table, the moon in the sky, and a nice bright yellow  
edition of Guy de Maupassant. To many a member of the Union League  
Club there is no remarkable difference between a Democrat, a  
Socialist, an anarchist, and a burglar, while to a highly  
sophisticated anarchist there is a whole universe of difference  
between Bakunin, Tolstoi, and Kropotkin. These examples show how  
difficult it might be to secure a sound public opinion about de  
Maupassant among babies, or about Democrats in the Union League Club.  

A man who merely rides in other people's automobiles may not rise to  
finer discrimination than between a Ford, a taxicab, and an  
automobile. But let that same man own a car and drive it, let him, as  
the psychoanalysts would say, project his libido upon automobiles, and  
he will describe a difference in carburetors by looking at the rear  
end of a car a city block away. That is why it is often such a relief  
when the talk turns from "general topics" to a man's own hobby. It is  
like turning from the landscape in the parlor to the ploughed field  
outdoors. It is a return to the three dimensional world, after a  
sojourn in the painter's portrayal of his own emotional response to  
his own inattentive memory of what he imagines he ought to have seen.  

We easily identify, says Ferenczi, two only partially similar things:  
[Footnote: Internat. Zeitschr, f. Arztl. Psychoanalyse, 1913.  
Translated and republished by Dr. Ernest Jones in S. Ferenczi,  
_Contributions to Psychoanalysis_, Ch. VIII, _Stages in the  
Development of the Sense of Reality_.] the child more easily than  
the adult, the primitive or arrested mind more readily than the  
mature. As it first appears in the child, consciousness seems to be an  
unmanageable mixture of sensations. The child has no sense of time,  
and almost none of space, it reaches for the chandelier with the same  
confidence that it reaches for its mother's breast, and at first with  
almost the same expectation. Only very gradually does function define  
itself. To complete inexperience this is a coherent and  
undifferentiated world, in which, as someone has said of a school of  
philosophers, all facts are born free and equal. Those facts which  
belong together in the world have not yet been separated from those  
which happen to lie side by side in the stream of consciousness.  

At first, says Ferenczi, the baby gets some of the things it wants by  
crying for them. This is "the period of magical hallucinatory  
omnipotence." In its second phase the child points to the things it  
wants, and they are given to it. "Omnipotence by the help of magic  
gestures." Later, the child learns to talk, asks for what it wishes,  
and is partially successful. "The period of magic thoughts and magic  
words." Each phase may persist for certain situations, though overlaid  
and only visible at times, as for example, in the little harmless  
superstitions from which few of us are wholly free. In each phase,  
partial success tends to confirm that way of acting, while failure  
tends to stimulate the development of another. Many individuals,  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

39/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
parties, and even nations, rarely appear to transcend the magical  
organization of experience. But in the more advanced sections of the  
most advanced peoples, trial and error after repeated failure has led  
to the invention of a new principle. The moon, they learn, is not  
moved by baying at it. Crops are not raised from the soil by spring  
festivals or Republican majorities, but by sunlight, moisture, seeds,  
fertilizer, and cultivation. [Footnote: Ferenczi, being a pathologist,  
does not describe this maturer period where experience is organized as  
equations, the phase of realism on the basis of science.]  

Allowing for the purely schematic value of Ferenczi's categories of  
response, the quality which we note as critical is the power to  
discriminate among crude perceptions and vague analogies. This power  
has been studied under laboratory conditions. [Footnote: See, for  
example, Diagnostische Assoziation Studien, conducted at the  
Psychiatric University Clinic in Zurich under the direction of Dr. C.  
G. Jung. These tests were carried on principally under the so-called  
Krapelin-Aschaffenburg classification. They show reaction time,  
classify response to the stimulant word as inner, outer, and clang,  
show separate results for the first and second hundred words, for  
reaction time and reaction quality when the subject is distracted by  
holding an idea in mind, or when he replies while beating time with a  
metronome. Some of the results are summarized in Jung, _Analytical  
Psychology_, Ch. II, transl. by Dr. Constance E. Long.] The Zurich  
Association Studies indicate clearly that slight mental fatigue, an  
inner disturbance of attention or an external distraction, tend to  
"flatten" the quality of the response. An example of the very "flat"  
type is the clang association (cat-hat), a reaction to the sound and  
not to the sense of the stimulant word. One test, for example, shows a  
9% increase of clang in the second series of a hundred reactions. Now  
the clang is almost a repetition, a very primitive form of analogy.  

4  

If the comparatively simple conditions of a laboratory can so readily  
flatten out discrimination, what must be the effect of city life? In  
the laboratory the fatigue is slight enough, the distraction rather  
trivial. Both are balanced in measure by the subject's interest and  
self-consciousness. Yet if the beat of a metronome will depress  
intelligence, what do eight or twelve hours of noise, odor, and heat  
in a factory, or day upon day among chattering typewriters and  
telephone bells and slamming doors, do to the political judgments  
formed on the basis of newspapers read in street-cars and subways? Can  
anything be heard in the hubbub that does not shriek, or be seen in  
the general glare that does not flash like an electric sign? The life  
of the city dweller lacks solitude, silence, ease. The nights are  
noisy and ablaze. The people of a big city are assaulted by incessant  
sound, now violent and jagged, now falling into unfinished rhythms,  
but endless and remorseless. Under modern industrialism thought goes  
on in a bath of noise. If its discriminations are often flat and  
foolish, here at least is some small part of the reason. The sovereign  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

40/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
people determines life and death and happiness under conditions where  
experience and experiment alike show thought to be most difficult.  
"The intolerable burden of thought" is a burden when the conditions  
make it burdensome. It is no burden when the conditions are favorable.  
It is as exhilarating to think as it is to dance, and just as natural.  

Main

Every man whose business it is to think knows that he must for part of  
the day create about himself a pool of silence. But in that  
helter-skelter which we flatter by the name of civilization, the  
citizen performs the perilous business of government under the worst  
possible conditions. A faint recognition of this truth inspires the  
movement for a shorter work day, for longer vacations, for light, air,  
order, sunlight and dignity in factories and offices. But if the  
intellectual quality of our life is to be improved that is only the  
merest beginning. So long as so many jobs are an endless and, for the  
worker, an aimless routine, a kind of automatism using one set of  
muscles in one monotonous pattern, his whole life will tend towards an  
automatism in which nothing is particularly to be distinguished from  
anything else unless it is announced with a thunderclap. So long as he  
is physically imprisoned in crowds by day and even by night his  
attention will flicker and relax. It will not hold fast and define  
clearly where he is the victim of all sorts of pother, in a home which  
needs to be ventilated of its welter of drudgery, shrieking children,  
raucous assertions, indigestible food, bad air, and suffocating  
ornament.  

Occasionally perhaps we enter a building which is composed and  
spacious; we go to a theatre where modern stagecraft has cut away  
distraction, or go to sea, or into a quiet place, and we remember how  
cluttered, how capricious, how superfluous and clamorous is the  
ordinary urban life of our time. We learn to understand why our addled  
minds seize so little with precision, why they are caught up and  
tossed about in a kind of tarantella by headlines and catch-words, why  
so often they cannot tell things apart or discern identity in apparent  
differences.  

5  

But this external disorder is complicated further by internal.  
Experiment shows that the speed, the accuracy, and the intellectual  
quality of association is deranged by what we are taught to call  
emotional conflicts. Measured in fifths of a second, a series of a  
hundred stimuli containing both neutral and hot words may show a  
variation as between 5 and 32 or even a total failure to respond at  
all. [Footnote: Jung, _Clark Lectures_.] Obviously our public  
opinion is in intermittent contact with complexes of all sorts; with  
ambition and economic interest, personal animosity, racial prejudice,  
class feeling and what not. They distort our reading, our thinking,  
our talking and our behavior in a great variety of ways.  

And finally since opinions do not stop at the normal members of  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

41/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
society, since for the purposes of an election, a propaganda, a  
following, numbers constitute power, the quality of attention is still  
further depressed. The mass of absolutely illiterate, of  
feeble-minded, grossly neurotic, undernourished and frustrated  
individuals, is very considerable, much more considerable there is  
reason to think than we generally suppose. Thus a wide popular appeal  
is circulated among persons who are mentally children or barbarians,  
people whose lives are a morass of entanglements, people whose  
vitality is exhausted, shut-in people, and people whose experience has  
comprehended no factor in the problem under discussion. The stream of  
public opinion is stopped by them in little eddies of misunderstanding,  
where it is discolored with prejudice and far fetched analogy.  

A "broad appeal" takes account of the quality of association, and is  
made to those susceptibilities which are widely distributed. A  
"narrow" or a "special" appeal is one made to those susceptibilities  
which are uncommon. But the same individual may respond with very  
different quality to different stimuli, or to the same stimuli at  
different times. Human susceptibilities are like an alpine country.  
There are isolated peaks, there are extensive but separated plateaus, 
and there are deeper strata which are quite continuous for nearly all  
mankind. Thus the individuals whose susceptibilities reach the  
rarefied atmosphere of those peaks where there exists an exquisitive  
difference between Frege and Peano, or between Sassetta's earlier and  
later periods, may be good stanch Republicans at another level of  
appeal, and when they are starving and afraid, indistinguishable from  
any other starving and frightened person. No wonder that the magazines  
with the large circulations prefer the face of a pretty girl to any  
other trade mark, a face, pretty enough to be alluring, but innocent  
enough to be acceptable. For the "psychic level" on which the stimulus  
acts determines whether the public is to be potentially a large or a  
small one.  

6  

Thus the environment with which our public opinions deal is refracted  
in many ways, by censorship and privacy at the source, by physical and  
social barriers at the other end, by scanty attention, by the poverty  
of language, by distraction, by unconscious constellations of feeling,  
by wear and tear, violence, monotony. These limitations upon our  
access to that environment combine with the obscurity and complexity  
of the facts themselves to thwart clearness and justice of perception,  
to substitute misleading fictions for workable ideas, and to deprive  
us of adequate checks upon those who consciously strive to mislead.  

PART III  

STEREOTYPES  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

42/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

CHAPTER 6. STEREOTYPES  
   "    7. STEREOTYPES AS DEFENSE  
   "    8. BLIND SPOTS AND THEIR VALUE  
   "    9. CODES AND THEIR ENEMIES  
   "   10. THE DETECTION OF STEREOTYPES  

CHAPTER VI  

STEREOTYPES  

1  

Each of us lives and works on a small part of the earth's surface,  
moves in a small circle, and of these acquaintances knows only a few  
intimately. Of any public event that has wide effects we see at best 
only a phase and an aspect. This is as true of the eminent insiders  
who draft treaties, make laws, and issue orders, as it is of those who  
have treaties framed for them, laws promulgated to them, orders given  
at them. Inevitably our opinions cover a bigger space, a longer reach  
of time, a greater number of things, than we can directly observe.  
They have, therefore, to be pieced together out of what others have  
reported and what we can imagine.  

Yet even the eyewitness does not bring back a naéve picture of the  
scene. [Footnote: _E. g. cf._ Edmond Locard, _L'Enquête Criminelle  
et les Méthodes Scientifiques._ A great deal of interesting material has  
been gathered in late years on the credibility of the witness, which  
shows, as an able reviewer of Dr. Locard's book says in _The  
Times_ (London) Literary Supplement (August 18, 1921), that  
credibility varies as to classes of witnesses and classes of events,  
and also as to type of perception. Thus, perceptions of touch, odor,  
and taste have low evidential value. Our hearing is defective and  
arbitrary when it judges the source and direction of sound, and in  
listening to the talk of other people "words which are not heard will  
be supplied by the witness in all good faith. He will have a theory of  
the purport of the conversation, and will arrange the sounds he heard  
to fit it." Even visual perceptions are liable to great error, as in  
identification, recognition, judgment of distance, estimates of  
numbers, for example, the size of a crowd. In the untrained observer,  
the sense of time is highly variable. All these original weaknesses  
are complicated by tricks of memory, and the incessant creative  
quality of the imagination. _Cf_. also Sherrington, _The  Integrative  
Action of the Nervous System_, pp. 318-327.  

The late Professor Hugo Münsterberg wrote a popular book on this  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

43/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

subject called _On the Witness Stand_.] For experience seems to  
show that he himself brings something to the scene which later he  
takes away from it, that oftener than not what he imagines to be the  
account of an event is really a transfiguration of it. Few facts in  
consciousness seem to be merely given. Most facts in consciousness  
seem to be partly made. A report is the joint product of the knower  
and known, in which the role of the observer is always selective and  
usually creative. The facts we see depend on where we are placed, and  
the habits of our eyes.  

An unfamiliar scene is like the baby's world, "one great, blooming,  
buzzing confusion." [Footnote: Wm. James, _Principles of  
Psychology_, Vol. I, p. 488.] This is the way, says Mr. John Dewey,  
[Footnote: John Dewey, _How We Think_, pg 121.] that any new  
thing strikes an adult, so far as the thing is really new and strange.  
"Foreign languages that we do not understand always seem jibberings,  
babblings, in which it is impossible to fix a definite, clear-cut,  
individualized group of sounds. The countryman in the crowded street,  
the landlubber at sea, the ignoramus in sport at a contest between  
experts in a complicated game, are further instances. Put an  
inexperienced man in a factory, and at first the work seems to him a  
meaningless medley. All strangers of another race proverbially look  
alike to the visiting stranger. Only gross differences of size or  
color are perceived by an outsider in a flock of sheep, each of which  
is perfectly individualized to the shepherd. A diffusive blur and an  
indiscriminately shifting suction characterize what we do not  
understand. The problem of the acquisition of meaning by things, or  
(stated in another way) of forming habits of simple apprehension, is  
thus the problem of introducing (1) _definiteness_ and _distinction_  
and (2) _consistency_ or _stability_ of meaning into what is  
otherwise vague and wavering."  

But the kind of definiteness and consistency introduced depends upon  
who introduces them. In a later passage [Footnote: _op. cit._, p. 
133.] Dewey gives an example of how differently an experienced layman  
and a chemist might define the word metal. "Smoothness, hardness,  
glossiness, and brilliancy, heavy weight for its size ... the  
serviceable properties of capacity for being hammered and pulled  
without breaking, of being softened by heat and hardened by cold, of  
retaining the shape and form given, of resistance to pressure and  
decay, would probably be included" in the layman's definition. But the  
chemist would likely as not ignore these esthetic and utilitarian  
qualities, and define a metal as "any chemical element that enters  
into combination with oxygen so as to form a base."  

For the most part we do not first see, and then define, we define  
first and then see. In the great blooming, buzzing confusion of the  
outer world we pick out what our culture has already defined for us,  
and we tend to perceive that which we have picked out in the form  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

44/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
stereotyped for us by our culture. Of the great men who assembled at  
Paris to settle the affairs of mankind, how many were there who were  
able to see much of the Europe about them, rather than their  
commitments about Europe? Could anyone have penetrated the mind of M.  
Clemenceau, would he have found there images of the Europe of 1919, or  
a great sediment of stereotyped ideas accumulated and hardened in a  
long and pugnacious existence? Did he see the Germans of 1919, or the  
German type as he had learned to see it since 1871? He saw the type,  
and among the reports that came to him from Germany, he took to heart  
those reports, and, it seems, those only, which fitted the type that  
was in his mind. If a junker blustered, that was an authentic German;  
if a labor leader confessed the guilt of the empire, he was not an  
authentic German.  

At a Congress of Psychology in Göttingen an interesting experiment was  
made with a crowd of presumably trained observers. [Footnote: A. von  
Gennep, _La formation des légendes_, pp. 158-159. Cited F. van  
Langenhove, _The Growth of a Legend_, pp. 120-122.]  

"Not far from the hall in which the Congress was sitting there was a  
public fete with a masked ball. Suddenly the door of the hall was  
thrown open and a clown rushed in madly pursued by a negro, revolver  
in hand. They stopped in the middle of the room fighting; the clown  
fell, the negro leapt upon him, fired, and then both rushed out of the  
hall. The whole incident hardly lasted twenty seconds.  

"The President asked those present to write immediately a report since  
there was sure to be a judicial inquiry. Forty reports were sent in.  
Only one had less than 20% of mistakes in regard to the principal  
facts; fourteen had 20% to 40% of mistakes; twelve from 40% to 50%;  
thirteen more than 50%. Moreover in twenty-four accounts 10% of the  
details were pure inventions and this proportion was exceeded in ten  
accounts and diminished in six. Briefly a quarter of the accounts were  
false.  

"It goes without saying that the whole scene had been arranged and  
even photographed in advance. The ten false reports may then be  
relegated to the category of tales and legends; twenty-four accounts  
are half legendary, and six have a value approximating to exact  
evidence."  

Thus out of forty trained observers writing a responsible account of a  
scene that had just happened before their eyes, more than a majority  
saw a scene that had not taken place. What then did they see? One  
would suppose it was easier to tell what had occurred, than to invent  
something which had not occurred. They saw their stereotype of such a  
brawl. All of them had in the course of their lives acquired a series  
of images of brawls, and these images flickered before their eyes. In  
one man these images displaced less than 20% of the actual scene, in  
thirteen men more than half. In thirty-four out of the forty observers  
the stereotypes preempted at least one-tenth of the scene.  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

45/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

A distinguished art critic has said [Footnote: Bernard Berenson,  
_The Central Italian Painters of the Renaissance_, pp. 60, _et  
seq_.] that "what with the almost numberless shapes assumed by an  
object. ... What with our insensitiveness and inattention, things  
scarcely would have for us features and outlines so determined and  
clear that we could recall them at will, but for the stereotyped  
shapes art has lent them." The truth is even broader than that, for  
the stereotyped shapes lent to the world come not merely from art, in  
the sense of painting and sculpture and literature, but from our moral  
codes and our social philosophies and our political agitations as  
well. Substitute in the following passage of Mr. Berenson's the words  
'politics,' 'business,' and 'society,' for the word 'art' and the  
sentences will be no less true: "... unless years devoted to the study  
of all schools of art have taught us also to see with our own eyes, we  
soon fall into the habit of moulding whatever we look at into the  
forms borrowed from the one art with which we are acquainted. There is  
our standard of artistic reality. Let anyone give us shapes and colors  
which we cannot instantly match in our paltry stock of hackneyed forms  
and tints, and we shake our heads at his failure to reproduce things  
as we know they certainly are, or we accuse him of insincerity." 

Mr. Berenson speaks of our displeasure when a painter "does not  
visualize objects exactly as we do," and of the difficulty of  
appreciating the art of the Middle Ages because since then "our manner  
of visualizing forms has changed in a thousand ways." [Footnote:  
_Cf._ also his comment on _Dante's Visual Images, and his Early  
Illustrators_ in _The Study and Criticism of Italian Art_ (First  
Series), p. 13. "_We_ cannot help dressing Virgil as a Roman,  
and giving him a 'classical profile' and 'statuesque carriage,' but  
Dante's visual image of Virgil was probably no less mediaeval, no  
more based on a critical reconstruction of antiquity, than his entire  
conception of the Roman poet. Fourteenth Century illustrators make  
Virgil look like a mediaeval scholar, dressed in cap and gown, and  
there is no reason why Dante's visual image of him should have been  
other than this."] He goes on to show how in regard to the human  
figure we have been taught to see what we do see. "Created by  
Donatello and Masaccio, and sanctioned by the Humanists, the new canon  
of the human figure, the new cast of features ... presented to the  
ruling classes of that time the type of human being most likely to win  
the day in the combat of human forces... Who had the power to break  
through this new standard of vision and, out of the chaos of things,  
to select shapes more definitely expressive of reality than those  
fixed by men of genius? No one had such power. People had perforce to  
see things in that way and in no other, and to see only the shapes  
depicted, to love only the ideals presented...." [Footnote: _The  
Central Italian Painters_, pp. 66-67.]  

2  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

46/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

If we cannot fully understand the acts of other people, until we know  
what they think they know, then in order to do justice we have to  
appraise not only the information which has been at their disposal,  
but the minds through which they have filtered it. For the accepted  
types, the current patterns, the standard versions, intercept  
information on its way to consciousness. Americanization, for example,  
is superficially at least the substitution of American for European  
stereotypes. Thus the peasant who might see his landlord as if he were  
the lord of the manor, his employer as he saw the local magnate, is  
taught by Americanization to see the landlord and employer according  
to American standards. This constitutes a change of mind, which is, in  
effect, when the inoculation succeeds, a change of vision. His eye  
sees differently. One kindly gentlewoman has confessed that the  
stereotypes are of such overweening importance, that when hers are not  
indulged, she at least is unable to accept the brotherhood of man and  
the fatherhood of God: "we are strangely affected by the clothes we  
wear. Garments create a mental and social atmosphere. What can be  
hoped for the Americanism of a man who insists on employing a London  
tailor? One's very food affects his Americanism. What kind of American  
consciousness can grow in the atmosphere of sauerkraut and Limburger  
cheese? Or what can you expect of the Americanism of the man whose  
breath always reeks of garlic?" [Footnote: Cited by Mr. Edward Hale  
Bierstadt, _New Republic_, June 1 1921 p. 21.]  

This lady might well have been the patron of a pageant which a friend  
of mine once attended. It was called the Melting Pot, and it was given  
on the Fourth of July in an automobile town where many foreign-born  
workers are employed. In the center of the baseball park at second  
base stood a huge wooden and canvas pot. There were flights of steps  
up to the rim on two sides. After the audience had settled itself, and  
the band had played, a procession came through an opening at one side  
of the field. It was made up of men of all the foreign nationalities  
employed in the factories. They wore their native costumes, they were  
singing their national songs; they danced their folk dances, and  
carried the banners of all Europe. The master of ceremonies was the  
principal of the grade school dressed as Uncle Sam. He led them to the  
pot. He directed them up the steps to the rim, and inside. He called  
them out again on the other side. They came, dressed in derby hats,  
coats, pants, vest, stiff collar and polka-dot tie, undoubtedly, said  
my friend, each with an Eversharp pencil in his pocket, and all  
singing the Star-Spangled Banner.  

To the promoters of this pageant, and probably to most of the actors,  
it seemed as if they had managed to express the most intimate  
difficulty to friendly association between the older peoples of  
America and the newer. The contradiction of their stereotypes  
interfered with the full recognition of their common humanity. The  
people who change their names know this. They mean to change  
themselves, and the attitude of strangers toward them.  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

47/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
There is, of course, some connection between the scene outside and the  
mind through which we watch it, just as there are some long-haired men  
and short-haired women in radical gatherings. But to the hurried  
observer a slight connection is enough. If there are two bobbed heads  
and four beards in the audience, it will be a bobbed and bearded  
audience to the reporter who knows beforehand that such gatherings are  
composed of people with these tastes in the management of their hair.  
There is a connection between our vision and the facts, but it is  
often a strange connection. A man has rarely looked at a landscape,  
let us say, except to examine its possibilities for division into  
building lots, but he has seen a number of landscapes hanging in the  
parlor. And from them he has learned to think of a landscape as a rosy  
sunset, or as a country road with a church steeple and a silver moon.  
One day he goes to the country, and for hours he does not see a single  
landscape. Then the sun goes down looking rosy. At once he recognizes  
a landscape and exclaims that it is beautiful. But two days later,  
when he tries to recall what he saw, the odds are that he will  
remember chiefly some landscape in a parlor.  

Unless he has been drunk or dreaming or insane he did see a sunset,  
but he saw in it, and above all remembers from it, more of what the  
oil painting taught him to observe, than what an impressionist  
painter, for example, or a cultivated Japanese would have seen and  
taken away with him. And the Japanese and the painter in turn will  
have seen and remembered more of the form they had learned, unless  
they happen to be the very rare people who find fresh sight for  
mankind. In untrained observation we pick recognizable signs out of  
the environment. The signs stand for ideas, and these ideas we fill  
out with our stock of images. We do not so much see this man and that  
sunset; rather we notice that the thing is man or sunset, and then see  
chiefly what our mind is already full of on those subjects.  

3  

There is economy in this. For the attempt to see all things freshly  
and in detail, rather than as types and generalities, is exhausting,  
and among busy affairs practically out of the question. In a circle of  
friends, and in relation to close associates or competitors, there is  
no shortcut through, and no substitute for, an individualized  
understanding. Those whom we love and admire most are the men and  
women whose consciousness is peopled thickly with persons rather than  
with types, who know us rather than the classification into which we  
might fit. For even without phrasing it to ourselves, we feel  
intuitively that all classification is in relation to some purpose not  
necessarily our own; that between two human beings no association has  
final dignity in which each does not take the other as an end in  
himself. There is a taint on any contact between two people which does  
not affirm as an axiom the personal inviolability of both.  

But modern life is hurried and multifarious, above all physical  
distance separates men who are often in vital contact with each other,  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

48/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
such as employer and employee, official and voter. There is neither  
time nor opportunity for intimate acquaintance. Instead we notice a  
trait which marks a well known type, and fill in the rest of the  
picture by means of the stereotypes we carry about in our heads. He is  
an agitator. That much we notice, or are told. Well, an agitator is  
this sort of person, and so _he_ is this sort of person. He is an  
intellectual. He is a plutocrat. He is a foreigner. He is a "South  
European." He is from Back Bay. He is a Harvard Man. How different  
from the statement: he is a Yale Man. He is a regular fellow. He is a  
West Pointer. He is an old army sergeant. He is a Greenwich Villager:  
what don't we know about him then, and about her? He is an  
international banker. He is from Main Street.  

The subtlest and most pervasive of all influences ere those which  
create and maintain the repertory of stereotypes. We are told about  
the world before we see it. We imagine most things before we  
experience them. And those preconceptions, unless education has made  
us acutely aware, govern deeply the whole process of perception. They  
mark out certain objects as familiar or strange, emphasizing the 
difference, so that the slightly familiar is seen as very familiar,  
and the somewhat strange as sharply alien. They are aroused by small  
signs, which may vary from a true index to a vague analogy. Aroused,  
they flood fresh vision with older images, and project into the world  
what has been resurrected in memory. Were there no practical  
uniformities in the environment, there would be no economy and only  
error in the human habit of accepting foresight for sight. But there  
are uniformities sufficiently accurate, and the need of economizing  
attention is so inevitable, that the abandonment of all stereotypes  
for a wholly innocent approach to experience would impoverish human  
life. 

What matters is the character of the stereotypes, and the gullibility  
with which we employ them. And these in the end depend upon those  
inclusive patterns which constitute our philosophy of life. If in that  
philosophy we assume that the world is codified according to a code  
which we possess, we are likely to make our reports of what is going  
on describe a world run by our code. But if our philosophy tells us  
that each man is only a small part of the world, that his intelligence  
catches at best only phases and aspects in a coarse net of ideas,  
then, when we use our stereotypes, we tend to know that they are only  
stereotypes, to hold them lightly, to modify them gladly. We tend,  
also, to realize more and more clearly when our ideas started, where  
they started, how they came to us, why we accepted them. All useful  
history is antiseptic in this fashion. It enables us to know what  
fairy tale, what school book, what tradition, what novel, play,  
picture, phrase, planted one preconception in this mind, another in  
that mind.  

4  

Those who wish to censor art do not at least underestimate this  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

49/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
influence. They generally misunderstand it, and almost always they are  
absurdly bent on preventing other people from discovering anything not  
sanctioned by them. But at any rate, like Plato in his argument about  
the poets, they feel vaguely that the types acquired through fiction  
tend to be imposed on reality. Thus there can be little doubt that the  
moving picture is steadily building up imagery which is then evoked by  
the words people read in their newspapers. In the whole experience of  
the race there has been no aid to visualization comparable to the  
cinema. If a Florentine wished to visualize the saints, he could go to 
the frescoes in his church, where he might see a vision of saints  
standardized for his time by Giotto. If an Athenian wished to  
visualize the gods he went to the temples. But the number of objects  
which were pictured was not great. And in the East, where the spirit  
of the second commandment was widely accepted, the portraiture of  
concrete things was even more meager, and for that reason perhaps the  
faculty of practical decision was by so much reduced. In the western  
world, however, during the last few centuries there has been an  
enormous increase in the volume and scope of secular description, the  
word picture, the narrative, the illustrated narrative, and finally  
the moving picture and, perhaps, the talking picture.  

Photographs have the kind of authority over imagination to-day, which  
the printed word had yesterday, and the spoken word before that. They  
seem utterly real. They come, we imagine, directly to us without human  
meddling, and they are the most effortless food for the mind  
conceivable. Any description in words, or even any inert picture, 
requires an effort of memory before a picture exists in the mind. But  
on the screen the whole process of observing, describing, reporting,  
and then imagining, has been accomplished for you. Without more  
trouble than is needed to stay awake the result which your imagination  
is always aiming at is reeled off on the screen. The shadowy idea  
becomes vivid; your hazy notion, let us say, of the Ku Klux Klan,  
thanks to Mr. Griffiths, takes vivid shape when you see the Birth of a  
Nation. Historically it may be the wrong shape, morally it may be a  
pernicious shape, but it is a shape, and I doubt whether anyone who  
has seen the film and does not know more about the Ku Klux Klan than  
Mr. Griffiths, will ever hear the name again without seeing those  
white horsemen.  

5  

And so when we speak of the mind of a group of people, of the French  
mind, the militarist mind, the bolshevik mind, we are liable to  
serious confusion unless we agree to separate the instinctive  
equipment from the stereotypes, the patterns, and the formulae which  
play so decisive a part in building up the mental world to which the  
native character is adapted and responds. Failure to make this  
distinction accounts for oceans of loose talk about collective minds,  
national souls, and race psychology. To be sure a stereotype may be so  
consistently and authoritatively transmitted in each generation from  
parent to child that it seems almost like a biological fact. In some  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

50/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
respects, we may indeed have become, as Mr. Wallas says, [Footnote:  
Graham Wallas, _Our Social Heritage_, p. 17.] biologically  
parasitic upon our social heritage. But certainly there is not the  
least scientific evidence which would enable anyone to argue that men  
are born with the political habits of the country in which they are  
born. In so far as political habits are alike in a nation, the first  
places to look for an explanation are the nursery, the school, the  
church, not in that limbo inhabited by Group Minds and National Souls.  
Until you have thoroughly failed to see tradition being handed on from  
parents, teachers, priests, and uncles, it is a solecism of the worst  
order to ascribe political differences to the germ plasm.  

It is possible to generalize tentatively and with a decent humility  
about comparative differences within the same category of education  
and experience. Yet even this is a tricky enterprise. For almost no  
two experiences are exactly alike, not even of two children in the  
same household. The older son never does have the experience of being  
the younger. And therefore, until we are able to discount the  
difference in nurture, we must withhold judgment about differences of  
nature. As well judge the productivity of two soils by comparing their  
yield before you know which is in Labrador and which in Iowa, whether  
they have been cultivated and enriched, exhausted, or allowed to run  
wild.  

CHAPTER VII  

STEREOTYPES AS DEFENSE  

1  

THERE is another reason, besides economy of effort, why we so often  
hold to our stereotypes when we might pursue a more disinterested  
vision. The systems of stereotypes may be the core of our personal  
tradition, the defenses of our position in society.  

They are an ordered, more or less consistent picture of the world, to  
which our habits, our tastes, our capacities, our comforts and our  
hopes have adjusted themselves. They may not be a complete picture of  
the world, but they are a picture of a possible world to which we are  
adapted. In that world people and things have their well-known places,  
and do certain expected things. We feel at home there. We fit in. We  
are members. We know the way around. There we find the charm of the  
familiar, the normal, the dependable; its grooves and shapes are where  
we are accustomed to find them. And though we have abandoned much that  
might have tempted us before we creased ourselves into that mould,  
once we are firmly in, it fits as snugly as an old shoe.  

No wonder, then, that any disturbance of the stereotypes seems like an  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

51/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
attack upon the foundations of the universe. It is an attack upon the  
foundations of _our_ universe, and, where big things are at  
stake, we do not readily admit that there is any distinction between  
our universe and the universe. A world which turns out to be one in  
which those we honor are unworthy, and those we despise are noble, is  
nerve-racking. There is anarchy if our order of precedence is not the  
only possible one. For if the meek should indeed inherit the earth, if  
the first should be last, if those who are without sin alone may cast  
a stone, if to Caesar you render only the things that are Caesar's,  
then the foundations of self-respect would be shaken for those who  
have arranged their lives as if these maxims were not true. A pattern  
of stereotypes is not neutral. It is not merely a way of substituting  
order for the great blooming, buzzing confusion of reality. It is not  
merely a short cut. It is all these things and something more. It is  
the guarantee of our self-respect; it is the projection upon the world  
of our own sense of our own value, our own position and our own  
rights. The stereotypes are, therefore, highly charged with the  
feelings that are attached to them. They are the fortress of our  
tradition, and behind its defenses we can continue to feel ourselves  
safe in the position we occupy.  

2  

When, for example, in the fourth century B. C., Aristotle wrote his  
defense of slavery in the face of increasing skepticism, [Footnote:  
Zimmern: _Greek Commonwealth_. See his footnote, p. 383.] the  
Athenian slaves were in great part indistinguishable from free  
citizens Mr. Zimmern quotes an amusing passage from the Old Oligarch  
explaining the good treatment of the slaves. "Suppose it were legal  
for a slave to be beaten by a citizen, it would frequently happen that  
an Athenian might be mistaken for a slave or an alien and receive a  
beating;--since the Athenian people is not better clothed than the  
slave or alien, nor in personal appearance is there any superiority."  
This absence of distinction would naturally tend to dissolve the  
institution. If free men and slaves looked alike, what basis was there  
for treating them so differently? It was this confusion which  
Aristotle set himself to clear away in the first book of his Politics.  
With unerring instinct he understood that to justify slavery he must  
teach the Greeks a way of _seeing_ their slaves that comported  
with the continuance of slavery.  

So, said Aristotle, there are beings who are slaves by nature.  
[Footnote: _Politics_, Bk. 1, Ch. 5.] "He then is by nature  
formed a slave, who is fitted to become the chattel of another person,  
_and on that account is so_." All this really says is that  
whoever happens to be a slave is by nature intended to be one.  
Logically the statement is worthless, but in fact it is not a  
proposition at all, and logic has nothing to do with it. It is a  
stereotype, or rather it is part of a stereotype. The rest follows  
almost immediately. After asserting that slaves perceive reason, but  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

52/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
are not endowed with the use of it, Aristotle insists that "it is the  
intention of nature to make the bodies of slaves and free men  
different from each other, that the one should be robust for their  
necessary purposes, but the other erect; useless indeed for such  
servile labours, but fit for civil life... It is clear then that some  
men are free by nature, and others are slaves. ..."  

Main

If we ask ourselves what is the matter with Aristotle's argument, we  
find that he has begun by erecting a great barrier between himself and  
the facts. When he had said that those who are slaves are by nature  
intended to be slaves, he at one stroke excluded the fatal question  
whether those particular men who happened to be slaves were the  
particular men intended by nature to be slaves. For that question  
would have tainted each case of slavery with doubt. And since the fact  
of being a slave was not evidence that a man was destined to be one,  
no certain test would have remained. Aristotle, therefore, excluded  
entirely that destructive doubt. Those who are slaves are intended to  
be slaves. Each slave holder was to look upon his chattels as natural  
slaves. When his eye had been trained to see them that way, he was to  
note as confirmation of their servile character the fact that they  
performed servile work, that they were competent to do servile work,  
and that they had the muscles to do servile work.  

This is the perfect stereotype. Its hallmark is that it precedes the  
use of reason; is a form of perception, imposes a certain character on  
the data of our senses before the data reach the intelligence. The  
stereotype is like the lavender window-panes on Beacon Street, like  
the door-keeper at a costume ball who judges whether the guest has an  
appropriate masquerade. There is nothing so obdurate to education or  
to criticism as the stereotype. It stamps itself upon the evidence in  
the very act of securing the evidence. That is why the accounts of  
returning travellers are often an interesting tale of what the  
traveller carried abroad with him on his trip. If he carried chiefly  
his appetite, a zeal for tiled bathrooms, a conviction that the  
Pullman car is the acme of human comfort, and a belief that it is  
proper to tip waiters, taxicab drivers, and barbers, but under no  
circumstances station agents and ushers, then his Odyssey will be  
replete with good meals and bad meals, bathing adventures,  
compartment-train escapades, and voracious demands for money. Or if he  
is a more serious soul he may while on tour have found himself at  
celebrated spots. Having touched base, and cast one furtive glance at  
the monument, he buried his head in Baedeker, read every word through,  
and moved on to the next celebrated spot; and thus returned with a  
compact and orderly impression of Europe, rated one star, or two.  

In some measure, stimuli from the outside, especially when they are  
printed or spoken words, evoke some part of a system of stereotypes,  
so that the actual sensation and the preconception occupy  
consciousness at the same time. The two are blended, much as if we  
looked at red through blue glasses and saw green. If what we are  
looking at corresponds successfully with what we anticipated, the  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

53/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
stereotype is reinforced for the future, as it is in a man who knows  
in advance that the Japanese are cunning and has the bad luck to run  
across two dishonest Japanese.  

Main

If the experience contradicts the stereotype, one of two things  
happens. If the man is no longer plastic, or if some powerful interest  
makes it highly inconvenient to rearrange his stereotypes, he pooh-  
poohs the contradiction as an exception that proves the rule,  
discredits the witness, finds a flaw somewhere, and manages to forget  
it. But if he is still curious and open-minded, the novelty is taken  
into the picture, and allowed to modify it. Sometimes, if the incident  
is striking enough, and if he has felt a general discomfort with his  
established scheme, he may be shaken to such an extent as to distrust  
all accepted ways of looking at life, and to expect that normally a  
thing will not be what it is generally supposed to be. In the extreme  
case, especially if he is literary, he may develop a passion for 
inverting the moral canon by making Judas, Benedict Arnold, or Caesar  
Borgia the hero of his tale.  

3  

The role played by the stereotype can be seen in the German tales  
about Belgian snipers. Those tales curiously enough were first refuted  
by an organization of German Catholic priests known as Pax. [Footnote:  
Fernand van Langenhove, _The Growth of a Legend._ The author is a  
Belgian sociologist.] The existence of atrocity stories is itself not  
remarkable, nor that the German people gladly believed them. But it is  
remarkable that a great conservative body of patriotic Germans should  
have set out as early as August 16, 1914, to contradict a collection  
of slanders on the enemy, even though such slanders were of the utmost  
value in soothing the troubled conscience of their fellow countrymen.  
Why should the Jesuit order in particular have set out to destroy a  
fiction so important to the fighting morale of Germany?  

I quote from M. van Langenhove's account:  

"Hardly had the German armies entered Belgium when strange rumors  
began to circulate. They spread from place to place, they were  
reproduced by the press, and they soon permeated the whole of Germany.  
It was said that the Belgian people, _instigated by the clergy,_  
had intervened perfidiously in the hostilities; had attacked by  
surprise isolated detachments; had indicated to the enemy the  
positions occupied by the troops; that old men, and even children, had  
been guilty of horrible atrocities upon wounded and defenseless German  
soldiers, tearing out their eyes and cutting off fingers, nose or  
ears; _that the priests from their pulpits had exhorted the people  
to commit these crimes, promising them as a reward the kingdom of  
heaven, and had even taken the lead in this barbarity._  

"Public credulity accepted these stories. The highest powers in the 

https://standardgalactic.github.io

54/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
state welcomed them without hesitation and endorsed them with their  
authority...  

Main

"In this way public opinion in Germany was disturbed and a lively  
indignation manifested itself, _directed especially against the  
priests_ who were held responsible for the barbarities attributed  
to the Belgians... By a natural diversion _the anger_ to which  
they were a prey _was directed_ by the Germans _against the  
Catholic clergy generally._ Protestants allowed the old religious  
hatred to be relighted in their minds and delivered themselves to  
attacks against Catholics. A new _Kulturkampf_ was let loose.  

"The Catholics did not delay in taking action against this hostile  
attitude." (Italics mine) [Footnote: _Op. cit._, pp. 5-7]  

There may have been some sniping. It would be extraordinary if every  
angry Belgian had rushed to the library, opened a manual of  
international law, and had informed himself whether he had a right to  
take potshot at the infernal nuisance tramping through his streets. It  
would be no less extraordinary if an army that had never been under  
fire, did not regard every bullet that came its way as unauthorized,  
because it was inconvenient, and indeed as somehow a violation of the  
rules of the Kriegspiel, which then constituted its only experience of  
war. One can imagine the more sensitive bent on convincing themselves  
that the people to whom they were doing such terrible things must be  
terrible people. And so the legend may have been spun until it reached  
the censors and propagandists, who, whether they believed it or not,  
saw its value, and let it loose on the German civilians. They too were 
not altogether sorry to find that the people they were outraging were  
sub-human. And, above all, since the legend came from their heroes,  
they were not only entitled to believe it, they were unpatriotic if  
they did not.  

But where so much is left to the imagination because the scene of  
action is lost in the fog of war, there is no check and no control.  
The legend of the ferocious Belgian priests soon tapped an old hatred.  
For in the minds of most patriotic protestant Germans, especially of  
the upper classes, the picture of Bismarck's victories included a long  
quarrel with the Roman Catholics. By a process of association, Belgian  
priests became priests, and hatred of Belgians a vent for all their  
hatreds. These German protestants did what some Americans did when  
under the stress of war they created a compound object of hatred out  
of the enemy abroad and all their opponents at home. Against this  
synthetic enemy, the Hun in Germany and the Hun within the Gate, they  
launched all the animosity that was in them.  

The Catholic resistance to the atrocity tales was, of course,  
defensive. It was aimed at those particular fictions which aroused  
animosity against all Catholics, rather than against Belgian Catholics  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

55/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

alone. The _Informations Pax_, says M. van Langenhove, had only  
an ecclesiastical bearing and "confined their attention almost 
exclusively to the reprehensible acts attributed to the priests." And  
yet one cannot help wondering a little about what was set in motion in  
the minds of German Catholics by this revelation of what Bismarck's  
empire meant in relation to them; and also whether there was any  
obscure connection between that knowledge and the fact that the  
prominent German politician who was willing in the armistice to sign  
the death warrant of the empire was Erzberger, [Footnote: Since this  
was written, Erzberger has been assassinated.] the leader of the  
Catholic Centre Party.  

CHAPTER VIII 

BLIND SPOTS AND THEIR VALUE  

1  

I HAVE been speaking of stereotypes rather than ideals, because the  
word ideal is usually reserved for what we consider the good, the true  
and the beautiful. Thus it carries the hint that here is something to  
be copied or attained. But our repertory of fixed impressions is wider  
than that. It contains ideal swindlers, ideal Tammany politicians,  
ideal jingoes, ideal agitators, ideal enemies. Our stereotyped world  
is not necessarily the world we should like it to be. It is simply the  
kind of world we expect it to be. If events correspond there is a  
sense of familiarity, and we feel that we are moving with the movement  
of events. Our slave must be a slave by nature, if we are Athenians  
who wish to have no qualms. If we have told our friends that we do  
eighteen holes of golf in 95, we tell them after doing the course in  
110, that we are not ourselves to-day. That is to say, we are not  
acquainted with the duffer who foozled fifteen strokes.  

Most of us would deal with affairs through a rather haphazard and  
shifting assortment of stereotypes, if a comparatively few men in each  
generation were not constantly engaged in arranging, standardizing,  
and improving them into logical systems, known as the Laws of  
Political Economy, the Principles of Politics, and the like. Generally  
when we write about culture, tradition, and the group mind, we are  
thinking of these systems perfected by men of genius. Now there is no  
disputing the necessity of constant study and criticism of these  
idealized versions, but the historian of people, the politician, and  
the publicity man cannot stop there. For what operates in history is  
not the systematic idea as a genius formulated it, but shifting  
imitations, replicas, counterfeits, analogies, and distortions in  
individual minds.  

Thus Marxism is not necessarily what Karl Marx wrote in Das Kapital,  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

56/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
but whatever it is that all the warring sects believe, who claim to be  
the faithful. From the gospels you cannot deduce the history of  
Christianity, nor from the Constitution the political history of  
America. It is Das Kapital as conceived, the gospels as preached and  
the preachment as understood, the Constitution as interpreted and  
administered, to which you have to go. For while there is a  
reciprocating influence between the standard version and the current  
versions, it is these current versions as distributed among men which  
affect their behavior. [Footnote: But unfortunately it is ever so much  
harder to know this actual culture than it is to summarize and to  
comment upon the works of genius. The actual culture exists in people  
far too busy to indulge in the strange trade of formulating their  
beliefs. They record them only incidentally, and the student rarely  
knows how typical are his data. Perhaps the best he can do is to  
follow Lord Bryce's suggestion [_Modern Democracies_, Vol. i, p.  
156] that he move freely "among all sorts and conditions of men," to  
seek out the unbiassed persons in every neighborhood who have skill in  
sizing up. "There is a _flair_ which long practise and 'sympathetic  
touch' bestow. The trained observer learns how to profit by small  
indications, as an old seaman discerns, sooner than the landsman,  
the signs of coming storm." There is, in short, a vast amount of  
guess work involved, and it is no wonder that scholars, who enjoy  
precision, so often confine their attentions to the neater formulations  
of other scholars.]  

"The theory of Relativity," says a critic whose eyelids, like the Lady  
Lisa's, are a little weary, "promises to develop into a principle as  
adequate to universal application as was the theory of Evolution. This  
latter theory, from being a technical biological hypothesis, became an  
inspiring guide to workers in practically every branch of knowledge:  
manners and customs, morals, religions, philosophies, arts, steam  
engines, electric tramways--everything had 'evolved.' 'Evolution'  
became a very general term; it also became imprecise until, in many  
cases, the original, definite meaning of the word was lost, and the  
theory it had been evoked to describe was misunderstood. We are hardy  
enough to prophesy a similar career and fate for the theory of  
Relativity. The technical physical theory, at present imperfectly  
understood, will become still more vague and dim. History repeats  
itself, and Relativity, like Evolution, after receiving a number of  
intelligible but somewhat inaccurate popular expositions in its  
scientific aspect, will be launched on a world-conquering career. We  
suggest that, by that time, it will probably be called _Relativismus_.  
Many of these larger applications will doubtless be justified; some will  
be absurd and a considerable number will, we imagine, reduce to truisms.  
And the physical theory, the mere seed of this mighty growth, will become  
once more the purely technical concern of scientific men." [Footnote:  
_The Times_ (London), _Literary Supplement_, June 2, 1921, p.  
352. Professor Einstein said when he was in America in 1921 that  
people tended to overestimate the influence of his theory, and to  
under-estimate its certainty.]  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

57/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

But for such a world-conquering career an idea must correspond,  
however imprecisely, to something. Professor Bury shows for how long a  
time the idea of progress remained a speculative toy. "It is not  
easy," he writes, [Footnote: J. B. Bury, _The Idea of Progress_,  
p. 324.] "for a new idea of the speculative order to penetrate and  
inform the general consciousness of a community until it has assumed  
some external and concrete embodiment, or is recommended by some  
striking material evidence. In the case of Progress both these  
conditions were fulfilled (in England) in the period 1820-1850." The  
most striking evidence was furnished by the mechanical revolution.  
"Men who were born at the beginning of the century had seen, before  
they had passed the age of thirty, the rapid development of steam  
navigation, the illumination of towns and houses by gas, the opening  
of the first railway." In the consciousness of the average householder  
miracles like these formed the pattern of his belief in the  
perfectibility of the human race.  

Tennyson, who was in philosophical matters a fairly normal person,  
tells us that when he went by the first train from Liverpool to  
Manchester (1830) he thought that the wheels ran in grooves. Then he  
wrote this line:  

"Let the great world spin forever down the ringing grooves of  
change." [Footnote: 2 Tennyson, _Memoir by his Son_, Vol. I, p.  
195. Cited by Bury, _op. cit_., p. 326.]  

And so a notion more or less applicable to a journey between Liverpool  
and Manchester was generalized into a pattern of the universe "for  
ever." This pattern, taken up by others, reinforced by dazzling  
inventions, imposed an optimistic turn upon the theory of evolution.  
That theory, of course, is, as Professor Bury says, neutral between  
pessimism and optimism. But it promised continual change, and the  
changes visible in the world marked such extraordinary conquests of  
nature, that the popular mind made a blend of the two. Evolution first  
in Darwin himself, and then more elaborately in Herbert Spencer, was a  
"progress towards perfection."  

2  

The stereotype represented by such words as "progress" and  
"perfection" was composed fundamentally of mechanical inventions. And  
mechanical it has remained, on the whole, to this day. In America more  
than anywhere else, the spectacle of mechanical progress has made so  
deep an impression, that it has suffused the whole moral code. An  
American will endure almost any insult except the charge that he is  
not progressive. Be he of long native ancestry, or a recent immigrant,  
the aspect that has always struck his eye is the immense physical  
growth of American civilization. That constitutes a fundamental  
stereotype through which he views the world: the country village will 

https://standardgalactic.github.io

58/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
become the great metropolis, the modest building a skyscraper, what is  
small shall be big; what is slow shall be fast; what is poor shall be  
rich; what is few shall be many; whatever is shall be more so.  

Main

Not every American, of course, sees the world this way. Henry Adams  
didn't, and William Allen White doesn't. But those men do, who in the  
magazines devoted to the religion of success appear as Makers of  
America. They mean just about that when they preach evolution,  
progress, prosperity, being constructive, the American way of doing  
things. It is easy to laugh, but, in fact, they are using a very great  
pattern of human endeavor. For one thing it adopts an impersonal  
criterion; for another it adopts an earthly criterion; for a third it  
is habituating men to think quantitatively. To be sure the ideal  
confuses excellence with size, happiness with speed, and human nature  
with contraption. Yet the same motives are at work which have ever  
actuated any moral code, or ever will. The desire for the biggest, the  
fastest, the highest, or if you are a maker of wristwatches or  
microscopes the smallest; the love in short of the superlative and the  
"peerless," is in essence and possibility a noble passion.  

Certainly the American version of progress has fitted an extraordinary  
range of facts in the economic situation and in human nature. It  
turned an unusual amount of pugnacity, acquisitiveness, and lust of  
power into productive work. Nor has it, until more recently perhaps,  
seriously frustrated the active nature of the active members of the  
community. They have made a civilization which provides them who made  
it with what they feel to be ample satisfaction in work, mating and  
play, and the rush of their victory over mountains, wildernesses,  
distance, and human competition has even done duty for that part of  
religious feeling which is a sense of communion with the purpose of  
the universe. The pattern has been a success so nearly perfect in the  
sequence of ideals, practice, and results, that any challenge to it is  
called un-American.  

And yet, this pattern is a very partial and inadequate way of  
representing the world. The habit of thinking about progress as  
"development" has meant that many aspects of the environment were  
simply neglected. With the stereotype of "progress" before their eyes,  
Americans have in the mass seen little that did not accord with that  
progress. They saw the expansion of cities, but not the accretion of  
slums; they cheered the census statistics, but refused to consider  
overcrowding; they pointed with pride to their growth, but would not  
see the drift from the land, or the unassimilated immigration. They  
expanded industry furiously at reckless cost to their natural  
resources; they built up gigantic corporations without arranging for 
industrial relations. They grew to be one of the most powerful nations  
on earth without preparing their institutions or their minds for the  
ending of their isolation. They stumbled into the World War morally  
and physically unready, and they stumbled out again, much  
disillusioned, but hardly more experienced.  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

59/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
In the World War the good and the evil influence of the American  
stereotype was plainly visible. The idea that the war could be won by  
recruiting unlimited armies, raising unlimited credits, building an  
unlimited number of ships, producing unlimited munitions, and  
concentrating without limit on these alone, fitted the traditional  
stereotype, and resulted in something like a physical miracle.  
[Footnote: I have in mind the transportation and supply of two million  
troops overseas. Prof. Wesley Mitchell points out that the total  
production of goods after our entrance into the war did not greatly  
increase in volume over that of the year 1916; but that production for  
war purposes did increase.] But among those most affected by the  
stereotype, there was no place for the consideration of what the  
fruits of victory were, or how they were to be attained. Therefore,  
aims were ignored, or regarded as automatic, and victory was  
conceived, because the stereotype demanded it, as nothing but an  
annihilating victory in the field. In peace time you did not ask what  
the fastest motor car was for, and in war you did not ask what the  
completest victory was for. Yet in Paris the pattern did not fit the  
facts. In peace you can go on endlessly supplanting small things with  
big ones, and big ones with bigger ones; in war when you have won  
absolute victory, you cannot go on to a more absolute victory. You  
have to do something on an entirely different pattern. And if you lack  
such a pattern, the end of the war is to you what it was to so many  
good people, an anticlimax in a dreary and savorless world.  

This marks the point where the stereotype and the facts, that cannot  
be ignored, definitely part company. There is always such a point,  
because our images of how things behave are simpler and more fixed  
than the ebb and flow of affairs. There comes a time, therefore, when  
the blind spots come from the edge of vision into the center. Then  
unless there are critics who have the courage to sound an alarm, and  
leaders capable of understanding the change, and a people tolerant by  
habit, the stereotype, instead of economizing effort, and focussing  
energy as it did in 1917 and 1918, may frustrate effort and waste  
men's energy by blinding them, as it did for those people who cried  
for a Carthaginian peace in 1919 and deplored the Treaty of Versailles  
in 1921.  

3  

Uncritically held, the stereotype not only censors out much that needs  
to be taken into account, but when the day of reckoning comes, and the  
stereotype is shattered, likely as not that which it did wisely take  
into account is ship-wrecked with it. That is the punishment assessed  
by Mr. Bernard Shaw against Free Trade, Free Contract, Free  
Competition, Natural Liberty, Laissez-faire, and Darwinism. A hundred  
years ago, when he would surely have been one of the tartest advocates  
of these doctrines, he would not have seen them as he sees them  
to-day, in the Infidel Half Century, [Footnote: _Back to  
Methuselah_. Preface.] to be excuses for "'doing the other fellow  
down' with impunity, all interference by a guiding government, all  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

60/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
organization except police organization to protect legalized fraud  
against fisticuffs, all attempt to introduce human purpose and design  
and forethought into the industrial welter being 'contrary to the laws  
of political economy'" He would have seen, then, as one of the  
pioneers of the march to the plains of heaven [Footnote: _The  
Quintessence of Ibsenism_] that, of the kind of human purpose and  
design and forethought to be found in a government like that of Queen  
Victoria's uncles, the less the better. He would have seen, not the  
strong doing the weak down, but the foolish doing the strong down. He  
would have seen purposes, designs and forethoughts at work,  
obstructing invention, obstructing enterprise, obstructing what he  
would infallibly have recognized as the next move of Creative  
Evolution.  

Even now Mr. Shaw is none too eager for the guidance of any guiding  
government he knows, but in theory he has turned a full loop against  
laissez-faire. Most advanced thinking before the war had made the same  
turn against the established notion that if you unloosed everything,  
wisdom would bubble up, and establish harmony. Since the war, with its  
definite demonstration of guiding governments, assisted by censors,  
propagandists, and spies, Roebuck Ramsden and Natural Liberty have  
been readmitted to the company of serious thinkers.  

One thing is common to these cycles. There is in each set of  
stereotypes a point where effort ceases and things happen of their own  
accord, as you would like them to. The progressive stereotype,  
powerful to incite work, almost completely obliterates the attempt to  
decide what work and why that work. Laissez-faire, a blessed release  
from stupid officialdom, assumes that men will move by spontaneous  
combustion towards a pre-established harmony. Collectivism, an  
antidote to ruthless selfishness, seems, in the Marxian mind, to  
suppose an economic determinism towards efficiency and wisdom on the  
part of socialist officials. Strong government, imperialism at home  
and abroad, at its best deeply conscious of the price of disorder,  
relies at last on the notion that all that matters to the governed  
will be known by the governors. In each theory there is a spot of  
blind automatism.  

That spot covers up some fact, which if it were taken into account,  
would check the vital movement that the stereotype provokes. If the  
progressive had to ask himself, like the Chinaman in the joke, what he  
wanted to do with the time he saved by breaking the record, if the  
advocate of laissez-faire had to contemplate not only free and  
exuberant energies of men, but what some people call their human  
nature, if the collectivist let the center of his attention be  
occupied with the problem of how he is to secure his officials, if the  
imperialist dared to doubt his own inspiration, you would find more  
Hamlet and less Henry the Fifth. For these blind spots keep away  
distracting images, which with their attendant emotions, might cause  
hesitation and infirmity of purpose. Consequently the stereotype not  
only saves time in a busy life and is a defense of our position in  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

61/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
society, but tends to preserve us from all the bewildering effect of  
trying to see the world steadily and see it whole.  

Main

CHAPTER IX  

CODES AND THEIR ENEMIES  

ANYONE who has stood at the end of a railroad platform waiting for a  
friend, will recall what queer people he mistook for him. The shape of  
a hat, a slightly characteristic gait, evoked the vivid picture in his  
mind's eye. In sleep a tinkle may sound like the pealing of a great 
bell; the distant stroke of a hammer like a thunderclap. For our  
constellations of imagery will vibrate to a stimulus that is perhaps  
but vaguely similar to some aspect of them. They may, in  
hallucination, flood the whole consciousness. They may enter very  
little into perception, though I am inclined to think that such an  
experience is extremely rare and highly sophisticated, as when we gaze  
blankly at a familiar word or object, and it gradually ceases to be  
familiar. Certainly for the most part, the way we see things is a  
combination of what is there and of what we expected to find. The  
heavens are not the same to an astronomer as to a pair of lovers; a  
page of Kant will start a different train of thought in a Kantian and  
in a radical empiricist; the Tahitian belle is a better looking person  
to her Tahitian suitor than to the readers of the _National  
Geographic Magazine_.  

Expertness in any subject is, in fact, a multiplication of the number  
of aspects we are prepared to discover, plus the habit of discounting  
our expectations. Where to the ignoramus all things look alike, and  
life is just one thing after another, to the specialist things are  
highly individual. For a chauffeur, an epicure, a connoisseur, a  
member of the President's cabinet, or a professor's wife, there are  
evident distinctions and qualities, not at all evident to the casual  
person who discusses automobiles, wines, old masters, Republicans, and  
college faculties.  

But in our public opinions few can be expert, while life is, as Mr.  
Bernard Shaw has made plain, so short. Those who are expert are so on  
only a few topics. Even among the expert soldiers, as we learned  
during the war, expert cavalrymen were not necessarily brilliant with  
trench-warfare and tanks. Indeed, sometimes a little expertness on a  
small topic may simply exaggerate our normal human habit of trying to  
squeeze into our stereotypes all that can be squeezed, and of casting  
into outer darkness that which does not fit.  

Whatever we recognize as familiar we tend, if we are not very careful,  
to visualize with the aid of images already in our mind. Thus in the  
American view of Progress and Success there is a definite picture of  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

62/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
human nature and of society. It is the kind of human nature and the  
kind of society which logically produce the kind of progress that is  
regarded as ideal. And then, when we seek to describe or explain  
actually successful men, and events that have really happened, we read  
back into them the qualities that are presupposed in the stereotypes.  

Main

These qualities were standardized rather innocently by the older  
economists. They set out to describe the social system under which  
they lived, and found it too complicated for words. So they  
constructed what they sincerely hoped was a simplified diagram, not so  
different in principle and in veracity from the parallelogram with  
legs and head in a child's drawing of a complicated cow. The scheme  
consisted of a capitalist who had diligently saved capital from his  
labor, an entrepreneur who conceived a socially useful demand and  
organized a factory, a collection of workmen who freely contracted,  
take it or leave it, for their labor, a landlord, and a group of  
consumers who bought in the cheapest market those goods which by the  
ready use of the pleasure-pain calculus they knew would give them the  
most pleasure. The model worked. The kind of people, which the model  
assumed, living in the sort of world the model assumed, invariably  
coöperated harmoniously in the books where the model was described.  

With modification and embroidery, this pure fiction, used by  
economists to simplify their thinking, was retailed and popularized  
until for large sections of the population it prevailed as the  
economic mythology of the day. It supplied a standard version of  
capitalist, promoter, worker and consumer in a society that was  
naturally more bent on achieving success than on explaining it. The  
buildings which rose, and the bank accounts which accumulated, were  
evidence that the stereotype of how the thing had been done was  
accurate. And those who benefited most by success came to believe they  
were the kind of men they were supposed to be. No wonder that the  
candid friends of successful men, when they read the official  
biography and the obituary, have to restrain themselves from asking  
whether this is indeed their friend.  

2  

To the vanquished and the victims, the official portraiture was, of  
course, unrecognizable. For while those who exemplified progress did  
not often pause to inquire whether they had arrived according to the  
route laid down by the economists, or by some other just as  
creditable, the unsuccessful people did inquire. "No one," says  
William James, [Footnote: _The Letters of William James,_ Vol. I,  
p.65] "sees further into a generalization than his own knowledge of  
detail extends." The captains of industry saw in the great trusts  
monuments of (their) success; their defeated competitors saw the  
monuments of (their) failure. So the captains expounded the economies  
and virtues of big business, asked to be let alone, said they were the  
agents of prosperity, and the developers of trade. The vanquished  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

63/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
insisted upon the wastes and brutalities of the trusts, and called  
loudly upon the Department of Justice to free business from  
conspiracies. In the same situation one side saw progress, economy,  
and a splendid development; the other, reaction, extravagance, and a  
restraint of trade. Volumes of statistics, anecdotes about the real  
truth and the inside truth, the deeper and the larger truth, were  
published to prove both sides of the argument.  

Main

For when a system of stereotypes is well fixed, our attention is  
called to those facts which support it, and diverted from those which  
contradict. So perhaps it is because they are attuned to find it, that  
kindly people discover so much reason for kindness, malicious people  
so much malice. We speak quite accurately of seeing through  
rose-colored spectacles, or with a jaundiced eye. If, as Philip  
Littell once wrote of a distinguished professor, we see life as  
through a class darkly, our stereotypes of what the best people and  
the lower classes are like will not be contaminated by understanding.  
What is alien will be rejected, what is different will fall upon  
unseeing eyes. We do not see what our eyes are not accustomed to take  
into account. Sometimes consciously, more often without knowing it, we  
are impressed by those facts which fit our philosophy.  

3  

This philosophy is a more or less organized series of images for  
describing the unseen world. But not only for describing it. For  
judging it as well. And, therefore, the stereotypes are loaded with  
preference, suffused with affection or dislike, attached to fears,  
lusts, strong wishes, pride, hope. Whatever invokes the stereotype is  
judged with the appropriate sentiment. Except where we deliberately  
keep prejudice in suspense, we do not study a man and judge him to be  
bad. We see a bad man. We see a dewy morn, a blushing maiden, a  
sainted priest, a humorless Englishman, a dangerous Red, a carefree  
bohemian, a lazy Hindu, a wily Oriental, a dreaming Slav, a volatile  
Irishman, a greedy Jew, a 100% American. In the workaday world that is  
often the real judgment, long in advance of the evidence, and it  
contains within itself the conclusion which the evidence is pretty  
certain to confirm. Neither justice, nor mercy, nor truth, enter into  
such a judgment, for the judgment has preceded the evidence. Yet a  
people without prejudices, a people with altogether neutral vision, is  
so unthinkable in any civilization of which it is useful to think,  
that no scheme of education could be based upon that ideal. Prejudice  
can be detected, discounted, and refined, but so long as finite men  
must compress into a short schooling preparation for dealing with a  
vast civilization, they must carry pictures of it around with them,  
and have prejudices. The quality of their thinking and doing will  
depend on whether those prejudices are friendly, friendly to other  
people, to other ideas, whether they evoke love of what is felt to be  
positively good, rather than hatred of what is not contained in their  
version of the good.  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

64/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
Morality, good taste and good form first standardize and then  
emphasize certain of these underlying prejudices. As we adjust  
ourselves to our code, we adjust the facts we see to that code.  
Rationally, the facts are neutral to all our views of right and wrong.  
Actually, our canons determine greatly what we shall perceive and how.  

Main

For a moral code is a scheme of conduct applied to a number of typical  
instances. To behave as the code directs is to serve whatever purpose  
the code pursues. It may be God's will, or the king's, individual  
salvation in a good, solid, three dimensional paradise, success on  
earth, or the service of mankind. In any event the makers of the code  
fix upon certain typical situations, and then by some form of  
reasoning or intuition, deduce the kind of behavior which would  
produce the aim they acknowledge. The rules apply where they apply.  

But in daily living how does a man know whether his predicament is the  
one the law-giver had in mind? He is told not to kill. But if his  
children are attacked, may he kill to stop a killing? The Ten  
Commandments are silent on the point. Therefore, around every code  
there is a cloud of interpreters who deduce more specific cases.  
Suppose, then, that the doctors of the law decide that he may kill in  
self-defense. For the next man the doubt is almost as great; how does  
he know that he is defining self-defense correctly, or that he has not  
misjudged the facts, imagined the attack, and is really the aggressor?  
Perhaps he has provoked the attack. But what is a provocation? Exactly  
these confusions infected the minds of most Germans in August, 1914.  

Far more serious in the modern world than any difference of moral code  
is the difference in the assumptions about facts to which the code is  
applied. Religious, moral and political formulae are nothing like so  
far apart as the facts assumed by their votaries. Useful discussion,  
then, instead of comparing ideals, reexamines the visions of the  
facts. Thus the rule that you should do unto others as you would have  
them do unto you rests on the belief that human nature is uniform. Mr.  
Bernard Shaw's statement that you should not do unto others what you  
would have them do unto you, because their tastes may be different,  
rests on the belief that human nature is not uniform. The maxim that  
competition is the life of trade consists of a whole tome of  
assumptions about economic motives, industrial relations, and the  
working of a particular commercial system. The claim that America will  
never have a merchant marine, unless it is privately owned and  
managed, assumes a certain proved connection between a certain kind of  
profit-making and incentive. The justification by the bolshevik  
propagandist of the dictatorship, espionage, and the terror, because  
"every state is an apparatus of violence" [Footnote: See _Two Years  
of Conflict on the Internal Front_, published by the Russian  
Socialist Federated Soviet Republic, Moscow, 1920. Translated by  
Malcolm W. Davis for the _New York Evening Post_, January 15,  
1921.] is an historical judgment, the truth of which is by no means  
self-evident to a non-communist.  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

65/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

At the core of every moral code there is a picture of human nature, a  
map of the universe, and a version of history. To human nature (of the  
sort conceived), in a universe (of the kind imagined), after a history  
(so understood), the rules of the code apply. So far as the facts of  
personality, of the environment and of memory are different, by so far  
the rules of the code are difficult to apply with success. Now every  
moral code has to conceive human psychology, the material world, and  
tradition some way or other. But in the codes that are under the  
influence of science, the conception is known to be an hypothesis,  
whereas in the codes that come unexamined from the past or bubble up  
from the caverns of the mind, the conception is not taken as an  
hypothesis demanding proof or contradiction, but as a fiction accepted  
without question. In the one case, man is humble about his beliefs,  
because he knows they are tentative and incomplete; in the other he is  
dogmatic, because his belief is a completed myth. The moralist who  
submits to the scientific discipline knows that though he does not  
know everything, he is in the way of knowing something; the dogmatist,  
using a myth, believes himself to share part of the insight of 
omniscience, though he lacks the criteria by which to tell truth from  
error. For the distinguishing mark of a myth is that truth and error,  
fact and fable, report and fantasy, are all on the same plane of  
credibility.  

The myth is, then, not necessarily false. It might happen to be wholly  
true. It may happen to be partly true. If it has affected human  
conduct a long time, it is almost certain to contain much that is  
profoundly and importantly true. What a myth never contains is the  
critical power to separate its truths from its errors. For that power  
comes only by realizing that no human opinion, whatever its supposed  
origin, is too exalted for the test of evidence, that every opinion is  
only somebody's opinion. And if you ask why the test of evidence is  
preferable to any other, there is no answer unless you are willing to  
use the test in order to test it.  

4  

The statement is, I think, susceptible of overwhelming proof, that  
moral codes assume a particular view of the facts. Under the term  
moral codes I include all kinds: personal, family, economic,  
professional, legal, patriotic, international. At the center of each  
there is a pattern of stereotypes about psychology, sociology, and  
history. The same view of human nature, institutions or tradition  
rarely persists through all our codes. Compare, for example, the  
economic and the patriotic codes. There is a war supposed to affect  
all alike. Two men are partners in business. One enlists, the other  
takes a war contract. The soldier sacrifices everything, perhaps even  
his life. He is paid a dollar a day, and no one says, no one believes,  
that you could make a better soldier out of him by any form of  
economic incentive. That motive disappears out of his human nature.  
The contractor sacrifices very little, is paid a handsome profit over  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

66/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
costs, and few say or believe that he would produce the munitions if  
there were no economic incentive. That may be unfair to him. The point  
is that the accepted patriotic code assumes one kind of human nature,  
the commercial code another. And the codes are probably founded on  
true expectations to this extent, that when a man adopts a certain  
code he tends to exhibit the kind of human nature which the code  
demands.  

Main

That is one reason why it is so dangerous to generalize about human  
nature. A loving father can be a sour boss, an earnest municipal  
reformer, and a rapacious jingo abroad. His family life, his business  
career, his politics, and his foreign policy rest on totally different  
versions of what others are like and of how he should act. These  
versions differ by codes in the same person, the codes differ somewhat  
among persons in the same social set, differ widely as between social  
sets, and between two nations, or two colors, may differ to the point  
where there is no common assumption whatever. That is why people  
professing the same stock of religious beliefs can go to war. The  
element of their belief which determines conduct is that view of the  
facts which they assume. 

That is where codes enter so subtly and so pervasively into the making  
of public opinion. The orthodox theory holds that a public opinion  
constitutes a moral judgment on a group of facts. The theory I am  
suggesting is that, in the present state of education, a public  
opinion is primarily a moralized and codified version of the facts. I  
am arguing that the pattern of stereotypes at the center of our codes  
largely determines what group of facts we shall see, and in what light  
we shall see them. That is why, with the best will in the world, the  
news policy of a journal tends to support its editorial policy; why a 
capitalist sees one set of facts, and certain aspects of human nature,  
literally sees them; his socialist opponent another set and other  
aspects, and why each regards the other as unreasonable or perverse,  
when the real difference between them is a difference of perception.  
That difference is imposed by the difference between the capitalist  
and socialist pattern of stereotypes. "There are no classes in  
America," writes an American editor. "The history of all hitherto  
existing society is the history of class struggles," says the 
Communist Manifesto. If you have the editor's pattern in your mind,  
you will see vividly the facts that confirm it, vaguely and  
ineffectively those that contradict. If you have the communist  
pattern, you will not only look for different things, but you will see  
with a totally different emphasis what you and the editor happen to  
see in common.  

5  

And since my moral system rests on my accepted version of the facts,  
he who denies either my moral judgments or my version of the facts, is  
to me perverse, alien, dangerous. How shall I account for him? The  
opponent has always to be explained, and the last explanation that we  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

67/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
ever look for is that he sees a different set of facts. Such an  
explanation we avoid, because it saps the very foundation of our own  
assurance that we have seen life steadily and seen it whole. It is  
only when we are in the habit of recognizing our opinions as a partial  
experience seen through our stereotypes that we become truly tolerant  
of an opponent. Without that habit, we believe in the absolutism of  
our own vision, and consequently in the treacherous character of all  
opposition. For while men are willing to admit that there are two  
sides to a "question," they do not believe that there are two sides to  
what they regard as a "fact." And they never do believe it until after  
long critical education, they are fully conscious of how second-hand  
and subjective is their apprehension of their social data.  

So where two factions see vividly each its own aspect, and contrive  
their own explanations of what they see, it is almost impossible for  
them to credit each other with honesty. If the pattern fits their  
experience at a crucial point, they no longer look upon it as an  
interpretation. They look upon it as "reality." It may not resemble  
the reality, except that it culminates in a conclusion which fits a  
real experience. I may represent my trip from New York to Boston by a  
straight line on a map, just as a man may regard his triumph as the  
end of a straight and narrow path. The road by which I actually went  
to Boston may have involved many detours, much turning and twisting,  
just as his road may have involved much besides pure enterprise, labor  
and thrift. But provided I reach Boston and he succeeds, the airline  
and the straight path will serve as ready made charts. Only when  
somebody tries to follow them, and does not arrive, do we have to  
answer objections. If we insist on our charts, and he insists on  
rejecting them, we soon tend to regard him as a dangerous fool, and he  
to regard us as liars and hypocrites. Thus we gradually paint  
portraits of each other. For the opponent presents himself as the man  
who says, evil be thou my good. He is an annoyance who does not fit  
into the scheme of things. Nevertheless he interferes. And since that  
scheme is based in our minds on incontrovertible fact fortified by  
irresistible logic, some place has to be found for him in the scheme.  
Rarely in politics or industrial disputes is a place made for him by  
the simple admission that he has looked upon the same reality and seen  
another aspect of it. That would shake the whole scheme.  

Thus to the Italians in Paris Fiume was Italian It was not merely a  
city that it would be desirable to include within the Italian kingdom.  
It was Italian. They fixed their whole mind upon the Italian majority  
within the legal boundaries of the city itself. The American  
delegates, having seen more Italians in New York than there are in  
Fiume, without regarding New York as Italian, fixed their eyes on  
Fiume as a central European port of entry. They saw vividly the  
Jugoslavs in the suburbs and the non-Italian hinterland. Some of the  
Italians in Paris were therefore in need of a convincing explanation  
of the American perversity. They found it in a rumor which started, no  
one knows where, that an influential American diplomat was in the  
snares of a Jugoslav mistress. She had been seen.... He had been  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

68/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
seen.... At Versailles just off the boulevard. ... The villa with the  
large trees.  

Main

This is a rather common way of explaining away opposition. In their  
more libelous form such charges rarely reach the printed page, and a  
Roosevelt may have to wait years, or a Harding months, before he can  
force an issue, and end a whispering campaign that has reached into  
every circle of talk. Public men have to endure a fearful amount of  
poisonous clubroom, dinner table, boudoir slander, repeated, 
elaborated, chuckled over, and regarded as delicious. While this sort  
of thing is, I believe, less prevalent in America than in Europe, yet  
rare is the American official about whom somebody is not repeating a  
scandal.  

Out of the opposition we make villains and conspiracies. If prices go  
up unmercifully the profiteers have conspired; if the newspapers  
misrepresent the news, there is a capitalist plot; if the rich are too  
rich, they have been stealing; if a closely fought election is lost,  
the electorate was corrupted; if a statesman does something of which  
you disapprove, he has been bought or influenced by some discreditable  
person. If workingmen are restless, they are the victims of agitators;  
if they are restless over wide areas, there is a conspiracy on foot.  
If you do not produce enough aeroplanes, it is the work of spies; if  
there is trouble in Ireland, it is German or Bolshevik "gold." And if  
you go stark, staring mad looking for plots, you see all strikes, the  
Plumb plan, Irish rebellion, Mohammedan unrest, the restoration of  
King Constantine, the League of Nations, Mexican disorder, the  
movement to reduce armaments, Sunday movies, short skirts, evasion of  
the liquor laws, Negro self-assertion, as sub-plots under some  
grandiose plot engineered either by Moscow, Rome, the Free Masons, the 
Japanese, or the Elders of Zion.  

CHAPTER X  

THE DETECTION OF STEREOTYPES  

1  

Skilled diplomatists, compelled to talk out loud to the warring  
peoples, learned how to use a large repertory of stereotypes. They  
were dealing with a precarious alliance of powers, each of which was  
maintaining its war unity only by the most careful leadership. The  
ordinary soldier and his wife, heroic and selfless beyond anything in  
the chronicles of courage, were still not heroic enough to face death  
gladly for all the ideas which were said by the foreign offices of  
foreign powers to be essential to the future of civilization. There  
were ports, and mines, rocky mountain passes, and villages that few  
soldiers would willingly have crossed No Man's Land to obtain for  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

69/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
their allies.  

Main

Now it happened in one nation that the war party which was in control  
of the foreign office, the high command, and most of the press, had  
claims on the territory of several of its neighbors. These claims were  
called the Greater Ruritania by the cultivated classes who regarded  
Kipling, Treitschke, and Maurice Barres as one hundred percent  
Ruritanian. But the grandiose idea aroused no enthusiasm abroad. So  
holding this finest flower of the Ruritanian genius, as their poet  
laureate said, to their hearts, Ruritania's statesmen went forth to  
divide and conquer. They divided the claim into sectors. For each  
piece they invoked that stereotype which some one or more of their  
allies found it difficult to resist, because that ally had claims for  
which it hoped to find approval by the use of this same stereotype.  

The first sector happened to be a mountainous region inhabited by  
alien peasants. Ruritania demanded it to complete her natural  
geographical frontier. If you fixed your attention long enough on the  
ineffable value of what is natural, those alien peasants just  
dissolved into fog, and only the slope of the mountains was visible.  
The next sector was inhabited by Ruritanians, and on the principle  
that no people ought to live under alien rule, they were re-annexed.  
Then came a city of considerable commercial importance, not inhabited  
by Ruritanians. But until the Eighteenth Century it had been part of  
Ruritania, and on the principle of Historic Right it was annexed.  
Farther on there was a splendid mineral deposit owned by aliens and  
worked by aliens. On the principle of reparation for damage it was  
annexed. Beyond this there was a territory inhabited 97% by aliens,  
constituting the natural geographical frontier of another nation,  
never historically a part of Ruritania. But one of the provinces which  
had been federated into Ruritania had formerly traded in those  
markets, and the upper class culture was Ruritanian. On the principle  
of cultural superiority and the necessity of defending civilization,  
the lands were claimed. Finally, there was a port wholly disconnected  
from Ruritania geographically, ethnically, economically, historically,  
traditionally. It was demanded on the ground that it was needed for  
national defense.  

In the treaties that concluded the Great War you can multiply examples  
of this kind. Now I do not wish to imply that I think it was possible  
to resettle Europe consistently on any one of these principles. I am  
certain that it was not. The very use of these principles, so  
pretentious and so absolute, meant that the spirit of accommodation  
did not prevail and that, therefore, the substance of peace was not  
there. For the moment you start to discuss factories, mines,  
mountains, or even political authority, as perfect examples of some  
eternal principle or other, you are not arguing, you are fighting.  
That eternal principle censors out all the objections, isolates the  
issue from its background and its context, and sets going in you some  
strong emotion, appropriate enough to the principle, highly  
inappropriate to the docks, warehouses, and real estate. And having  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

70/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
started in that mood you cannot stop. A real danger exists. To meet it  
you have to invoke more absolute principles in order to defend what is  
open to attack. Then you have to defend the defenses, erect buffers,  
and buffers for the buffers, until the whole affair is so scrambled  
that it seems less dangerous to fight than to keep on talking.  

Main

There are certain clues which often help in detecting the false  
absolutism of a stereotype. In the case of the Ruritanian propaganda  
the principles blanketed each other so rapidly that one could readily  
see how the argument had been constructed. The series of  
contradictions showed that for each sector that stereotype was  
employed which would obliterate all the facts that interfered with the 
claim. Contradiction of this sort is often a good clue.  

2  

Inability to take account of space is another. In the spring of 1918,  
for example, large numbers of people, appalled by the withdrawal of  
Russia, demanded the "reestablishment of an Eastern Front." The war,  
as they had conceived it, was on two fronts, and when one of them  
disappeared there was an instant demand that it be recreated. The  
unemployed Japanese army was to man the front, substituting for the  
Russian. But there was one insuperable obstacle. Between Vladivostok  
and the eastern battleline there were five thousand miles of country,  
spanned by one broken down railway. Yet those five thousand miles  
would not stay in the minds of the enthusiasts. So overwhelming was  
their conviction that an eastern front was needed, and so great their  
confidence in the valor of the Japanese army, that, mentally, they had  
projected that army from Vladivostok to Poland on a magic carpet. In  
vain our military authorities argued that to land troops on the rim of  
Siberia had as little to do with reaching the Germans, as climbing  
from the cellar to the roof of the Woolworth building had to do with  
reaching the moon.  

The stereotype in this instance was the war on two fronts. Ever since  
men had begun to imagine the Great War they had conceived Germany held  
between France and Russia. One generation of strategists, and perhaps  
two, had lived with that visual image as the starting point of all  
their calculations. For nearly four years every battle-map they saw  
had deepened the impression that this was the war. When affairs took a  
new turn, it was not easy to see them as they were then. They were  
seen through the stereotype, and facts which conflicted with it, such  
as the distance from Japan to Poland, were incapable of coming vividly  
into consciousness.  

It is interesting to note that the American authorities dealt with the  
new facts more realistically than the French. In part, this was  
because (previous to 1914) they had no preconception of a war upon the  
continent; in part because the Americans, engrossed in the  
mobilization of their forces, had a vision of the western front which  
was itself a stereotype that excluded from _their_ consciousness  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

71/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
any very vivid sense of the other theatres of war. In the spring of  
1918 this American view could not compete with the traditional French  
view, because while the Americans believed enormously in their own  
powers, the French at that time (before Cantigny and the Second Marne)  
had the gravest doubts. The American confidence suffused the American  
stereotype, gave it that power to possess consciousness, that  
liveliness and sensible pungency, that stimulating effect upon the  
will, that emotional interest as an object of desire, that congruity  
with the activity in hand, which James notes as characteristic of what  
we regard as "real." [Footnote: _Principles of Psychology_, Vol.  
II, p. 300.] The French in despair remained fixed on their accepted  
image. And when facts, gross geographical facts, would not fit with  
the preconception, they were either censored out of mind, or the facts  
were themselves stretched out of shape. Thus the difficulty of the  
Japanese reaching the Germans five thousand miles away was, in  
measure, overcome by bringing the Germans more than half way to meet  
them. Between March and June 1918, there was supposed to be a German  
army operating in Eastern Siberia. This phantom army consisted of some  
German prisoners actually seen, more German prisoners thought about,  
and chiefly of the delusion that those five thousand intervening miles  
did not really exist. [Footnote: See in this connection Mr. Charles  
Grasty's interview with Marshal Foch, _New York Times_, February 
26, 1918. "Germany is walking through Russia. America and Japan, who  
are in a position to do so, should go to meet her in Siberia." See  
also the resolution by Senator King of Utah, June 10, 1918, and Mr.  
Taft's statement in the _New York Times_, June 11, 1918, and the  
appeal to America on May 5, 1918, by Mr. A. J. Sack, Director of the  
Russian Information Bureau: "If Germany were in the Allied place...  
she would have 3,000,000 fighting on the East front within a year."]  

3  

A true conception of space is not a simple matter. If I draw a  
straight line on a map between Bombay and Hong Kong and measure the  
distance, I have learned nothing whatever about the distance I should  
have to cover on a voyage. And even if I measure the actual distance  
that I must traverse, I still know very little until I know what ships  
are in the service, when they run, how fast they go, whether I can  
secure accommodation and afford to pay for it. In practical life space  
is a matter of available transportation, not of geometrical planes, as  
the old railroad magnate knew when he threatened to make grass grow in  
the streets of a city that had offended him. If I am motoring and ask  
how far it is to my destination, I curse as an unmitigated booby the  
man who tells me it is three miles, and does not mention a six mile  
detour. It does me no good to be told that it is three miles if you  
walk. I might as well be told it is one mile as the crow flies. I do  
not fly like a crow, and I am not walking either. I must know that it  
is nine miles for a motor car, and also, if that is the case, that six  
of them are ruts and puddles. I call the pedestrian a nuisance who  
tells me it is three miles and think evil of the aviator who told me  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

72/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
it was one mile. Both of them are talking about the space they have to  
cover, not the space I must cover.  

Main

In the drawing of boundary lines absurd complications have arisen  
through failure to conceive the practical geography of a region. Under  
some general formula like self-determination statesmen have at various  
times drawn lines on maps, which, when surveyed on the spot, ran  
through the middle of a factory, down the center of a village street,  
diagonally across the nave of a church, or between the kitchen and  
bedroom of a peasant's cottage. There have been frontiers in a grazing 
country which separated pasture from water, pasture from market, and  
in an industrial country, railheads from railroad. On the colored  
ethnic map the line was ethnically just, that is to say, just in the  
world of that ethnic map.  

4  

But time, no less than space, fares badly. A common example is that of  
the man who tries by making an elaborate will to control his money  
long after his death. "It had been the purpose of the first William  
James," writes his great-grandson Henry James, [Footnote: _The  
Letters of William James_, Vol. I, p. 6.] "to provide that his  
children (several of whom were under age when he died) should qualify  
themselves by industry and experience to enjoy the large patrimony  
which he expected to bequeath to them, and with that in view he left a  
will which was a voluminous compound of restraints and instructions.  
He showed thereby how great were both his confidence in his own 
judgment and his solicitude for the moral welfare of his descendants."  
The courts upset the will. For the law in its objection to  
perpetuities recognizes that there are distinct limits to the  
usefulness of allowing anyone to impose his moral stencil upon an  
unknown future. But the desire to impose it is a very human trait, so  
human that the law permits it to operate for a limited time after  
death.  

The amending clause of any constitution is a good index of the  
confidence the authors entertained about the reach of their opinions  
in the succeeding generations. There are, I believe, American state  
constitutions which are almost incapable of amendment. The men who  
made them could have had but little sense of the flux of time: to them  
the Here and Now was so brilliantly certain, the Hereafter so vague or  
so terrifying, that they had the courage to say how life should run  
after they were gone. And then because constitutions are difficult to  
amend, zealous people with a taste for mortmain have loved to write on  
this imperishable brass all kinds of rules and restrictions that,  
given any decent humility about the future, ought to be no more  
permanent than an ordinary statute.  

A presumption about time enters widely into our opinions. To one  
person an institution which has existed for the whole of his conscious  
life is part of the permanent furniture of the universe: to another it  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

73/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
is ephemeral. Geological time is very different from biological time.  
Social time is most complex. The statesman has to decide whether to  
calculate for the emergency or for the long run. Some decisions have  
to be made on the basis of what will happen in the next two hours;  
others on what will happen in a week, a month, a season, a decade,  
when the children have grown up, or their children's children. An  
important part of wisdom is the ability to distinguish the  
time-conception that properly belongs to the thing in hand. The person  
who uses the wrong time-conception ranges from the dreamer who ignores  
the present to the philistine who can see nothing else. A true scale  
of values has a very acute sense of relative time.  

Distant time, past and future, has somehow to be conceived. But as  
James says, "of the longer duration we have no direct 'realizing'  
sense." [Footnote: _Principles of Psychology_, Vol. I, p. 638.]  
The longest duration which we immediately feel is what is called the  
"specious present." It endures, according to Titchener, for about six  
seconds. [Footnote: Cited by Warren, _Human Psychology_, p. 255.]  
"All impressions within this period of time are present to us _at  
once_. This makes it possible for us to perceive changes and events  
as well as stationary objects. The perceptual present is supplemented  
by the ideational present. Through the combination of perceptions with  
memory images, entire days, months, and even years of the past are  
brought together into the present."  

In this ideational present, vividness, as James said, is proportionate  
to the number of discriminations we perceive within it. Thus a  
vacation in which we were bored with nothing to do passes slowly while  
we are in it, but seems very short in memory. Great activity kills  
time rapidly, but in memory its duration is long. On the relation  
between the amount we discriminate and our time perspective James has  
an interesting passage: [Footnote: _Op. cit._, Vol. I, p. 639.]  

"We have every reason to think that creatures may possibly differ  
enormously in the amounts of duration which they intuitively feel, and  
in the fineness of the events that may fill it. Von Baer has indulged  
in some interesting computations of the effect of such differences in  
changing the aspect of Nature. Suppose we were able, within the length  
of a second, to note 10,000 events distinctly, instead of barely 10 as  
now; [Footnote: In the moving picture this effect is admirably produced  
by the ultra-rapid camera.] if our life were then destined to hold the  
same number of impressions, it might be 1000 times as short. We should  
live less than a month, and personally know nothing of the change of  
seasons. If born in winter, we should believe in summer as we now  
believe in the heats of the carboniferous era. The motions of organic  
beings would be so slow to our senses as to be inferred, not seen. The  
sun would stand still in the sky, the moon be almost free from change,  
and so on. But now reverse the hypothesis and suppose a being to get  
only one 1000th part of the sensations we get in a given time, and  
consequently to live 1000 times as long. Winters and summers will be  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

74/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
to him like quarters of an hour. Mushrooms and the swifter growing  
plants will shoot into being so rapidly as to appear instantaneous  
creations; annual shrubs will rise and fall from the earth like  
restless boiling water springs; the motions of animals will be as  
invisible as are to us the movements of bullets and cannon-balls; the  
sun will scour through the sky like a meteor, leaving a fiery trail  
behind him, etc."  

Main

5  

In his Outline of History Mr. Wells has made a gallant effort to  
visualize "the true proportions of historical to geological time"  
[Footnote: 1 Vol. II, p. 605. See also James Harvey Robinson, _The  
New History,_ p. 239.] On a scale which represents the time from  
Columbus to ourselves by three inches of space, the reader would have  
to walk 55 feet to see the date of the painters of the Altamara caves,  
550 feet to see the earlier Neanderthalers, a mile or so to the last  
of the dinosaurs. More or less precise chronology does not begin until  
after 1000 B.C., and at that time "Sargon I of the Akkadian-Sumerian  
Empire was a remote memory,... more remote than is Constantine the  
Great from the world of the present day.... Hammurabi had been dead a  
thousand years... Stonehedge in England was already a thousand years  
old."  

Mr. Wells was writing with a purpose. "In the brief period of ten  
thousand years these units (into which men have combined) have grown  
from the small family tribe of the early neolithic culture to the vast  
united realms--vast yet still too small and partial--of the present  
time." Mr. Wells hoped by changing the time perspective on our present  
problems to change the moral perspective. Yet the astronomical measure  
of time, the geological, the biological, any telescopic measure which  
minimizes the present is not "more true" than a microscopic. Mr.  
Simeon Strunsky is right when he insists that "if Mr. Wells is  
thinking of his subtitle, The Probable Future of Mankind, he is  
entitled to ask for any number of centuries to work out his solution.  
If he is thinking of the salvaging of this western civilization,  
reeling under the effects of the Great War, he must think in decades  
and scores of years." [Footnote: In a review of _The Salvaging of  
Civilization, The Literary Review of the N. Y. Evening Post_, June  
18, 1921, p. 5.] It all depends upon the practical purpose for which  
you adopt the measure. There are situations when the time perspective  
needs to be lengthened, and others when it needs to be shortened.  

The man who says that it does not matter if 15,000,000 Chinese die of  
famine, because in two generations the birthrate will make up the  
loss, has used a time perspective to excuse his inertia. A person who  
pauperizes a healthy young man because he is sentimentally  
overimpressed with an immediate difficulty has lost sight of the  
duration of the beggar's life. The people who for the sake of an  
immediate peace are willing to buy off an aggressive empire by  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

75/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
indulging its appetite have allowed a specious present to interfere  
with the peace of their children. The people who will not be patient  
with a troublesome neighbor, who want to bring everything to a  
"showdown" are no less the victims of a specious present.  

Main

6  

Into almost every social problem the proper calculation of time  
enters. Suppose, for example, it is a question of timber. Some trees  
grow faster than others. Then a sound forest policy is one in which  
the amount of each species and of each age cut in each season is made 
good by replanting. In so far as that calculation is correct the  
truest economy has been reached. To cut less is waste, and to cut more  
is exploitation. But there may come an emergency, say the need for  
aeroplane spruce in a war, when the year's allowance must be exceeded.  
An alert government will recognize that and regard the restoration of  
the balance as a charge upon the future.  

Coal involves a different theory of time, because coal, unlike a tree,  
is produced on the scale of geological time. The supply is limited.  
Therefore a correct social policy involves intricate computation of  
the available reserves of the world, the indicated possibilities, the  
present rate of use, the present economy of use, and the alternative  
fuels. But when that computation has been reached it must finally be  
squared with an ideal standard involving time. Suppose, for example,  
that engineers conclude that the present fuels are being exhausted at  
a certain rate; that barring new discoveries industry will have to  
enter a phase of contraction at some definite time in the future. We  
have then to determine how much thrift and self-denial we will use,  
after all feasible economies have been exercised, in order not to rob  
posterity. But what shall we consider posterity? Our grandchildren?  
Our great grandchildren? Perhaps we shall decide to calculate on a  
hundred years, believing that to be ample time for the discovery of  
alternative fuels if the necessity is made clear at once. The figures  
are, of course, hypothetical. But in calculating that way we shall be  
employing what reason we have. We shall be giving social time its  
place in public opinion. Let us now imagine a somewhat different case:  
a contract between a city and a trolley-car company. The company says  
that it will not invest its capital unless it is granted a monopoly of  
the main highway for ninety-nine years. In the minds of the men who  
make that demand ninety-nine years is so long as to mean "forever."  
But suppose there is reason to think that surface cars, run from a  
central power plant on tracks, are going out of fashion in twenty  
years. Then it is a most unwise contract to make, for you are  
virtually condemning a future generation to inferior transportation.  
In making such a contract the city officials lack a realizing sense of  
ninety-nine years. Far better to give the company a subsidy now in  
order to attract capital than to stimulate investment by indulging a  
fallacious sense of eternity. No city official and no company official  
has a sense of real time when he talks about ninety-nine years.  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

76/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
Popular history is a happy hunting ground of time confusions. To the  
average Englishman, for example, the behavior of Cromwell, the  
corruption of the Act of Union, the Famine of 1847 are wrongs suffered  
by people long dead and done by actors long dead with whom no living  
person, Irish or English, has any real connection. But in the mind of  
a patriotic Irishman these same events are almost contemporary. His  
memory is like one of those historical paintings, where Virgil and  
Dante sit side by side conversing. These perspectives and  
foreshortenings are a great barrier between peoples. It is ever so  
difficult for a person of one tradition to remember what is  
contemporary in the tradition of another.  

Almost nothing that goes by the name of Historic Rights or Historic  
Wrongs can be called a truly objective view of the past. Take, for  
example, the Franco-German debate about Alsace-Lorraine. It all  
depends on the original date you select. If you start with the Rauraci  
and Sequani, the lands are historically part of Ancient Gaul. If you  
prefer Henry I, they are historically a German territory; if you take  
1273 they belong to the House of Austria; if you take 1648 and the  
Peace of Westphalia, most of them are French; if you take Louis XIV  
and the year 1688 they are almost all French. If you are using the  
argument from history you are fairly certain to select those dates in 
the past which support your view of what should be done now.  

Arguments about "races" and nationalities often betray the same  
arbitrary view of time. During the war, under the influence of  
powerful feeling, the difference between "Teutons" on the one hand,  
and "Anglo-Saxons" and French on the other, was popularly believed to  
be an eternal difference. They had always been opposing races. Yet a  
generation ago, historians, like Freeman, were emphasizing the common  
Teutonic origin of the West European peoples, and ethnologists would  
certainly insist that the Germans, English, and the greater part of  
the French are branches of what was once a common stock. The general  
rule is: if you like a people to-day you come down the branches to the  
trunk; if you dislike them you insist that the separate branches are  
separate trunks. In one case you fix your attention on the period  
before they were distinguishable; in the other on the period after  
which they became distinct. And the view which fits the mood is taken  
as the "truth."  

An amiable variation is the family tree. Usually one couple are  
appointed the original ancestors, if possible, a couple associated  
with an honorific event like the Norman Conquest. That couple have no  
ancestors. They are not descendants. Yet they were the descendants of  
ancestors, and the expression that So-and-So was the founder of his  
house means not that he is the Adam of his family, but that he is the  
particular ancestor from whom it is desirable to start, or perhaps the  
earliest ancestor of which there is a record. But genealogical tables  
exhibit a deeper prejudice. Unless the female line happens to be  
especially remarkable descent is traced down through the males. The  
tree is male. At various moments females accrue to it as itinerant  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

77/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
bees light upon an ancient apple tree.  

Main

7  

But the future is the most illusive time of all. Our temptation here  
is to jump over necessary steps in the sequence; and as we are  
governed by hope or doubt, to exaggerate or to minimize the time  
required to complete various parts of a process. The discussion of the  
role to be exercised by wage-earners in the management of industry is 
riddled with this difficulty. For management is a word that covers  
many functions. [Footnote: Cf. Carter L. Goodrich, The Frontier of  
Control.] Some of these require no training; some require a little  
training; others can be learned only in a lifetime. And the truly 
discriminating program of industrial democratization would be one  
based on the proper time sequence, so that the assumption of  
responsibility would run parallel to a complementary program of  
industrial training. The proposal for a sudden dictatorship of the  
proletariat is an attempt to do away with the intervening time of  
preparation; the resistance to all sharing of responsibility an  
attempt to deny the alteration of human capacity in the course of  
time. Primitive notions of democracy, such as rotation in office, and  
contempt for the expert, are really nothing but the old myth that the  
Goddess of Wisdom sprang mature and fully armed from the brow of Jove.  
They assume that what it takes years to learn need not be learned at  
all.  

Whenever the phrase "backward people" is used as the basis of a  
policy, the conception of time is a decisive element. The Covenant of  
the League of Nations says, [Footnote: Article XIX.] for example, that  
"the character of the mandate must differ according to the stage of  
the development of the people," as well as on other grounds. Certain  
communities, it asserts, "have reached a stage of development" where  
their independence can be provisionally recognized, subject to advice  
and assistance "until such time as they are able to stand alone." The  
way in which the mandatories and the mandated conceive that time will  
influence deeply their relations. Thus in the case of Cuba the  
judgment of the American government virtually coincided with that of  
the Cuban patriots, and though there has been trouble, there is no  
finer page in the history of how strong powers have dealt with the  
weak. Oftener in that history the estimates have not coincided. Where  
the imperial people, whatever its public expressions, has been deeply  
convinced that the backwardness of the backward was so hopeless as not  
to be worth remedying, or so profitable that it was not desirable to  
remedy it, the tie has festered and poisoned the peace of the world.  
There have been a few cases, very few, where backwardness has meant to  
the ruling power the need for a program of forwardness, a program with  
definite standards and definite estimates of time. Far more  
frequently, so frequently in fact as to seem the rule, backwardness  
has been conceived as an intrinsic and eternal mark of inferiority.  
And then every attempt to be less backward has been frowned upon as  
the sedition, which, under these conditions, it undoubtedly is. In our  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

78/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
own race wars we can see some of the results of the failure to realize  
that time would gradually obliterate the slave morality of the Negro,  
and that social adjustment based on this morality would begin to break  
down.  

Main

It is hard not to picture the future as if it obeyed our present  
purposes, to annihilate whatever delays our desire, or immortalize  
whatever stands between us and our fears.  

8  

In putting together our public opinions, not only do we have to  
picture more space than we can see with our eyes, and more time than  
we can feel, but we have to describe and judge more people, more  
actions, more things than we can ever count, or vividly imagine. We  
have to summarize and generalize. We have to pick out samples, and  
treat them as typical.  

To pick fairly a good sample of a large class is not easy. The problem  
belongs to the science of statistics, and it is a most difficult  
affair for anyone whose mathematics is primitive, and mine remain  
azoic in spite of the half dozen manuals which I once devoutly  
imagined that I understood. All they have done for me is to make me a  
little more conscious of how hard it is to classify and to sample, how  
readily we spread a little butter over the whole universe.  

Some time ago a group of social workers in Sheffield, England, started  
out to substitute an accurate picture of the mental equipment of the  
workers of that city for the impressionistic one they had. [Footnote:  
_The Equipment of the Worker_.] They wished to say, with some  
decent grounds for saying it, how the workers of Sheffield were  
equipped. They found, as we all find the moment we refuse to let our 
first notion prevail, that they were beset with complications. Of the  
test they employed nothing need be said here except that it was a  
large questionnaire. For the sake of the illustration, assume that the  
questions were a fair test of mental equipment for English city life.  
Theoretically, then, those questions should have been put to every  
member of the working class. But it is not so easy to know who are the  
working class. However, assume again that the census knows how to  
classify them. Then there were roughly 104,000 men and 107,000 women  
who ought to have been questioned. They possessed the answers which  
would justify or refute the casual phrase about the "ignorant workers"  
or the "intelligent workers." But nobody could think of questioning  
the whole two hundred thousand.  

So the social workers consulted an eminent statistician, Professor  
Bowley. He advised them that not less than 408 men and 408 women would  
prove to be a fair sample. According to mathematical calculation this  
number would not show a greater deviation from the average than 1 in  
22. [Footnote: _Op. cit._, p. 65.] They had, therefore, to  
question at least 816 people before they could pretend to talk about  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

79/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
the average workingman. But which 816 people should they approach? "We  
might have gathered particulars concerning workers to whom one or  
another of us had a pre-inquiry access; we might have worked through  
philanthropic gentlemen and ladies who were in contact with certain  
sections of workers at a club, a mission, an infirmary, a place of  
worship, a settlement. But such a method of selection would produce  
entirely worthless results. The workers thus selected would not be in  
any sense representative of what is popularly called 'the average run  
of workers;' they would represent nothing but the little coteries to  
which they belonged.  

"The right way of securing 'victims,' to which at immense cost of time  
and labour we rigidly adhered, is to get hold of your workers by some  
'neutral' or 'accidental' or 'random' method of approach." This they  
did. And after all these precautions they came to no more definite  
conclusion than that on their classification and according to their  
questionnaire, among 200,000 Sheffield workers "about one quarter"  
were "well equipped," "approaching three-quarters" were "inadequately  
equipped" and that "about one-fifteenth" were "mal-equipped."  

Compare this conscientious and almost pedantic method of arriving at  
an opinion, with our usual judgments about masses of people, about the  
volatile Irish, and the logical French, and the disciplined Germans,  
and the ignorant Slavs, and the honest Chinese, and the untrustworthy  
Japanese, and so on and so on. All these are generalizations drawn  
from samples, but the samples are selected by a method that  
statistically is wholly unsound. Thus the employer will judge labor by  
the most troublesome employee or the most docile that he knows, and  
many a radical group has imagined that it was a fair sample of the  
working class. How many women's views on the "servant question" are  
little more than the reflection of their own treatment of their  
servants? The tendency of the casual mind is to pick out or stumble  
upon a sample which supports or defies its prejudices, and then to  
make it the representative of a whole class.  

A great deal of confusion arises when people decline to classify  
themselves as we have classified them. Prophecy would be so much  
easier if only they would stay where we put them. But, as a matter of  
fact, a phrase like the working class will cover only some of the  
truth for a part of the time. When you take all the people, below a  
certain level of income, and call them the working class, you cannot  
help assuming that the people so classified will behave in accordance  
with your stereotype. Just who those people are you are not quite  
certain. Factory hands and mine workers fit in more or less, but farm  
hands, small farmers, peddlers, little shop keepers, clerks, servants,  
soldiers, policemen, firemen slip out of the net. The tendency, when  
you are appealing to the "working class," is to fix your attention on  
two or three million more or less confirmed trade unionists, and treat  
them as Labor; the other seventeen or eighteen million, who might  
qualify statistically, are tacitly endowed with the point of view  
ascribed to the organized nucleus. How very misleading it was to  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

80/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
impute to the British working class in 1918-1921 the point of view  
expressed in the resolutions of the Trades Union Congress or in the  
pamphlets written by intellectuals.  

Main

The stereotype of Labor as Emancipator selects the evidence which  
supports itself and rejects the other. And so parallel with the real  
movements of working men there exists a fiction of the Labor Movement,  
in which an idealized mass moves towards an ideal goal. The fiction  
deals with the future. In the future possibilities are almost  
indistinguishable from probabilities and probabilities from  
certainties. If the future is long enough, the human will might turn  
what is just conceivable into what is very likely, and what is likely  
into what is sure to happen. James called this the faith ladder, and  
said that "it is a slope of goodwill on which in the larger questions  
of life men habitually live." [Footnote: William James, _Some  
Problems of Philosophy_, p. 224.]  

"1. There is nothing absurd in a certain view of the world being true,  
nothing contradictory;  

2. It _might_ have been true under certain conditions;  

3. It _may_ be true even now;  

4. It is _fit_ to be true;  

5. It _ought_ to be true;  

6. It _must_ be true;  

7. It _shall_ be true, at any rate true for me."  

And, as he added in another place, [Footnote: _A Pluralistic  
Universe_, p. 329.] "your acting thus may in certain special cases  
be a means of making it securely true in the end." Yet no one would  
have insisted more than he, that, so far as we know how, we must avoid  
substituting the goal for the starting point, must avoid reading back  
into the present what courage, effort and skill might create in the  
future. Yet this truism is inordinately difficult to live by, because  
every one of us is so little trained in the selection of our samples.  

If we believe that a certain thing ought to be true, we can almost  
always find either an instance where it is true, or someone who  
believes it ought to be true. It is ever so hard when a concrete fact  
illustrates a hope to weigh that fact properly. When the first six  
people we meet agree with us, it is not easy to remember that they may  
all have read the same newspaper at breakfast. And yet we cannot send  
out a questionnaire to 816 random samples every time we wish to  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

81/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
estimate a probability. In dealing with any large mass of facts, the  
presumption is against our having picked true samples, if we are  
acting on a casual impression.  

Main

9  

And when we try to go one step further in order to seek the causes and  
effects of unseen and complicated affairs, haphazard opinion is very  
tricky. There are few big issues in public life where cause and effect  
are obvious at once. They are not obvious to scholars who have devoted  
years, let us say, to studying business cycles, or price and wage  
movements, or the migration and the assimilation of peoples, or the  
diplomatic purposes of foreign powers. Yet somehow we are all supposed  
to have opinions on these matters, and it is not surprising that the  
commonest form of reasoning is the intuitive, post hoc ergo propter  
hoc.  

The more untrained a mind, the more readily it works out a theory that  
two things which catch its attention at the same time are causally  
connected. We have already dwelt at some length on the way things  
reach our attention. We have seen that our access to information is  
obstructed and uncertain, and that our apprehension is deeply  
controlled by our stereotypes; that the evidence available to our  
reason is subject to illusions of defense, prestige, morality, space,  
time, and sampling. We must note now that with this initial taint,  
public opinions are still further beset, because in a series of events  
seen mostly through stereotypes, we readily accept sequence or  
parallelism as equivalent to cause and effect.  

This is most likely to happen when two ideas that come together arouse  
the same feeling. If they come together they are likely to arouse the  
same feeling; and even when they do not arrive together a powerful  
feeling attached to one is likely to suck out of all the corners of  
memory any idea that feels about the same. Thus everything painful  
tends to collect into one system of cause and effect, and likewise  
everything pleasant.  

"IId IIm (1675) This day I hear that G[od] has shot an arrow into the  
midst of this Town. The small pox is in an ordinary ye sign of the  
Swan, the ordinary Keepers name is Windsor. His daughter is sick of  
the disease. It is observable that this disease begins at an alehouse,  
to testify God's displeasure agt the sin of drunkenness & yt of  
multiplying alehouses!" [Footnote: _The Heart of the Puritan_, p.  
177, edited by Elizabeth Deering Hanscom.]  

Thus Increase Mather, and thus in the year 1919 a distinguished  
Professor of Celestial Mechanics discussing the Einstein theory:  

"It may well be that.... Bolshevist uprisings are in reality the  
visible objects of some underlying, deep, mental disturbance,  
world-wide in character.... This same spirit of unrest has invaded  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

82/225

08/05/2022, 13:10

Main

science." [Footnote: Cited in _The New Republic_, Dec. 24, 1919,  
p. 120.]  

In hating one thing violently, we readily associate with it as cause  
or effect most of the other things we hate or fear violently. They may  
have no more connection than smallpox and alehouses, or Relativity and  
Bolshevism, but they are bound together in the same emotion. In a  
superstitious mind, like that of the Professor of Celestial Mechanics,  
emotion is a stream of molten lava which catches and imbeds whatever  
it touches. When you excavate in it you find, as in a buried city, all  
sorts of objects ludicrously entangled in each other. Anything can be  
related to anything else, provided it feels like it. Nor has a mind in  
such a state any way of knowing how preposterous it is. Ancient fears,  
reinforced by more recent fears, coagulate into a snarl of fears where  
anything that is dreaded is the cause of anything else that is  
dreaded.  

10  

Generally it all culminates in the fabrication of a system of all  
evil, and of another which is the system of all good. Then our love of  
the absolute shows itself. For we do not like qualifying  
adverbs. [Footnote: _Cf_. Freud's discussion of absolutism in  
dreams, _Interpretation of Dreams_, Chapter VI, especially pp.  
288, _et seq_.] They clutter up sentences, and interfere with  
irresistible feeling. We prefer most to more, least to less, we  
dislike the words rather, perhaps, if, or, but, toward, not quite,  
almost, temporarily, partly. Yet nearly every opinion about public  
affairs needs to be deflated by some word of this sort. But in our  
free moments everything tends to behave absolutely,--one hundred  
percent, everywhere, forever.  

It is not enough to say that our side is more right than the enemy's,  
that our victory will help democracy more than his. One must insist  
that our victory will end war forever, and make the world safe for  
democracy. And when the war is over, though we have thwarted a greater  
evil than those which still afflict us, the relativity of the result  
fades out, the absoluteness of the present evil overcomes our spirit,  
and we feel that we are helpless because we have not been  
irresistible. Between omnipotence and impotence the pendulum swings.  

Real space, real time, real numbers, real connections, real weights  
are lost. The perspective and the background and the dimensions of  
action are clipped and frozen in the stereotype.  

PART IV  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

83/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
INTERESTS  

Main

CHAPTER 11. THE ENLISTING OF INTEREST  
   "    12. SELF-INTEREST RECONSIDERED  

CHAPTER XI  

THE ENLISTING OF INTEREST  

I  

BUT the human mind is not a film which registers once and for all each  
impression that comes through its shutters and lenses. The human mind  
is endlessly and persistently creative. The pictures fade or combine,  
are sharpened here, condensed there, as we make them more completely  
our own. They do not lie inert upon the surface of the mind, but are  
reworked by the poetic faculty into a personal expression of  
ourselves. We distribute the emphasis and participate in the action.  

In order to do this we tend to personalize quantities, and to  
dramatize relations. As some sort of allegory, except in acutely  
sophisticated minds, the affairs of the world are represented. Social  
Movements, Economic Forces, National Interests, Public Opinion are  
treated as persons, or persons like the Pope, the President, Lenin,  
Morgan or the King become ideas and institutions. The deepest of all  
the stereotypes is the human stereotype which imputes human nature to  
inanimate or collective things.  

The bewildering variety of our impressions, even after they have been  
censored in all kinds of ways, tends to force us to adopt the greater  
economy of the allegory. So great is the multitude of things that we  
cannot keep them vividly in mind. Usually, then, we name them, and let  
the name stand for the whole impression. But a name is porous. Old  
meanings slip out and new ones slip in, and the attempt to retain the  
full meaning of the name is almost as fatiguing as trying to recall  
the original impressions. Yet names are a poor currency for thought.  
They are too empty, too abstract, too inhuman. And so we begin to see  
the name through some personal stereotype, to read into it, finally to  
see in it the incarnation of some human quality.  

Yet human qualities are themselves vague and fluctuating. They are  
best remembered by a physical sign. And therefore, the human qualities  
we tend to ascribe to the names of our impressions, themselves tend to  
be visualized in physical metaphors. The people of England, the  
history of England, condense into England, and England becomes John  
Bull, who is jovial and fat, not too clever, but well able to take  
care of himself. The migration of a people may appear to some as the  
meandering of a river, and to others like a devastating flood. The  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

84/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
courage people display may be objectified as a rock; their purpose as  
a road, their doubts as forks of the road, their difficulties as ruts  
and rocks, their progress as a fertile valley. If they mobilize their  
dread-naughts they unsheath a sword. If their army surrenders they are  
thrown to earth. If they are oppressed they are on the rack or under  
the harrow.  

Main

When public affairs are popularized in speeches, headlines, plays,  
moving pictures, cartoons, novels, statues or paintings, their  
transformation into a human interest requires first abstraction from  
the original, and then animation of what has been abstracted. We  
cannot be much interested in, or much moved by, the things we do not  
see. Of public affairs each of us sees very little, and therefore,  
they remain dull and unappetizing, until somebody, with the makings of  
an artist, has translated them into a moving picture. Thus the  
abstraction, imposed upon our knowledge of reality by all the  
limitations of our access and of our prejudices, is compensated. Not  
being omnipresent and omniscient we cannot see much of what we have to  
think and talk about. Being flesh and blood we will not feed on words  
and names and gray theory. Being artists of a sort we paint pictures,  
stage dramas and draw cartoons out of the abstractions.  

Or, if possible, we find gifted men who can visualize for us. For  
people are not all endowed to the same degree with the pictorial  
faculty. Yet one may, I imagine, assert with Bergson that the  
practical intelligence is most closely adapted to spatial  
qualities. [Footnote: _Creative Evolution_, Chs. III, IV.] A  
"clear" thinker is almost always a good visualizer. But for that same  
reason, because he is "cinematographic," he is often by that much  
external and insensitive. For the people who have intuition, which is  
probably another name for musical or muscular perception, often  
appreciate the quality of an event and the inwardness of an act far  
better than the visualizer. They have more understanding when the  
crucial element is a desire that is never crudely overt, and appears  
on the surface only in a veiled gesture, or in a rhythm of speech.  
Visualization may catch the stimulus and the result. But the  
intermediate and internal is often as badly caricatured by a  
visualizer, as is the intention of the composer by an enormous soprano  
in the sweet maiden's part.  

Nevertheless, though they have often a peculiar justice, intuitions  
remain highly private and largely incommunicable. But social  
intercourse depends on communication, and while a person can often  
steer his own life with the utmost grace by virtue of his intuitions,  
he usually has great difficulty in making them real to others. When he  
talks about them they sound like a sheaf of mist. For while intuition  
does give a fairer perception of human feeling, the reason with its 
spatial and tactile prejudice can do little with that perception.  
Therefore, where action depends on whether a number of people are of  
one mind, it is probably true that in the first instance no idea is  
lucid for practical decision until it has visual or tactile value. But  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

85/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
it is also true, that no visual idea is significant to us until it has  
enveloped some stress of our own personality. Until it releases or  
resists, depresses or enhances, some craving of our own, it remains  
one of the objects which do not matter.  

Main

2  

Pictures have always been the surest way of conveying an idea, and  
next in order, words that call up pictures in memory. But the idea  
conveyed is not fully our own until we have identified ourselves with  
some aspect of the picture. The identification, or what Vernon Lee has  
called empathy, [Footnote: _Beauty and Ugliness_.] may be almost  
infinitely subtle and symbolic. The mimicry may be performed without  
our being aware of it, and sometimes in a way that would horrify those  
sections of our personality which support our self-respect. In  
sophisticated people the participation may not be in the fate of the  
hero, but in the fate of the whole idea to which both hero and villain  
are essential. But these are refinements.  

In popular representation the handles for identification are almost  
always marked. You know who the hero is at once. And no work promises  
to be easily popular where the marking is not definite and the choice  
clear. [Footnote: A fact which bears heavily on the character of news.  
_Cf_. Part VII.] But that is not enough. The audience must have  
something to do, and the contemplation of the true, the good and the  
beautiful is not something to do. In order not to sit inertly in the  
presence of the picture, and this applies as much to newspaper stories  
as to fiction and the cinema, the audience must be exercised by the  
image. Now there are two forms of exercise which far transcend all  
others, both as to ease with which they are aroused, and eagerness  
with which stimuli for them are sought. They are sexual passion and  
fighting, and the two have so many associations with each other, blend  
into each other so intimately, that a fight about sex outranks every 
other theme in the breadth of its appeal. There is none so engrossing  
or so careless of all distinctions of culture and frontiers.  

The sexual motif figures hardly at all in American political imagery.  
Except in certain minor ecstasies of war, in an occasional scandal, or  
in phases of the racial conflict with Negroes or Asiatics, to speak of  
it at all would seem far-fetched. Only in moving pictures, novels, and  
some magazine fiction are industrial relations, business competition,  
politics, and diplomacy tangled up with the girl and the other woman.  
But the fighting motif appears at every turn. Politics is interesting  
when there is a fight, or as we say, an issue. And in order to make  
politics popular, issues have to be found, even when in truth and  
justice, there are none,--none, in the sense that the differences of  
judgment, or principle, or fact, do not call for the enlistment of  
pugnacity. [Footnote: _Cf_. Frances Taylor Patterson, _Cinema  
Craftsmanship_, pp. 31-32. "III. If the plot lacks suspense: 1. Add  
an antagonist, 2. Add an obstacle, 3. Add a problem, 4. Emphasize one  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

86/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
of the questions in the minds of the spectator.,.."]  

Main

But where pugnacity is not enlisted, those of us who are not directly  
involved find it hard to keep up our interest. For those who are  
involved the absorption may be real enough to hold them even when no  
issue is involved. They may be exercised by sheer joy in activity, or  
by subtle rivalry or invention. But for those to whom the whole  
problem is external and distant, these other faculties do not easily  
come into play. In order that the faint image of the affair shall mean  
something to them, they must be allowed to exercise the love of  
struggle, suspense, and victory.  

Miss Patterson [Footnote: _Op. cit._, pp. 6-7.] insists that  
"suspense... constitutes the difference between the masterpieces in  
the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the pictures at the Rivoli or the  
Rialto Theatres." Had she made it clear that the masterpieces lack  
either an easy mode of identification or a theme popular for this  
generation, she would be wholly right in saying that this "explains  
why the people straggle into the Metropolitan by twos and threes and  
struggle into the Rialto and Rivoli by hundreds. The twos and threes  
look at a picture in the Art Museum for less than ten minutes--unless  
they chance to be art students, critics, or connoisseurs. The hundreds  
in the Rivoli or the Rialto look at the picture for more than an hour.  
As far as beauty is concerned there can be no comparison of the merits  
of the two pictures. Yet the motion picture draws more people and  
holds them at attention longer than do the masterpieces, not through  
any intrinsic merit of its own, but because it depicts unfolding  
events, the outcome of which the audience is breathlessly waiting. It  
possesses the element of struggle, which never fails to arouse  
suspense."  

In order then that the distant situation shall not be a gray flicker  
on the edge of attention, it should be capable of translation into  
pictures in which the opportunity for identification is recognizable.  
Unless that happens it will interest only a few for a little while. It  
will belong to the sights seen but not felt, to the sensations that  
beat on our sense organs, and are not acknowledged. We have to take  
sides. We have to be able to take sides. In the recesses of our being  
we must step out of the audience on to the stage, and wrestle as the  
hero for the victory of good over evil. We must breathe into the  
allegory the breath of our life.  

3  

And so, in spite of the critics, a verdict is rendered in the old  
controversy about realism and romanticism. Our popular taste is to  
have the drama originate in a setting realistic enough to make  
identification plausible and to have it terminate in a setting  
romantic enough to be desirable, but not so romantic as to be  
inconceivable. In between the beginning and the end the canons are  
liberal, but the true beginning and the happy ending are landmarks.  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

87/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
The moving picture audience rejects fantasy logically developed,  
because in pure fantasy there is no familiar foothold in the age of 
machines. It rejects realism relentlessly pursued because it does not  
enjoy defeat in a struggle that has become its own.  

Main

What will be accepted as true, as realistic, as good, as evil, as  
desirable, is not eternally fixed. These are fixed by stereotypes,  
acquired from earlier experiences and carried over into judgment of  
later ones. And, therefore, if the financial investment in each film  
and in popular magazines were not so exorbitant as to require instant  
and widespread popularity, men of spirit and imagination would be able  
to use the screen and the periodical, as one might dream of their  
being used, to enlarge and to refine, to verify and criticize the  
repertory of images with which our imaginations work. But, given the  
present costs, the men who make moving pictures, like the church and  
the court painters of other ages, must adhere to the stereotypes that  
they find, or pay the price of frustrating expectation. The  
stereotypes can be altered, but not in time to guarantee success when  
the film is released six months from now.  

The men who do alter the stereotypes, the pioneering artists and  
critics, are naturally depressed and angered at managers and editors  
who protect their investments. They are risking everything, then why  
not the others? That is not quite fair, for in their righteous fury  
they have forgotten their own rewards, which are beyond any that their 
employers can hope to feel. They could not, and would not if they  
could, change places. And they have forgotten another thing in the  
unceasing war with Philistia. They have forgotten that they are  
measuring their own success by standards that artists and wise men of  
the past would never have dreamed of invoking. They are asking for  
circulations and audiences that were never considered by any artist  
until the last few generations. And when they do not get them, they  
are disappointed.  

Those who catch on, like Sinclair Lewis in "Main Street," are men who  
have succeeded in projecting definitely what great numbers of other  
people were obscurely trying to say inside their heads. "You have said  
it for me." They establish a new form which is then endlessly copied  
until it, too, becomes a stereotype of perception. The next pioneer  
finds it difficult to make the public see Main Street any other way.  
And he, like the forerunners of Sinclair Lewis, has a quarrel with the  
public.  

This quarrel is due not only to the conflict of stereotypes, but to  
the pioneering artist's reverence for his material. Whatever the plane  
he chooses, on that plane he remains. If he is dealing with the  
inwardness of an event he follows it to its conclusion regardless of  
the pain it causes. He will not tag his fantasy to help anyone, or cry  
peace where there is no peace. There is his America. But big audiences  
have no stomach for such severity. They are more interested in  
themselves than in anything else in the world. The selves in which  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

88/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
they are interested are the selves that have been revealed by schools  
and by tradition. They insist that a work of art shall be a vehicle  
with a step where they can climb aboard, and that they shall ride, not  
according to the contours of the country, but to a land where for an  
hour there are no clocks to punch and no dishes to wash. To satisfy  
these demands there exists an intermediate class of artists who are  
able and willing to confuse the planes, to piece together a  
realistic-romantic compound out of the inventions of greater men, and,  
as Miss Patterson advises, give "what real life so rarely does-the  
triumphant resolution of a set of difficulties; the anguish of virtue  
and the triumph of sin... changed to the glorifications of virtue and  
the eternal punishment of its enemy." [Footnote: _Op. cit._, p.  
46. "The hero and heroine must in general possess youth, beauty,  
goodness, exalted self-sacrifice, and unalterable constancy."]  

4  

The ideologies of politics obey these rules. The foothold of realism  
is always there. The picture of some real evil, such as the German  
threat or class conflict, is recognizable in the argument. There is a  
description of some aspect of the world which is convincing because it  
agrees with familiar ideas. But as the ideology deals with an unseen  
future, as well as with a tangible present, it soon crosses  
imperceptibly the frontier of verification. In describing the present  
you are more or less tied down to common experience. In describing  
what nobody has experienced you are bound to let go. You stand at  
Armageddon, more or less, but you battle for the Lord, perhaps.... A  
true beginning, true according to the standards prevailing, and a 
happy ending. Every Marxist is hard as nails about the brutalities of  
the present, and mostly sunshine about the day after the dictatorship.  
So were the war propagandists: there was not a bestial quality in  
human nature they did not find everywhere east of the Rhine, or west  
of it if they were Germans. The bestiality was there all right. But  
after the victory, eternal peace. Plenty of this is quite cynically  
deliberate. For the skilful propagandist knows that while you must  
start with a plausible analysis, you must not keep on analyzing,  
because the tedium of real political accomplishment will soon destroy  
interest. So the propagandist exhausts the interest in reality by a  
tolerably plausible beginning, and then stokes up energy for a long  
voyage by brandishing a passport to heaven.  

The formula works when the public fiction enmeshes itself with a  
private urgency. But once enmeshed, in the heat of battle, the  
original self and the original stereotype which effected the junction  
may be wholly lost to sight.  

CHAPTER XII  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

89/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
SELF-INTEREST RECONSIDERED  

Main

1  

THEREFORE, the identical story is not the same story to all who hear  
it. Each will enter it at a slightly different point, since no two  
experiences are exactly alike; he will reenact it in his own way, and  
transfuse it with his own feelings. Sometimes an artist of compelling  
skill will force us to enter into lives altogether unlike our own,  
lives that seem at first glance dull, repulsive, or eccentric. But  
that is rare. In almost every story that catches our attention we  
become a character and act out the role with a pantomime of our own. 
The pantomime may be subtle or gross, may be sympathetic to the story,  
or only crudely analogous; but it will consist of those feelings which  
are aroused by our conception of the role. And so, the original theme  
as it circulates, is stressed, twisted, and embroidered by all the  
minds through which it goes. It is as if a play of Shakespeare's were  
rewritten each time it is performed with all the changes of emphasis  
and meaning that the actors and audience inspired.  

Something very like that seems to have happened to the stories in the  
sagas before they were definitively written down. In our time the  
printed record, such as it is, checks the exuberance of each  
individual's fancy. But against rumor there is little or no checks and  
the original story, true or invented, grows wings and horns, hoofs and 
beaks, as the artist in each gossip works upon it. The first  
narrator's account does not keep its shape and proportions. It is  
edited and revised by all who played with it as they heard it, used it  
for day dreams, and passed it on. [Footnote: For an interesting  
example, see the case described by C. J. Jung, _Zentralblatt für  
Psychoanalyse_, 1911, Vol. I, p. 81. Translated by Constance Long,  
in _Analytical Psychology_, Ch. IV.]  

Consequently the more mixed the audience, the greater will be the  
variation in the response. For as the audience grows larger, the  
number of common words diminishes. Thus the common factors in the  
story become more abstract. This story, lacking precise character of  
its own, is heard by people of highly varied character. They give it  
their own character.  

2  

The character they give it varies not only with sex and age, race and  
religion and social position, but within these cruder classifications,  
according to the inherited and acquired constitution of the  
individual, his faculties, his career, the progress of his career, an  
emphasized aspect of his career, his moods and tenses, or his place on  
the board in any of the games of life that he is playing. What reaches  
him of public affairs, a few lines of print, some photographs,  
anecdotes, and some casual experience of his own, he conceives through  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

90/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
his set patterns and recreates with his own emotions. He does not take  
his personal problems as partial samples of the greater environment.  
He takes his stories of the greater environment as a mimic enlargement  
of his private life.  

Main

But not necessarily of that private life as he would describe it to  
himself. For in his private life the choices are narrow, and much of  
himself is squeezed down and out of sight where it cannot directly  
govern his outward behavior. And thus, beside the more average people  
who project the happiness of their own lives into a general good will,  
or their unhappiness into suspicion and hate, there are the outwardly  
happy people who are brutal everywhere but in their own circle, as  
well as the people who, the more they detest their families, their  
friends, their jobs, the more they overflow with love for mankind.  

As you descend from generalities to detail, it becomes more apparent  
that the character in which men deal with their affairs is not fixed.  
Possibly their different selves have a common stem and common 
qualities, but the branches and the twigs have many forms. Nobody  
confronts every situation with the same character. His character  
varies in some degree through the sheer influence of time and  
accumulating memory, since he is not an automaton. His character  
varies, not only in time, but according to circumstance. The legend of  
the solitary Englishman in the South Seas, who invariably shaves and  
puts on a black tie for dinner, bears witness to his own intuitive and  
civilized fear of losing the character which he has acquired. So do  
diaries, and albums, and souvenirs, old letters, and old clothes, and  
the love of unchanging routine testify to our sense of how hard it is  
to step twice in the Heraclitan river.  

There is no one self always at work. And therefore it is of great  
importance in the formation of any public opinion, what self is  
engaged. The Japanese ask the right to settle in California. Clearly  
it makes a whole lot of difference whether you conceive the demand as  
a desire to grow fruit or to marry the white man's daughter. If two  
nations are disputing a piece of territory, it matters greatly whether  
the people regard the negotiations as a real estate deal, an attempt  
to humiliate them, or, in the excited and provocative language which  
usually enclouds these arguments, as a rape. For the self which takes  
charge of the instincts when we are thinking about lemons or distant  
acres is very different from the self which appears when we are  
thinking even potentially as the outraged head of a family. In one  
case the private feeling which enters into the opinion is tepid, in  
the other, red hot. And so while it is so true as to be mere tautology  
that "self-interest" determines opinion, the statement is not  
illuminating, until we know which self out of many selects and directs  
the interest so conceived.  

Religious teaching and popular wisdom have always distinguished  
several personalities in each human being. They have been called the  
Higher and Lower, the Spiritual and the Material, the Divine and the  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

91/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
Carnal; and although we may not wholly accept this classification, we  
cannot fail to observe that distinctions exist. Instead of two  
antithetic selves, a modern man would probably note a good many not so  
sharply separated. He would say that the distinction drawn by  
theologians was arbitrary and external, because many different selves  
were grouped together as higher provided they fitted into the  
theologian's categories, but he would recognize nevertheless that here  
was an authentic clue to the variety of human nature.  

We have learned to note many selves, and to be a little less ready to  
issue judgment upon them. We understand that we see the same body, but  
often a different man, depending on whether he is dealing with a  
social equal, a social inferior, or a social superior; on whether he  
is making love to a woman he is eligible to marry, or to one whom he  
is not; on whether he is courting a woman, or whether he considers  
himself her proprietor; on whether he is dealing with his children,  
his partners, his most trusted subordinates, the boss who can make him  
or break him; on whether he is struggling for the necessities of life,  
or successful; on whether he is dealing with a friendly alien, or a 
despised one; on whether he is in great danger, or in perfect  
security; on whether he is alone in Paris or among his family in  
Peoria.  

People differ widely, of course, in the consistency of their  
characters, so widely that they may cover the whole gamut of  
differences between a split soul like Dr. Jekyll's and an utterly  
singleminded Brand, Parsifal, or Don Quixote. If the selves are too  
unrelated, we distrust the man; if they are too inflexibly on one  
track we find him arid, stubborn, or eccentric. In the repertory of  
characters, meager for the isolated and the self-sufficient, highly  
varied for the adaptable, there is a whole range of selves, from that  
one at the top which we should wish God to see, to those at the bottom  
that we ourselves do not dare to see. There may be octaves for the  
family,--father, Jehovah, tyrant,--husband, proprietor, male,--lover,  
lecher,--for the occupation,--employer, master, exploiter,--competitor,  
intriguer, enemy,--subordinate, courtier, snob. Some never come out  
into public view. Others are called out only by exceptional circumstances. 
But the characters take their form from a man's conception of the 
situation in which he finds himself. If the environment to which he  
is sensitive happens to be the smart set, he will imitate the character  
he conceives to be appropriate. That character will tend to act as 
modulator of his bearing, his speech, his choice of subjects, his  
preferences. Much of the comedy of life lies here, in the way people  
imagine their characters for situations that are strange to them: the  
professor among promoters, the deacon at a poker game, the  
cockney in the country, the paste diamond among real diamonds.  

3  

Into the making of a man's characters there enters a variety of  
influences not easily separated. [Footnote: For an interesting sketch  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

92/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
of the more noteworthy early attempts to explain character, see the  
chapter called "The Antecedents of the Study of Character and  
Temperament," in Joseph Jastrow's _The Psychology of Conviction_.]  
The analysis in its fundamentals is perhaps still as doubtful as it  
was in the fifth century B. C. when Hippocrates formulated the  
doctrine of the humors, distinguished the sanguine, the  
melancholic, the choleric, and the phlegmatic dispositions, and  
ascribed them to the blood, the black bile, the yellow bile, and the  
phlegm. The latest theories, such as one finds them in Cannon,  
[Footnote: _Bodily Changes in Pleasure, Pain and Anger_.] Adler,  
[Footnote: _The Neurotic Constitution_.] Kempf, [Footnote: _The  
Autonomic Functions and the Personality; Psychopathology. Cf_. also  
Louis Berman: _The Glands Regulating Personality_.] appear to  
follow much the same scent, from the outward behavior and the inner  
consciousness to the physiology of the body. But in spite of an  
immensely improved technique, no one would be likely to claim that  
there are settled conclusions which enable us to set apart nature from  
nurture, and abstract the native character from the acquired. It is  
only in what Joseph Jastrow has called the slums of psychology that  
the explanation of character is regarded as a fixed system to be  
applied by phrenologists, palmists, fortune-tellers, mind-readers, and  
a few political professors. There you will still find it asserted that  
"the Chinese are fond of colors, and have their eyebrows much vaulted"  
while "the heads of the Calmucks are depressed from above, but very  
large laterally, about the organ which gives the inclination to  
acquire; and this nation's propensity to steal, etc., is admitted."  
[Footnote: _Jastrow, op. cit._, p. 156.]  

The modern psychologists are disposed to regard the outward behavior  
of an adult as an equation between a number of variables, such as the  
resistance of the environment, repressed cravings of several  
maturities, and the manifest personality. [Footnote: Formulated by  
Kempf, _Psychopathology_, p. 74, as follows:  

Manifest wishes                }  
     over                      }  
Later Repressed Wishes         }  
     Over                      } opposed by the resistance of the  
Adolescent Repressed Wishes    }       environment=Behavior  
     Over                      }  
Preadolescent Repressed Wishes }  
] They permit us to suppose, though I have not seen the notion  
formulated, that the repression or control of cravings is fixed not in  
relation to the whole person all the time, but more or less in respect  
to his various selves. There are things he will not do as a patriot  
that he will do when he is not thinking of himself as a patriot. No  
doubt there are impulses, more or less incipient in childhood, that  
are never exercised again in the whole of a man's life, except as they  
enter obscurely and indirectly into combination with other impulses.  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

93/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
But even that is not certain, since repression is not irretrievable.  
For just as psychoanalysis can bring to the surface a buried impulse,  
so can social situations. [Footnote: _Cf._ the very interesting  
book of Everett Dean Martin, _The Behavior of Crowds_.  

Main

Also Hobbes, _Leviathan_, Part II, Ch. 25. "For the passions of  
men, which asunder are moderate, as the heat of one brand, in an  
assembly are like many brands, that inflame one another, especially  
when they blow one another with orations...."  

LeBon, _The Crowd_, elaborates this observation of Hobbes's.] It  
is only when our surroundings remain normal and placid, when what is  
expected of us by those we meet is consistent, that we live without  
knowledge of many of our dispositions. When the unexpected occurs, we  
learn much about ourselves that we did not know.  

The selves, which we construct with the help of all who influence us,  
prescribe which impulses, how emphasized, how directed, are  
appropriate to certain typical situations for which we have learned  
prepared attitudes. For a recognizable type of experience, there is a  
character which controls the outward manifestations of our whole  
being. Murderous hate is, for example, controlled in civil life.  
Though you choke with rage, you must not display it as a parent,  
child, employer, politician. You would not wish to display a  
personality that exudes murderous hate. You frown upon it, and the  
people around you also frown. But if a war breaks out, the chances are  
that everybody you admire will begin to feel the justification of  
killing and hating. At first the vent for these feelings is very  
narrow. The selves which come to the front are those which are attuned  
to a real love of country, the kind of feeling that you find in Rupert  
Brooke, and in Sir Edward Grey's speech on August 3,1914, and in  
President Wilson's address to Congress on April 2, 1917. The reality  
of war is still abhorred, and what war actually means is learned but  
gradually. For previous wars are only transfigured memories. In that  
honeymoon phase, the realists of war rightly insist that the nation is  
not yet awake, and reassure each other by saying: "Wait for the  
casualty lists." Gradually the impulse to kill becomes the main  
business, and all those characters which might modify it,  
disintegrate. The impulse becomes central, is sanctified, and  
gradually turns unmanageable. It seeks a vent not alone on the idea of  
the enemy, which is all the enemy most people actually see during the  
war, but upon all the persons and objects and ideas that have always  
been hateful. Hatred of the enemy is legitimate. These other hatreds  
have themselves legitimized by the crudest analogy, and by what, once  
having cooled off, we recognize as the most far-fetched analogy. It  
takes a long time to subdue so powerful an impulse once it goes loose.  
And therefore, when the war is over in fact, it takes time and  
struggle to regain self-control, and to deal with the problems of  
peace in civilian character.  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

94/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
Modern war, as Mr. Herbert Croly has said, is inherent in the  
political structure of modern society, but outlawed by its ideals. For  
the civilian population there exists no ideal code of conduct in war,  
such as the soldier still possesses and chivalry once prescribed. The  
civilians are without standards, except those that the best of them  
manage to improvise. The only standards they possess make war an  
accursed thing. Yet though the war may be a necessary one, no moral  
training has prepared them for it. Only their higher selves have a  
code and patterns, and when they have to act in what the higher  
regards as a lower character profound disturbance results.  

The preparation of characters for all the situations in which men may 
find themselves is one function of a moral education. Clearly then, it 
depends for its success upon the sincerity and knowledge with which  
the environment has been explored. For in a world falsely conceived,  
our own characters are falsely conceived, and we misbehave. So the  
moralist must choose: either he must offer a pattern of conduct for  
every phase of life, however distasteful some of its phases may be, or  
he must guarantee that his pupils will never be confronted by the  
situations he disapproves. Either he must abolish war, or teach people  
how to wage it with the greatest psychic economy; either he must  
abolish the economic life of man and feed him with stardust and dew,  
or he must investigate all the perplexities of economic life and offer  
patterns of conduct which are applicable in a world where no man is 
self-supporting. But that is just what the prevailing moral culture so  
generally refuses to do. In its best aspects it is diffident at the  
awful complication of the modern world. In its worst, it is just 
cowardly. Now whether the moralists study economics and politics and 
psychology, or whether the social scientists educate the moralists is  
no great matter. Each generation will go unprepared into the modern  
world, unless it has been taught to conceive the kind of personality  
it will have to be among the issues it will most likely meet.  

4  

Most of this the naive view of self-interest leaves out of account. It  
forgets that self and interest are both conceived somehow, and that  
for the most part they are conventionally conceived. The ordinary  
doctrine of self-interest usually omits altogether the cognitive  
function. So insistent is it on the fact that human beings finally  
refer all things to themselves, that it does not stop to notice that  
men's ideas of all things and of themselves are not instinctive. They  
are acquired.  

Thus it may be true enough, as James Madison wrote in the tenth paper  
of the Federalist, that "a landed interest, a manufacturing interest,  
a mercantile interest, a moneyed interest, with many lesser interests,  
grow up of necessity in civilized nations, and divide them into  
different classes, actuated by different sentiments and views." But if  
you examine the context of Madison's paper, you discover something  
which I think throws light upon that view of instinctive fatalism,  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

95/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
called sometimes the economic interpretation of history. Madison was  
arguing for the federal constitution, and "among the numerous  
advantages of the union" he set forth "its tendency to break and  
control the violence of faction." Faction was what worried Madison.  
And the causes of faction he traced to "the nature of man," where  
latent dispositions are "brought into different degrees of activity,  
according to the different circumstances of civil society. A zeal for  
different opinions concerning religion, concerning government and many  
other points, as well of speculation as of practice; an attachment to  
different leaders ambitiously contending for preeminence and power, or  
to persons of other descriptions whose fortunes have been interesting  
to the human passions, have, in turn, divided mankind into parties,  
inflamed them with mutual animosity, and rendered them much more  
disposed to vex and oppress each other, than to coöperate for their  
common good. So strong is this propensity of mankind to fall into  
mutual animosities, that where no substantial occasion presents  
itself, the most frivolous and fanciful distinctions have been  
sufficient to kindle their unfriendly passions and excite their most  
violent conflicts. But the _most common_ and _durable_ source  
of factions has been the various and unequal distribution of property."  

Madison's theory, therefore, is that the propensity to faction may be  
kindled by religious or political opinions, by leaders, but most  
commonly by the distribution of property. Yet note that Madison claims  
only that men are divided by their relation to property. He does not  
say that their property and their opinions are cause and effect, but  
that differences of property are the causes of differences of opinion.  
The pivotal word in Madison's argument is "different." From the  
existence of differing economic situations you can tentatively infer a  
probable difference of opinions, but you cannot infer what those  
opinions will necessarily be.  

This reservation cuts radically into the claims of the theory as that  
theory is usually held. That the reservation is necessary, the  
enormous contradiction between dogma and practice among orthodox  
socialists bears witness. They argue that the next stage in social 
evolution is the inevitable result of the present stage. But in order  
to produce that inevitable next stage they organize and agitate to  
produce "class consciousness." Why, one asks, does not the economic  
situation produce consciousness of class in everybody? It just  
doesn't, that is all. And therefore the proud claim will not stand  
that the socialist philosophy rests on prophetic insight into destiny.  
It rests on an hypothesis about human nature. [Footnote: _Cf._  
Thorstein Veblen, "The Socialist Economics of Karl Marx and His  
Followers," in _The Place of Science in Modern Civilization,_  
esp. pp. 413-418.]  

The socialist practice is based on a belief that if men are  
economically situated in different ways, they can then be induced to  
hold certain views. Undoubtedly they often come to believe, or can be  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

96/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
induced to believe different things, as they are, for example,  
landlords or tenants, employees or employers, skilled or unskilled  
laborers, wageworkers or salaried men, buyers or sellers, farmers or  
middle-men, exporters or importers, creditors or debtors. Differences  
of income make a profound difference in contact and opportunity. Men  
who work at machines will tend, as Mr. Thorstein Veblen has so  
brilliantly demonstrated, [Footnote: _The Theory of Business  
Enterprise_.] to interpret experience differently from handicraftsmen  
or traders. If this were all that the materialistic conception of politics  
asserted, the theory would be an immensely valuable hypothesis that  
every interpreter of opinion would have to use. But he would often  
have to abandon the theory, and he would always have to be on  
guard. For in trying to explain a certain public opinion, it is rarely  
obvious which of a man's many social relations is effecting a particular  
opinion. Does Smith's opinion arise from his problems as a landlord,  
an importer, an owner of railway shares, or an employer? Does  
Jones's opinion, Jones being a weaver in a textile mill, come from  
the attitude of his boss, the competition of new immigrants, his wife's  
grocery bills, or the ever present contract with the firm which is  
selling him a Ford car and a house and lot on the instalment plan? 
Without special inquiry you cannot tell. The economic determinist  
cannot tell.  

A man's various economic contacts limit or enlarge the range of his  
opinions. But which of the contacts, in what guise, on what theory,  
the materialistic conception of politics cannot predict. It can  
predict, with a high degree of probability, that if a man owns a  
factory, his ownership will figure in those opinions which seem to  
have some bearing on that factory. But how the function of being an  
owner will figure, no economic determinist as such, can tell you.  
There is no fixed set of opinions on any question that go with being 
the owner of a factory, no views on labor, on property, on management,  
let alone views on less immediate matters. The determinist can predict  
that in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred the owner will resist  
attempts to deprive him of ownership, or that he will favor  
legislation which he thinks will increase his profits. But since there  
is no magic in ownership which enables a business man to know what  
laws will make him prosper, there is no chain of cause and effect  
described in economic materialism which enables anyone to prophesy  
whether the owner will take a long view or a short one, a competitive  
or a cooperative.  

Did the theory have the validity which is so often claimed for it, it  
would enable us to prophesy. We could analyze the economic interests  
of a people, and deduce what the people was bound to do. Marx tried  
that, and after a good guess about the trusts, went wholly wrong. The  
first socialist experiment came, not as he predicted, out of the  
culmination of capitalist development in the West, but out of the  
collapse of a pre-capitalist system in the East. Why did he go wrong?  
Why did his greatest disciple, Lenin, go wrong? Because the Marxians  
thought that men's economic position would irresistibly produce a  
https://standardgalactic.github.io

97/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
clear conception of their economic interests. They thought they  
themselves possessed that clear conception, and that what they knew  
the rest of mankind would learn. The event has shown, not only that a  
clear conception of interest does not arise automatically in everyone,  
but that it did not arise even in Marx and Lenin themselves. After all  
that Marx and Lenin have written, the social behavior of mankind is  
still obscure. It ought not to be, if economic position alone  
determined public opinion. Position ought, if their theory were  
correct, not only to divide mankind into classes, but to supply each  
class with a view of its interest and a coherent policy for obtaining  
it. Yet nothing is more certain than that all classes of men are in  
constant perplexity as to what their interests are. [Footnote: As a  
matter of fact, when it came to the test, Lenin completely abandoned  
the materialistic interpretation of politics. Had he held sincerely to  
the Marxian formula when he seized power in 1917, he would have said  
to himself: according to the teachings of Marx, socialism will develop  
out of a mature capitalism... here am I, in control of a nation that  
is only entering upon a capitalist development... it is true that I am  
a socialist, but I am a scientific socialist... it follows that for  
the present all idea of a socialist republic is out of the question...  
we must advance capitalism in order that the evolution which Marx  
predicted may take place. But Lenin did nothing of the sort. Instead  
of waiting for evolution to evolve, he tried by will, force, and  
education, to defy the historical process which his philosophy  
assumed.  

Since this was written Lenin has abandoned communism on the ground  
that Russia does not possess the necessary basis in a mature  
capitalism. He now says that Russia must create capitalism, which will  
create a proletariat, which will some day create communism. This is at  
least consistent with Marxist dogma. But it shows how little  
determinism there is in the opinions of a determinist.]  

This dissolves the impact of economic determinism. For if our economic  
interests are made up of our variable concepts of those interests,  
then as the master key to social processes the theory fails. That  
theory assumes that men are capable of adopting only one version of  
their interest, and that having adopted it, they move fatally to  
realize it. It assumes the existence of a specific class interest.  
That assumption is false. A class interest can be conceived largely or  
narrowly, selfishly or unselfishly, in the light of no facts, some  
facts, many facts, truth and error. And so collapses the Marxian  
remedy for class conflicts. That remedy assumes that if all property  
could be held in common, class differences would disappear. The  
assumption is false. Property might well be held in common, and yet  
not be conceived as a whole. The moment any group of people failed to  
see communism in a communist manner, they would divide into classes on  
the basis of what they saw.  

In respect to the existing social order Marxian socialism emphasizes  
property conflict as the maker of opinion, in respect to the loosely  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

98/225

Main

08/05/2022, 13:10
defined working class it ignores property conflict as the basis of  
agitation, in respect to the future it imagines a society without  
property conflict, and, therefore, without conflict of opinion. Now in  
the existing social order there may be more instances where one man  
must lose if another is to gain, than there would be under socialism,  
but for every case where one must lose for another to gain, there are  
endless cases where men simply imagine the conflict because they are  
uneducated. And under socialism, though you removed every instance of  
absolute conflict, the partial access of each man to the whole range  
of facts would nevertheless create conflict. A socialist state will  
not be able to dispense with education, morality, or liberal science,  
though on strict materialistic grounds the communal ownership of  
properties ought to make them superfluous. The communists in Russia  
would not propagate their faith with such unflagging zeal if economic  
determinism were alone determining the opinion of the Russian people.  

5  

The socialist theory of human nature is, like the hedonistic calculus,  
an example of false determinism. Both assume that the unlearned  
dispositions fatally but intelligently produce a certain type of  
behavior. The socialist believes that the dispositions pursue the  
economic interest of a class; the hedonist believes that they pursue  
pleasure and avoid pain. Both theories rest on a naive view of  
instinct, a view, defined by James, [Footnote: _Principles of  
Psychology_, Vol. II, p. 383.] though radically qualified by him,  
as "the faculty of acting in such a way as to produce certain ends,  
without foresight of the ends and without previous education in the  
performance."  

It is doubtful whether instinctive action of this sort figures at all  
in the social life of mankind. For as James pointed out: [Footnote:  
_Op. cit._, Vol. II, p. 390.] "every instinctive act in an animal  
with memory must cease to be 'blind' after being once repeated."  
Whatever the equipment at birth, the innate dispositions are from  
earliest infancy immersed in experience which determines what shall  
excite them as stimulus. "They become capable," as Mr. McDougall  
says, [Footnote: Introduction to _Social Psychology_, Fourth  
Edition, pp. 31-32.] "of being initiated, not only by the perception  
of objects of the kind which directly excite the innate disposition, 
the natural or native excitants of the instinct, but also by ideas of  
such objects, and by perceptions and by ideas of objects of other  
kinds." [Footnote: "Most definitions of instincts and instinctive  
actions take account only of their conative aspects... and it is a  
common mistake to ignore the cognitive and affective aspects of the  
instinctive mental process." Footnote _op. cit._, p. 29.]  

It is only the "central part of the disposition" [Footnote: p. 34.]  
says Mr. McDougall further, "that retains its specific character and  
remains common to all individuals and all situations in which the  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

99/225

08/05/2022, 13:10
instinct is excited." The cognitive processes, and the actual bodily  
movements by which the instinct achieves its end may be indefinitely  
complicated. In other words, man has an instinct of fear, but what he  
will fear and how he will try to escape, is determined not from birth,  
but by experience.  

Main

If it were not for this variability, it would be difficult to conceive  
the inordinate variety of human nature. But when you consider that all  
the important tendencies of the creature, his appetites, his loves,  
his hates, his curiosity, his sexual cravings, his fears, and  
pugnacity, are freely attachable to all sorts of objects as stimulus,  
and to all kinds of objects as gratification, the complexity of human  
nature is not so inconceivable. And when you think that each new  
generation is the casual victim of the way a previous generation was  
conditioned, as well as the inheritor of the environment that  
resulted, the possible combinations and permutations are enormous.  

There is no prima facie case then for supposing that because persons  
crave some particular thing, or behave in some particular way, human  
nature is fatally constituted to crave that and act thus. The craving  
and the action are both learned, and in another generation might be  
learned differently. Analytic psychology and social history unite in  
supporting this conclusion. Psychology indicates how essentially  
casual is the nexus between the particular stimulus and the particular  
response. Anthropology in the widest sense reinforces the view by  
demonstrating that the things which have excited men's passions, and  
the means which they have used to realize them, differ endlessly from  
age to age and from place to place.  

Men pursue their interest. But how they shall pursue it is not fatally  
determined, and, therefore, within whatever limits of time this planet  
will continue to support human life, man can set no term upon the  
creative energies of men. He can issue no doom of automatism. He can  
say, if he must, that for his life there will be no changes which he  
can recognize as good. But in saying that he will be confining his  
life to what he can see with his eye, rejecting what he might see with  
his mind; he will be taking as the measure of good a measure which is  
only the one he happens to possess. He can find no ground for  
abandoning his highest hopes and relaxing his conscious effort unless  
he chooses to regard the unknown as the unknowable, unless he elects  
to believe that what no one knows no one will know, and that what  
someone has not yet learned no one will ever be able to teach.  

PART V  

THE MAKING OF A COMMON WILL  

CHAPTER 13. THE TRANSFER OF INTEREST  

https://standardgalactic.github.io

100/225

