Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00985-7
1Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 2Department of Bioengineering, School of Engineering & Applied 
Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 3Department of Neuroscience, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA. 4Department of Philosophy, American University, Washington DC, USA. 5Department of Electrical & Systems Engineering, School 
of Engineering & Applied Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 6Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 7Department of Physics & Astronomy, College of Arts & Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA. 8Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 9Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM, USA. 
✉e-mail: dsb@seas.upenn.edu
C
uriosity is characterized by intrinsically motivated informa-
tion seeking1–3. The information sought while acting on one’s 
curiosity often has no immediate, tangible benefit4–6. Despite 
a lack of immediate benefits, the tendency to frequently experience 
curiosity is associated with positive well-being7–9; curiosity facilitates 
engagement with novel and challenging stimuli and, in the process, 
the accrual of information and other resources that, although not 
of immediate benefit, may have utility when encountering future 
challenges10–12. And irrespective of its immediate or potential utility, 
curiosity may well be valuable in itself13.
Characterizing how individuals seek information when 
internally driven is fundamental to understanding how curios-
ity leads to the shoring up of resources that impact well-being. 
Historico-philosophical studies tracing the use of the word ‘curios-
ity’ have identified styles of information seeking that span millen-
nia, cultures and languages14. The styles include the busybody and 
the hunter. The information seeking of the busybody is marked by 
a preference for sampling diverse concepts, characterized by “dis-
traction” and “never-dwelling anywhere”15 (p. 161). The busybody 
will “frisk about, and rove about, at random, wherever they please”16 
(section 34). The information seeking of the hunter is characterized 
by sampling closely connected concepts. The hunter does not “turn 
aside and follow every scent”17 (p. 520e) in the manner of the busy-
body. The hunter instead “wishes [they] had a few hundred help-
ers and good, well-trained hounds that [they] could drive into the 
history of the human soul to round up [their] game”18 (p. 59) in a 
targeted information search. Both styles are considered expressions 
of curiosity, but there are individual differences in the extent to 
which each style is expressed19. Tendencies to exhibit one style over 
another will lead to the accumulation of different types of resources 
over time. The busybody’s store of information will be more diverse 
than that of the hunter, but the hunter’s information store will  
contain greater depth on fewer subjects.
The open-ended, internally driven nature of curiosity makes 
characterizing diverse information-seeking styles a daunting 
endeavour. Existing approaches include the examination of sac-
cadic exploration of visual scenes and responses to trivia ques-
tions designed to evoke curiosity20,21. Experimental paradigms are 
shedding light on curiosity, but they have been met with calls to 
consider more complex forms of information seeking that occur 
over extended timescales2. We claim that styles of information seek-
ing identified through historico-philosophical methodologies can 
be readily accommodated within a knowledge-network-building 
framework22. From this perspective, network nodes represent dis-
tinct concepts, and network edges represent the manner in which 
the concepts are related. While seeking information, an individual 
traverses edges on knowledge networks, moving from one con-
cept to the next. Some of the edges they traverse may have large 
weights, indicating that the two concepts joined by the edge are 
very similar, and some edges may have very small weights, indicat-
ing that the two concepts are virtually unrelated. Casting curiosity 
as a knowledge-network-building practice reflects the intercon-
nectedness of informational units23 and allows an application of 
the mathematical language of graph theory24,25 to quantify complex 
manifestations of curious behaviour. The easily distracted busy-
body will create loose knowledge networks of sparsely connected, 
seemingly unrelated concepts. In the parlance of graph theory, their 
networks will have small edge weights, low clustering and high 
characteristic path length. The more targeted hunter, in contrast, 
will create tight networks consisting of closely connected concepts, 
and their networks will have large edge weights, high clustering and 
low characteristic path length (Fig. 1).
Hunters, busybodies and the knowledge network 
building associated with deprivation curiosity
David M. Lydon-Staley   1,2, Dale Zhou   3, Ann Sizemore Blevins   2, Perry Zurn   4 and 
Danielle S. Bassett   2,5,6,7,8,9 ✉
The open-ended and internally driven nature of curiosity makes characterizing the information seeking that accompanies it 
a daunting endeavour. We use a historico-philosophical taxonomy of information seeking coupled with a knowledge network 
building framework to capture styles of information-seeking in 149 participants as they explore Wikipedia for over 5 hours 
spanning 21 days. We create knowledge networks in which nodes represent distinct concepts and edges represent the similar-
ity between concepts. We quantify the tightness of knowledge networks using graph theoretical indices and use a generative 
model of network growth to explore mechanisms underlying information-seeking. Deprivation curiosity (the tendency to seek 
information that eliminates knowledge gaps) is associated with the creation of relatively tight networks and a relatively greater 
tendency to return to previously visited concepts. With this framework in hand, future research can readily quantify the infor-
mation seeking associated with curiosity.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | March 2021 | 327–336 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
327
Articles
NaTure Human Behaviour
To determine how trait curiosity manifests in knowledge net-
work building, we can measure the associations between net-
work structure and existing curiosity measurement instruments. 
Deprivation curiosity refers to the extent to which one’s information 
seeking is motivated to overcome the feeling of being deprived of 
knowledge26. Deprivation curiosity has emerged as a robust indi-
vidual difference27,28, with several valid and reliable measures avail-
able28–31. Individuals high in deprivation curiosity possess a strong 
drive to know, and they seek information that eliminates gaps in 
their knowledge30,32. There is an element of compulsiveness to depri-
vation curiosity. Deprivation curiosity does not motivate individu-
als to learn new things just for fun. Instead, when individuals decide 
that they are missing information required to better understand a 
concept, they experience a feeling of deprivation33. A determina-
tion to continue information seeking until a knowledge gap is filled 
results in a persistent and effortful form of specific exploration that 
resolves an unknown28,34.
This compulsiveness may reflect motivational mechanisms of 
incentive salience33,35. Incentive salience refers to a motivational feel-
ing of ‘wanting’ in anticipation of an outcome that is separate from 
the hedonic response of ‘liking’36,37. Mesolimbic dopamine activity 
is implicated in wanting and motivates approach behaviours, often 
in the form of response perseveration and the pursuit of a stimulus 
until consumption and satiation38,39. There is evidence that want-
ing plays a role in deprivation curiosity, with the expected acquisi-
tion of knowledge associated with activation in the dopaminergic 
reward system40–42. Activation associated with deprivation curiosity 
shares activity implicated in incentive salience in the processing of 
other rewards (such as food and money)40. Due to the targeted and 
effortful nature of information seeking associated with deprivation 
seeking and its likely association with wanting, we hypothesize that 
individuals high in deprivation curiosity will create tighter networks 
as they encounter new information, recognize gaps in their knowl-
edge and search for closely related concepts in an iterative cycle of 
filling in knowledge gaps26,43.
Here, we operationalize curiosity as a knowledge-network-building 
practice. We monitor the information seeking of 149 individuals on 
Wikipedia, an online encyclopaedia, over the course of 21 days. 
The choice of Wikipedia reflects its use as a knowledge network in  
previous research (for example, see ref. 44), its use in existing work to 
examine information seeking45,46 and findings that intrinsic learn-
ing forms a major motivation for the use of Wikipedia47,48. We treat 
each Wikipedia page as a distinct concept or node in a knowledge 
network, and we quantify the semantic similarity between any two 
pages to create network edges. We use graph theory to quantify gen-
eral notions of tight and loose networks to realize busybody and 
hunter styles of information seeking. We uncover potential mecha-
nisms underlying knowledge network growth by developing a gen-
erative model of information seeking. We examine associations 
between knowledge networks and trait deprivation curiosity, with 
the hypothesis that individuals high in deprivation curiosity will 
create relatively tight, hunter-like knowledge networks. We examine 
the extent to which the tightness of knowledge networks changes 
over time. Curiosity exhibits fluctuations over relatively short tim-
escales (for example, from day to day7,49), and hunter and busybody 
styles of knowledge network building are thought to be expressed 
to different degrees across time within each person22. We hypoth-
esize that loose knowledge networks, reflecting the pursuit of novel, 
diverse and varied information, will be created during periods of 
heightened sensation-seeking tendencies that promote the “seeking 
of varied, novel, complex, and intense sensations and experiences”50 
(p. 26) (see also ref. 51).
Results
We operationalize busybody and hunter styles of information seek-
ing in a specific instance of knowledge network building. Using the 
Wikipedia browsing of 149 participants for 15 minutes each day 
across 21 days, we treat each Wikipedia page visited as a network 
node, and we define the weight of each network edge as the cosine 
similarity of the term-frequency inverse document frequency of the 
text contained in each page (Fig. 2a,b). Thus, a high edge weight indi-
cates similarity of the text contained in the two nodes connected by 
the edge. We interrogate the structure of each network using graph 
theoretical indices, and we apply a generative model of network 
growth to provide insight into the mechanisms underlying network 
building. The participants completed a self-reported survey of trait 
curiosity30 before beginning the information-seeking task, allowing 
us to examine associations between aspects of network structure 
Clustering
Path length
Hunter
Busybody
Wikipedia
Wikipedia
Fig. 1 | Hunter and busybody styles of information seeking. The participants explored Wikipedia for 15 minutes every day for 21 days. We represent 
the participants’ information seeking as knowledge networks22. The nodes represent the unique Wikipedia pages visited, and the edges represent the 
similarity between the text content of each page. We use a historico-philosophical taxonomy of curious information seeking14 to examine between-person 
differences in the resulting networks. The busybody samples diverse concepts and creates loose knowledge networks of sparsely connected concepts. In 
contrast, the hunter creates tight knowledge networks characterized by sampling related concepts. We operationalize notions of network tightness using 
graph theoretical indices. Intuitively, the characteristic path length assesses the average distance between all pairs of nodes in a network. When the path 
length is short, the network is easily traversed and representative of the hunter’s tight networks. The clustering coefficient indicates the extent to which 
a node’s neighbours are connected. A high average clustering coefficient indicates a tight network of closely connected concepts, which is the kind we 
expect of the hunter.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | March 2021 | 327–336 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
328
Articles
NaTure Human Behaviour
and trait deprivation curiosity. In all models, we include four other 
facets of curiosity (joyous exploration, social curiosity, thrill seeking 
and stress tolerance28,30) as covariates to examine the extent to which 
the hypothesized associations are specific to deprivation curiosity, 
rather than being driven by other facets of curiosity. The participants 
also reported on their sensation-seeking tendencies each day across 
the 21-day period immediately before the Wikipedia browsing task, 
allowing us to examine how within-person changes in sensation 
seeking are associated with changes in knowledge network build-
ing. The details of knowledge network construction and all mea-
sures are provided in the Methods section and the Supplementary 
Methods. Descriptive statistics of the key variables can be found in 
Supplementary Table 1. Two-tailed tests were used throughout. In 
multilever models, b indicates unstandardized regression coeffi-
cients and β indicates standardized regression coefficients.
Deprivation curiosity is positively associated with the average 
edge weight of knowledge networks. The participants completed 
an average of 17.90 (s.d. = 3.21) days of Wikipedia browsing. The 
median number of edges in the participants’ knowledge networks 
is 168 (interquartile range (IQR) = 143), where each edge indicates 
a transition from one Wikipedia page to another. The participants 
visited a median of 135 (IQR = 99) unique nodes. The average 
weight of all edges in each participant’s network is 0.18 (s.d. = 0.04). 
Intuitively, network building that is more hunter-like is reflected 
in the right side of the distribution of average edge weights in the 
sample (relatively high average edge weights), and busybody-like 
network building is reflected in the left side of the distribution (rela-
tively lower average edge weights; see Fig. 2c).
We used a multilevel model to assess the relation between 
information-seeking behaviour and trait curiosity. We find that 
deprivation curiosity is positively associated with average edge 
weight (b = 0.004, 95% confidence interval (CI) = (0.001, 0.007), 
P = 0.01, Cohen’s d = 0.44; a moderate effect size52; Supplementary 
Table 2), indicating that participants high in deprivation curiosity 
are more hunter-like in their knowledge network building relative 
to participants low in deprivation curiosity, who in contrast are 
more busybody-like in their information seeking (Fig. 2d).
Deprivation curiosity is positively associated with knowledge 
network clustering and negatively associated with characteristic 
path length. Next, we created participant-specific networks consist-
ing of all Wikipedia pages that a participant visited and all possible 
edges between those nodes, even if those specific edges were not 
traversed during the information-seeking task. We calculated the 
average clustering coefficient of each participant’s knowledge net-
work. The clustering coefficient provides an indication of the extent 
to which a node’s neighbours are connected53. We took the mean 
clustering coefficient of each node in the participants’ knowledge 
networks to quantify general notions of tight and loose knowledge 
networks, with high average clustering coefficients indicative of 
networks consisting of closely connected concepts and low average 
clustering coefficients indicative of networks consisting of sparsely 
connected concepts. The average clustering coefficient in these 
networks is 0.09 (s.d. = 0.02). To conceptually link this metric to 
knowledge network building, we note that network building that is 
more hunter-like is reflected in the right side of the distribution of 
average clustering coefficients (relatively high clustering), and more 
busybody-like network building is reflected in the left side of the 
distribution (relatively low clustering).
In a complementary assessment, we computed the characteristic 
path length of each participant’s network. Intuitively, the character-
istic path length assesses the average distance between all pairs of 
nodes in a network. When the characteristic path length is short, the 
network is easily traversed54. The mean characteristic path length in 
these networks is 0.99 (s.d. = 0.03). To conceptually link this met-
ric to knowledge-network-building practices, we note that network 
building that is more hunter-like is reflected in the left side of the 
distribution of the characteristic path length (relatively short path 
lengths), and more busybody-like network building is reflected in 
the right side of the distribution (relatively long path lengths).
We used multiple regression analysis to test the extent to which 
deprivation curiosity is associated with the average clustering coef-
ficient, while controlling for the other four facets of curiosity as well 
a
b
c
d
Pierre  Curie
Human
vestigiality
War elephant
Elephant
Marie Curie
Wisdom
tooth
0.19
18,654 Wikipedia
pages
0.18
0.17
1
10
20
30
–3
0.08 0.18 0.27
0
1
Cosine
similarity
–2
Average edge weight
Average edge weight
Deprivation sensitivity
Edge (descending order)
–1
0
1
2
Fig. 2 | Knowledge network construction and the association between 
deprivation curiosity and edge weight. a, The participants (n = 149) visited 
18,654 Wikipedia pages. b, Network nodes represent all the unique pages 
visited by all participants in the sample. Weighted network edges represent 
the cosine similarity (bounded between 0 and 1) between all possible pairs 
of vectors of term-frequency inverse document frequencies associated with 
the text of each page. Edges with higher weights indicate relatively greater 
semantic similarity between nodes. For example, the edge between ‘Marie 
Curie’ and ‘Pierre Curie’ has a cosine similarity value of 0.8, and the edge 
between ‘Wisdom tooth’ and ‘Human vestigiality’ has a cosine similarity 
value of 0.2. c, The partial time series of edges traversed by an individual 
who tended to visit loosely connected concepts (left), an individual who 
tended to visit strongly connected concepts (right) and an individual 
whose network had the average edge weight for the sample (middle). 
In a section of their edge weight time series, the participant on the left 
with a lower-than-average edge weight sought out ‘Physical chemistry’, 
‘Me Too movement’, ‘The Partridge family’, ‘Harborne Primary School’, 
‘HIP 79431’ and ‘Tom Bigelow’, which collectively seem to be a rather 
diverse set of concepts. In contrast, the participant with a relatively high 
average edge weight visited ‘History of the Jews in Germany’, ‘Hep-Hep 
riots’, ‘Zionism’, ‘Nathan Birnbaum’ and ‘Theodor Herzl’, which comprise 
a closely connected set of concepts in Jewish history. d, Multilevel model 
results using 27,967 observations nested in 149 participants show that 
participants high in deprivation curiosity had higher average edge weights, 
indicating that they tended to visit similar concepts as they traversed 
Wikipedia (b = 0.004, 95% CI = (0.001, 0.007), P = 0.01, Cohen’s d = 0.44; 
a moderate effect size52; Supplementary Table 2). The shaded area around 
the model-estimated association represents the standard error.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | March 2021 | 327–336 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
329
Articles
NaTure Human Behaviour
as network density and size, which are known confounds in net-
work studies55 (Fig. 3a). We removed an outlier value of the clus-
tering coefficient (0.28, 9.5 standard deviations above the mean) 
before performing the analysis. The predictors explain 20% of the 
variance in the clustering coefficient (R2 = 0.20, F(7,140) = 5.08, 
P < 0.001; Supplementary Table 3). Deprivation curiosity is posi-
tively associated with the average clustering coefficient (b = 0.003, 
95% CI = (0.001, 0.006), P = 0.01, β = 0.23; a small effect size; Fig. 
3b), suggesting that participants high in deprivation curiosity exam-
ine closely related concepts during information seeking to a greater 
extent than participants low in deprivation curiosity.
We next regressed the characteristic path length on depriva-
tion curiosity while controlling for the other four facets of curios-
ity as well as both network density and size (Fig. 3c). We removed 
an outlier value of the characteristic path length (0.69, 10 standard 
deviations below the mean) before performing the analysis. The 
predictors explain 82% of the variance in the characteristic path 
length (R2 = 0.82, F(7,140) = 90.64, P < 0.001; Supplementary Table 
4). Deprivation curiosity is negatively associated with the character-
istic path length (b = −0.001, 95% CI = (−0.001, −0.0001), P = 0.02, 
β = −0.10; a small effect size; Fig. 3d) such that participants high in 
deprivation curiosity, while exploiting local information, also have 
networks that are easily traversable from one end to the other.
Principles of knowledge network growth and associations with 
curiosity. In the next step, we moved beyond descriptions of net-
work structure by using a generative model to explore potential  
network mechanisms underlying the observed patterns of infor-
mation seeking. Our model represents the network growth mech-
anisms that a simulated agent uses to construct networks with 
different structures. By fitting an agent’s growth mechanisms to 
the empirical sequence in which the participants traversed edges 
on Wikipedia, we characterized how the participants’ differing 
information-seeking patterns arise from formal growth rules. Tight 
networks could emerge from a greater tendency to revisit similar 
concepts, a lesser propensity to make large conceptual leaps when 
moving from page to page or a combination of both. These possi-
bilities guided our choice of network growth model. We formalized 
these possibilities for underlying principles that led to differences 
in the tightness of knowledge networks using two growth rules. 
The first growth rule is reinforcement and entails a participant 
strengthening the weights of traversed edges (Fig. 4a). When an 
edge is strengthened, it becomes more likely that the participant 
will revisit the nodes connected by the reinforced edge. Higher 
values of reinforcement indicate greater strengthening of traversed 
edges. The second growth rule is regularity. Regularity indicates 
the willingness of the agent to take short versus long topological 
steps. Higher values of regularity indicate a relatively greater pref-
erence for taking shorter topological steps (Fig. 4b). The effects of 
reinforcement and regularity on the knowledge network growth of 
simulated participants are illustrated in Supplementary Video 1 and  
described in Fig. 4.
To determine the roles of reinforcement and regularity in 
observed knowledge network growth, we fit the generative model 
i
j
i
j
a
c
b
d
Clustering coefficient
Path length
0.050
β = 0.23
β = –0.10
0.025
0
–0.025
0
–0.01
–0.02
–0.050
–3
–2
Deprivation sensitivity
–1
0
1
2
–3
–2
Deprivation sensitivity
–1
0
1
2
Average clustering
coefficient
Characteristic path
length
L
o
w
H
i
g
h
Fig. 3 | Deprivation curiosity and the clustering and path length of knowledge networks. a, We characterized the extent to which a node’s neighbours 
are connected by calculating the clustering coefficient on participant-specific networks in which each node is a unique Wikipedia page visited by the 
participant and in which edges exist between all possible node pairs and are weighted by a cosine similarity value. Here we show a network schematic in 
which node i has a high clustering coefficient, while node j has a low clustering coefficient; the neighbours of node i are more likely to be neighbours of 
one another than the neighbours of node j. b, A partial residual plot from a regression analysis with 148 participants shows that deprivation curiosity is 
positively associated with the average clustering coefficient (b = 0.003, P = 0.01, β = 0.23, 95% CI = (0.001, 0.006)). The shaded area around the line of 
best fit represents the standard error. c, We also quantified the characteristic path length of each participant’s network. The shortest path between node 
i and node j is displayed as a solid line. The characteristic path length can be thought of as the average distance along the shortest paths for all possible 
pairs of nodes in the network. d, A partial residual plot from a regression analysis with 148 participants shows that deprivation curiosity was negatively 
associated with the characteristic path length (b = −0.001, P = 0.02, β = −0.10; a small effect size; 95% CI = (−0.001, −0.0001)). The shaded area around 
the line of best fit represents the standard error. In a and c, we show binary networks to provide intuition, but in all analyses we used the weighted path 
length and clustering coefficient to maintain sensitivity to individual differences in network geometry.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | March 2021 | 327–336 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
330
Articles
NaTure Human Behaviour
to each participant’s network separately. The mean reinforcement 
is 39.55 (s.d. = 6.69). Intuitively, hunter-like network building is 
indicated by higher values of reinforcement, suggesting that par-
ticipants return to previously visited concepts to fill information 
gaps. Busybody-like network building, in contrast, is indicated by 
lower values of reinforcement and a lesser tendency to return to 
previously visited concepts. We used multiple regression analysis 
to test whether deprivation curiosity is associated with reinforce-
ment while controlling for the other four facets of curiosity as well 
as network density and network size. The predictors as a group do 
not explain a significant percentage of the variance in reinforce-
ment (R2 = 0.09, F(7,141) = 1.97, P = 0.06; Supplementary Table 5). 
Deprivation curiosity is positively associated with reinforcement 
(b = 1.36, 95% CI = (0.28, 2.44), P = 0.01, β = 0.24; a small effect size; 
Fig. 4c). This association indicates that participants with high values 
of deprivation curiosity have a greater tendency to return to previ-
ously visited concepts during knowledge network building.
In addition to reinforcement, the regularity term of the gen-
erative model constitutes the preference for taking shorter versus 
longer topological steps during information seeking. Intuitively, 
network building that is more busybody-like is indicated by smaller 
regularity values and the tendency to take relatively long topologi-
cal steps along the knowledge network. In contrast, hunter-like 
network building is indicated by larger regularity values and the 
tendency to take shorter topological steps, potentially in an effort 
to sample closely related concepts. We used multiple regression 
analysis to test whether deprivation curiosity is associated with 
regularity while controlling for the other four facets of curiosity and 
network strength. The predictors explain a significant percentage 
of the variance in the regularity (R2 = 0.10, F(7,141) = 2.26, P = 0.03; 
Supplementary Table 6). Deprivation curiosity is not significantly 
associated with regularity (b = 0.01, 95% CI = (−0.01, 0.04), P = 0.35, 
β = 0.09). Although not significantly associated with facets of curi-
osity, the mean regularity is 2.11 (s.d. = 0.15), approaching 2 and 
therefore suggesting that the information-seeking character of the 
sample is consistent with Lévy-like dynamics56–58. A Lévy flight is a 
specialized random walk expressed as fractal movement patterns, 
occurring when the distribution of distances traversed with discrete 
movements falls in a power-law distribution with an exponent of 2, 
as observed in the current data (Fig. 4b).
Variability in hunter and busybody styles. To examine the extent 
to which the participants exhibit variability in their styles of infor-
mation seeking across time, we partitioned the time series of 
Wikipedia browsing data into thirds to create early, middle and late 
information-seeking knowledge networks. Intraclass correlations 
indicate that 35% of the variance in the average edge weight, 26% 
of the variance in the average clustering coefficient and 64% of the 
variance in the characteristic path length is due to between-person 
variance. Thus, a substantial amount of the variance in network 
metrics across early, middle and late information-seeking stages is 
due to within-person fluctuations.
We hypothesized that fluctuations in participants’ sensation- 
seeking tendencies—their preferences for novel and exciting experi-
ences—would be associated with the tightness of their knowledge 
networks, such that periods of high sensation-seeking tendencies 
would be periods during which looser knowledge networks were 
created. Repeated measures correlations provide evidence for this 
hypothesis. The repeated measures correlation between sensation 
seeking and average edge weight of knowledge networks is sig-
nificant and negative (r(297) = −0.16, 95% CI = (−0.27, −0.05), 
P = 0.004; a small effect size; Fig. 5b), indicating that periods of 
higher sensation seeking are periods in which networks with lower 
average edge weights are constructed. Periods of higher-than-usual 
sensation seeking are also periods in which participants create 
knowledge networks of lower-than-usual clustering (r(297) = −0.14, 
–3
–2
Deprivation sensitivity
–1
0
1
2
–3
–2
Deprivation sensitivity
–1
0
1
2
0.2
0
–0.4
–0.2
Regularity
10
c
a
d
b
0
–10
Reinforcement
β = 0.24
β = 0.09
0
1
Distance (I)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
1
P(I) = I –µ
3
Language
Working
Fluency
Intelligence
Learning
Cognition
0
Probability P(I )
µ =
Fig. 4 | Generative model and associations with deprivation curiosity. a,b, 
Our generative model of knowledge network growth consists of two growth 
rules that capture individual differences in how people seek information 
on Wikipedia. During a random walk (a), an individual starting at the node 
‘intelligence’ draws length l = 2 from a Pareto distribution with μ = 1 (b), 
meaning that the agent will traverse two edges. In this case, they travel from 
‘intelligence’ to ‘learning’ (edge 1) and then from ‘learning’ to ‘cognition’ 
(edge 2), indicated by the orange lines. Between-person differences in 
the preference for taking short versus long steps (operationalized as the 
number of edges traversed) is captured by our first growth rule: regularity. 
High regularity values are associated with a preference for taking shorter 
steps when walking on the knowledge network. This tendency is shown 
in b where three values of regularity (μ) are shown along with their 
associated probabilities of making jumps of distance l. Participants with 
high regularity values (μ = 3, dark blue) have a higher probability of taking 
steps of distance 1 relative to participants with low values (μ = 1 or 2, lighter 
blues) and a lower probability of taking jumps of distances greater than 1. 
High regularity values, then, would result in tight networks akin to those 
of the hunter. Our second growth rule, reinforcement, can be described by 
considering why the individual visited ‘learning’ after ‘intelligence’ and what 
happens to the network after the participant travels from ‘intelligence’ to 
‘cognition’. The probability of visiting ‘learning’ versus other neighbours of 
‘intelligence’ (such as ‘fluency’ or ‘working’) is related to the weight of the 
edges between ‘intelligence’ and its neighbouring nodes. Edges with high 
weights, indicating greater similarity in concepts, have a higher probability 
of being traversed than those with lower weights. After walking to the nodes 
‘learning’ and ‘cognition’ (orange edges in a), the edge between the initial 
(‘intelligence’) and target (‘cognition’) nodes, in green, gets strengthened 
by the reinforcement value δw. In other words, the weight of the edge 
increases. Reinforcement is used to capture individual differences in the 
tendency to seek similar and previously sought information while traversing 
Wikipedia by determining how much the weight of an edge should increase. 
For participants with high values of reinforcement, the green edge in a 
would be reinforced to a relatively high extent, leading to a greater likelihood 
of the individual returning to previously visited concepts and resulting in 
tight networks characteristic of the hunter. See Supplementary Video 1 for 
dynamic illustrations. c,d, Partial residual plots from a regression analysis 
with 149 participants indicate that deprivation curiosity is positively 
associated with reinforcement (c; b = 1.36, 95% CI = (0.28, 2.44), P = 0.01, 
β = 0.24; a small effect size). We observe no statistically significant 
association between deprivation curiosity and regularity (d; b = 0.01, 95% 
CI = (−0.01, 0.04), P = 0.35, β = 0.09) in a regression analysis with 149 
participants. In both panels, the shaded area around the line of best fit 
represents the standard error.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | March 2021 | 327–336 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
331
Articles
NaTure Human Behaviour
95% CI = (−0.25, −0.03), P = 0.01; a small effect size; Fig. 5c) and 
longer-than-usual characteristic path lengths (r(297) = 0.19, 95% 
CI = (0.08, 0.30), P < 0.001; a small effect size; Fig. 5d).
Robustness and additional analyses. Additional analyses confirm  
that the results for the association between deprivation curios-
ity and average edge weight (Supplementary Table 7), clustering 
coefficient (Supplementary Table 8), characteristic path length 
(Supplementary Table 9) and reinforcement (Supplementary Table 
10) are robust to the removal of non-significant covariates. We also 
note that after adjusting the alpha rate to control for the testing of 
deprivation curiosity’s association with the tightness of knowledge 
networks across three different indices (Bonferroni correction 
such that the alpha rate is 0.05/3 = 0.02), the associations remain 
significant. Our correction for deprivation sensitivity specifically 
and not all dimensions of curiosity reflects the manuscript’s focus 
on deprivation sensitivity. The use of a multiple regression rather 
than a multilevel model to test the association between deprivation 
curiosity and average edge weight also revealed the hypothesized 
association (Supplementary Table 11 and Supplementary Fig. 1). 
In the Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Results, we 
test two additional models of network growth59 (the preferential 
attachment and preferential acquisition models), but we find no 
evidence that these models accurately describe knowledge network 
growth. Additional analyses to characterize the structure of knowl-
edge networks indicate that knowledge networks have modular and 
small-world structure (Supplementary Methods and Supplementary  
Results).
Discussion
Curiosity is characterized by intrinsically motivated information 
seeking and is strongly associated with well-being due to the many 
informational resources reaped by consistently acting on one’s curi-
osity over time7–9. The open-ended and internally driven nature of 
curiosity makes it difficult to quantify the resources that are col-
lected during information seeking, which in turn are theorized to 
promote well-being on extended timescales. Here, we overcome 
this challenge by integrating historico-philosophical styles of curi-
ous information seeking14,19 with a knowledge-network-building 
approach to curiosity22 to characterize and quantify the internally 
driven and idiosyncratic information seeking of individuals under 
minimal external constraints.
By intensively monitoring the information seeking of partici-
pants browsing Wikipedia for over five hours throughout 21 days, 
we constructed networks consisting of the unique Wikipedia pages 
visited by the participants and the semantic similarity between the 
content of those pages. By transforming the 18,654 pages visited by 
the participants into networks, we were able to represent complex 
information seeking in a manner that could be readily quantified. 
Knowledge networks exhibited small-world and modular structure. 
Individual differences in the average edge weight, clustering coef-
ficient and characteristic path length captured general notions of 
tight and loose knowledge networks, providing an intuitive mapping 
for hunter and busybody styles of knowledge-network-building 
practice.
As well as describing the resulting knowledge networks, we 
formalized hunter and busybody styles of information seeking by 
specifying a generative model of network growth. The model con-
sisted of two growth rules with an intuitive mapping to hunter and 
busybody styles involving the tendency to revisit previously tra-
versed edges (that is, reinforcement) and the propensity to travel 
across different topological distances at each edge between concepts 
(that is, regularity). The participants, on average, exhibited a regu-
larity value of 2.11, consistent with a particular type of random walk 
termed a Lévy flight. A Lévy flight is a specialized random walk 
expressed as fractal movement patterns, occurring when the dis-
tribution of distances traversed with discrete movements falls in a 
power-law distribution with an exponent of 2, as observed in the 
current data (Fig. 4b). Fractal movement patterns make Lévy flights 
particularly apt for efficiently searching for resources embedded in 
complex environments with hierarchical, lattice, patchy or hetero-
geneous organizations60–62. Lévy flights have been observed in the 
movement trajectories of diverse systems, including cells, animals 
and humans63–65. Observations of Lévy kinesthetics in nature have 
motivated proposals that evolution selected for cognitive processes 
that result in efficient Lévy flight exploration66–69. Evolutionary 
adaptations leading to Lévy flight foraging in physical environ-
ments may have also been co-opted for the exploration of abstract 
conceptual spaces70,71. Findings from the generative model suggest, 
then, that humans display a type of information-seeking behaviour 
typically observed during the optimally efficient search for scarce, 
randomly distributed and subjectively rewarding information dur-
ing knowledge network building on Wikipedia. This finding moti-
vates the interpretation of knowledge network exploration during 
internally directed information seeking under minimal constraints 
as searching through a conceptual space for subjectively rewarding 
concepts with an optimally efficient strategy.
In addition to quantifying qualitative notions of loose and tight 
knowledge networks, we examined the role of deprivation curiosity 
in styles of knowledge network building. In line with the notion that 
individuals high in deprivation curiosity have a drive to eliminate 
the unknown as they encounter new information and recognize gaps 
in their knowledge26–28, deprivation curiosity was consistently asso-
ciated with three indices used to quantify the tightness and loose-
ness of the participants’ knowledge networks. Greater deprivation 
0.3
Early
a
b
c
d
Middle
Late
r = –0.14
r = 0.19
r = –0.16
0.2
0
0.1
Average clustering
coefficient
1.0
0.9
0.7
0.8
Characteristic path length
0.5
0.4
0.2
0.1
0
0.3
Average edge weight
0
2.5
Sensation seeking
5.0
7.5
10.0
0
2.5
Sensation seeking
5.0
7.5
10.0
0
2.5
Sensation seeking
5.0
7.5
10.0
Fig. 5 | Within-person variability in hunter and busybody styles. a, 
We partitioned each participant’s time series of edges traversed into 
early, middle and late periods to examine within-person fluctuations in 
the expression of hunter and busybody styles of information seeking. 
b–d, Repeated measures correlations (r) indicate that periods of 
higher-than-usual sensation seeking as assessed via daily diaries are 
periods during which knowledge networks with lower-than-usual average 
edge weights (b; r(297) = −0.16, 95% CI = (−0.27, −0.05), P = 0.004), 
lower-than-usual average clustering coefficients (c; r(297) = −0.14, 95% 
CI = (−0.25, −0.03), P = 0.01) and longer-than-usual characteristic path 
lengths (d; r(297) = 0.19, 95% CI = (0.08, 0.30), P < 0.001) are created. 
Each dot represents one of three observations for a participant (n = 149), 
and the lines represent the repeated measures correlation fit for each 
participant.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | March 2021 | 327–336 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
332
Articles
NaTure Human Behaviour
curiosity was associated with higher average edge weights, higher 
clustering coefficients and shorter characteristic path lengths. Our 
findings support propositions regarding deprivation curiosity and 
provide new insight into its expression during open-ended infor-
mation seeking. When considering the findings from the genera-
tive model, reinforcement was associated with deprivation curiosity. 
This association underlines the importance of revisiting informa-
tion in explaining the tendency for participants high in deprivation 
curiosity to create tight networks. Regularity was not statistically 
significantly associated with deprivation curiosity, suggesting that 
the mechanism underlying the relative tightness of the knowledge 
networks of participants high in deprivation curiosity is more likely 
due to the revisiting of similar concepts and less likely due to indi-
vidual differences in the tendency to take short versus long topo-
logical leaps.
In examining the association between deprivation curiosity 
and knowledge network architecture, we controlled for other fac-
ets of curiosity. Joyous exploration, a facet of curiosity associated 
with pure enjoyment of novel stimuli30, was treated as a covariate to 
examine the independent association between deprivation curios-
ity and knowledge network structure; however, this facet was nega-
tively associated with both average edge weight and reinforcement. 
This pattern of associations suggests that participants characterized 
by high motivation to seek new knowledge are more likely to visit 
relatively dissimilar concepts as they traverse Wikipedia compared 
with those low in joyous exploration, and that they exhibit little ten-
dency to return to previously visited concepts. Joyous exploration 
lends itself to carefree, casual information seeking and is positively 
associated with ambiguity tolerance31,34, in line with the associa-
tion with loose networks observed in the present study. However, 
we caution that joyous exploration was not significantly associated 
with the average clustering coefficient or path length, that few con-
sistent associations between facets of curiosity beyond deprivation 
curiosity and knowledge network indices were observed, and that 
facets beyond deprivation curiosity were treated as covariates in the 
current study, which motivated our corrections for multiple com-
parisons. Contexts beyond Wikipedia will be better suited to exam-
ine how other facets of curiosity are expressed in networks during 
information seeking in the contexts of uncertainty (stress toler-
ance), social information (social curiosity) and perceptually intense 
(thrill seeking) information.
We considered styles of knowledge network building and depri-
vation curiosity as both traits and states7. We find that all indices 
of knowledge network tightness exhibit substantial within-person 
variability across time. Thus, while our individual differences 
analyses indicate variability across persons in the expression of 
hunter and busybody information-seeking styles, these tendencies 
fluctuate within persons across time. We find that periods during 
which looser-than-usual knowledge networks are created are also 
periods during which sensation-seeking tendencies are higher 
than usual. This mapping between fluctuations in knowledge net-
work style and sensation-seeking tendencies is intuitive given the 
association between sensation seeking and drives for novel experi-
ences. An important future direction will be to determine whether 
sensation-seeking tendencies influence knowledge network build-
ing by changing the desire for differing types of information. 
Alternatively, findings may reflect more diverse information seeking 
spurred on by the more diverse array of activities undertaken before 
Wikipedia exploration during periods of high sensation seeking.
Our interdisciplinary approach has the benefit of broadening 
and deepening the now-classical psychological perspectives on 
curiosity. Our analysis develops and redirects a long tradition of 
distinguishing specific and diversive curiosity72. Specific curios-
ity refers to an aroused state experienced when confronted with 
ambiguous stimuli, leading to specific exploration to obtain depth 
of knowledge73. Diversive curiosity, by contrast, refers to the need 
to seek new experiences to obtain a breadth of knowledge74. These 
dimensions of curiosity continue to be probed75. The strength of 
this literature lies in its attention not only to states versus traits of 
curiosity but also to the objects that induce curiosity (for example, 
novel perceptual or epistemic stimuli) and the internal impetuses 
that prompt curiosity (for example, interest, boredom, conflict, 
complexity, ambiguity and anxiety). We build on this literature in 
two ways. First, by pressing back, across philosophical thought, we 
can attend to a rich, underutilized history of curiosity not merely as 
a state or a trait but as a panoply of personas and practices. Tracking 
these transhistorical archetypes across eons of wisdom literatures, 
we are equipped to appreciate and to test inherited taxonomies of 
curiosity76. Second, by pressing forwards, through network science, 
we can attend more directly to curiosity as an act of connecting, 
rather than merely acquiring, new pieces of information. Not limit-
ing ourselves to understanding how knowledge is amassed, we use 
this framework to explore the elegant architectures of knowledge 
network building itself.
It is important to interpret the study findings in the context of 
the study’s limitations. The collection of data under few restrictions 
provides a more ecologically valid design relative to existing experi-
mental laboratory paradigms to capture the internally directed 
information seeking that lies at the core of contemporary definitions 
of curiosity1–3. Yet, the participants received incentives for complet-
ing the 15 minutes of Wikipedia browsing, raising the possibility 
that the participants browsed to obtain the incentives rather than 
to satisfy their deprivation curiosity. However, the incentives were 
provided to encourage continued participation in the study proto-
col and were not contingent on seeking out information on specific 
topics or in particular ways. The motives behind information seek-
ing over extended timescales are undoubtedly manifold. Yet, con-
sistently observing associations between deprivation curiosity and 
three indices of knowledge network tightness suggests that a desire 
to satisfy one’s deprivation curiosity was one motive behind the 
information seeking observed. Even though the observed associa-
tions are modest, it is notable that the associations can be detected 
in the real world in the midst of all the noise that exists outside of 
the laboratory.
We situate hunter and busybody styles of information seeking on 
a dimension ranging from loose to tight networks using continuous 
variables (for example, average edge weight, clustering coefficient 
and path length). Implicit in this formalism and our use of con-
tinuous variables is the notion that individuals practice both forms 
of information seeking but that each form can be expressed to a 
differing degree, and that the relative expression of diverse forms 
of curiosity is an important individual difference19. By dichoto-
mizing the data, we would fail to capture the extent of variation in 
hunter and busybody styles across both individuals and time. Note 
that hunter and busybody styles are both considered expressions of 
curiosity, aligning with multidimensional conceptions of curiosity 
that emphasize not the existence of curious versus incurious people 
but individual differences in the way that curiosity is expressed30. 
As such, this framework may contribute to a broader appreciation 
of the diverse range of information seeking manifested across the 
spectrum of neurotypical and neuroatypical learners77. A next step 
will be to examine how tendencies to practice different styles are 
reflected in the types of resources (in this case, narrow versus wide 
stores of information) that individuals collect over time, which are 
theorized to impact well-being7,9.
We focused on hunter and busybody styles of knowledge net-
work building. Historico-philosophical studies have identified a 
third archetype known as the dancer14. The dancer experiments 
and breaks with traditional pathways of investigation, takes leaps 
of creative imagination and, in the process, produces new concepts 
and radically remodels knowledge networks. Paradigms beyond 
information seeking will be necessary to capture the work of the 
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | March 2021 | 327–336 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
333
Articles
NaTure Human Behaviour
dancer due to the centrality of creation to the dancer’s definition. 
Creativity paradigms that capture searches in semantic memory 
networks or analyses of the structure of creative works themselves 
would lend themselves to capturing the dancer. Although the source 
of the data and the processes underlying it would differ drastically 
from the current information-seeking paradigm, the network-based 
approach taken here may generalize and capture the knowledge 
network building and construction of the dancer. Indeed, network 
approaches have previously been applied to capture differences in 
network structures of semantic associations observed in people 
with varying levels of creativity78,79.
In summary, we use a knowledge-network-building framework 
to capture and quantify styles of information seeking put forward 
in a historico-philosophical taxonomy of curious information seek-
ing. Individuals’ highly idiosyncratic, internally directed informa-
tion seeking can be represented as knowledge networks, and general 
notions of tight and loose knowledge networks can be operation-
alized using graph theoretical indices and growth mechanisms to 
provide insight into the organizing principles of curiosity-driven 
exploration. We provide support for a role for deprivation curios-
ity in motivating distinct styles of information seeking by finding 
evidence that individuals high in deprivation curiosity create tight 
knowledge networks and exhibit a tendency to return to previously 
visited concepts.
Methods
We used data from the Knowledge Networks Over Time study, a study designed to 
provide insight into behaviour across a range of domains of functioning, including 
curiosity7,51. All data and code used in the manuscript are available upon request 
from the corresponding author. Greater detail on the design, data preparation and 
analysis can be found in the Supplementary Methods. All research was conducted 
in accordance with the Human Subjects Electronic Research Application 
institutional review board (IRB) at the University of Pennsylvania. The IRB at the 
university declared the study exempt due to the minimal risk the study posed to the 
participants. All participants provided informed consent before taking part in the 
study.
Participants. Our participant sample comprised 149 individuals (121 female, 
26 male and 2 other gender) recruited through poster, Facebook, Craigslist and 
university research site advertisements in Philadelphia and the surrounding 
university community, who completed the task that is the focus of the current 
manuscript, from a full sample of 167 participants on which we have previously 
reported7,51. No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample sizes, but our 
sample sizes are similar to those reported in previous 21-day intensive longitudinal 
studies80. The participants were aged between 18.21 and 65.24 years (mean = 25.05, 
s.d. = 6.99) and identified as African American/Black (6.71%), Asian (25.50%), 
Hispanic/Latino (5.37%), multiracial (5.37%), other (5.37%), white (49.66%) and 
missing information (2.01%). The data collection began in October 2017 and 
ended in July 2018.
Procedure. Interested participants were sent a baseline survey through Qualtrics 
containing demographic questionnaires and the curiosity measure. The 
participants engaged in a laboratory session at which they completed additional 
questionnaires on Qualtrics, received training in the daily assessment protocol and 
were guided through the installation of tracking software (Timing) necessary for 
a Wikipedia browsing task. Only the participant and one researcher were present 
during the laboratory visit. After the laboratory visit, a 21-day diary assessment 
protocol was initiated. The 21-day diary assessment consisted of two components. 
The first was a daily diary, delivered using Qualtrics, consisting of survey 
questionnaires that took approximately five minutes to complete. The second 
component came immediately after the daily diary and was a 15-minute  
Wikipedia browsing task. Links to the daily assessments were emailed to the 
participants at 18:30 each evening, and the participants completed them outside 
of the laboratory on their personal computers. The researcher was not blind to 
the study hypotheses during data collection. The participants were compensated 
with Amazon gift cards at each study phase. They were given cards worth US$25 
after completing the baseline assessment and the laboratory visit. For the daily 
assessment, completion was incentivized by making participant payments 
contingent on completion: the completion of three, four, five, six and seven surveys 
each week was compensated with gift cards worth US$10, US$15, US$20, US$25 
and US$35, respectively. Continued participation through the daily assessment  
was further incentivized by using a raffle for which an iPad mini was the prize.  
The completion of all seven surveys each week resulted in one entry into the  
raffle drawing.
Measures. We used the participants’ reports of demographic information and trait 
curiosity from the baseline surveys, their ratings of sensation seeking during the 
21-day diary and their daily Wikipedia browsing.
Each evening after the daily diary, the participants were prompted to open 
a browser and to navigate to Wikipedia.org. The participants were instructed 
to spend 15 minutes in self-directed information seeking on Wikipedia and to 
explore whatever topics interested them. Specifically, during the laboratory visit, the 
investigator stated, “We would like you to open a new tab on your browser and visit 
https://www.wikipedia.org/. We would like you to spend 15 minutes each evening 
reading about whatever you want on Wikipedia. For example, if you wanted to 
learn more about Philadelphia, you could go to the Philadelphia Wikipedia page.” 
At this point, the researcher used the Wikipedia search bar to navigate to https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philadelphia to ensure that all participants had familiarity with 
Wikipedia and its usage. “You can read through the page. You can also click on links 
you find interesting or you can use the search bar to search for new topics. There is no 
right or wrong way to do this. We are interested in what it is that people read about 
when they are not forced to read about anything in particular.” We developed this set 
of instructions to ensure that people would browse according to their curiosity and 
not in any particular manner suggested by the experimenter. After the 15 minutes of 
open browsing, the participants exported and uploaded their browsing history.
Curiosity was measured using the Five-Dimensional Curiosity Scale (5D)30. 
The 5D captures multiple dimensions of curiosity that include deprivation 
sensitivity, joyous exploration, stress tolerance, social curiosity and thrill seeking. 
The participants rated the extent to which five items within each subscale 
accurately described them on a 0 (“Does not describe me at all”) to 6 (“Completely 
describes me”) scale. The reliability (Cronbach’s α) of the subscales in the current 
sample was satisfactory. Note that the deprivation sensitivity subscale is highly 
similar to another commonly used deprivation curiosity scale28.
We measured the day’s sensation seeking using two items adapted from the 
Fun-Seeking subscale of the BIS/BAS scales81 and the Excitement-Seeking subscale 
of the Revised Neuroticism, Extraversion, and Openness Personality Inventory82. 
The participants were instructed to rate how accurately the statement reflected how 
they behaved today on a scale from 0 (“None of the time”) to 10 (“All of the time”) 
in increments of 0.1.
Data preparation. To construct knowledge networks for each participant, we 
created for each individual a list of nodes (the unique Wikipedia pages visited) and 
an edge list that indicated the similarity between each node. To create edge weights, 
we computed term-frequency inverse document frequency (t.f.-i.d.f.) values 
for the text in each Wikipedia page visited during the study for all participants 
(n = 18,654) and calculated the cosine similarity between all pairs of nodes. The 
term frequency for a document is given as
t:f:ðt; dÞ ¼ f t;d;
ð1Þ
where the term frequency of token t in document d is given by the frequency f with 
which it appears in the document. The inverse document frequency (i.d.f.) for a 
token is defined as:
i:d:f:ðt; DÞ ¼ log
jDj
jfd 2 D : t 2 dgj


;
ð2Þ
where the i.d.f. of token t in the set of documents D (the study corpus of all 18,654 
Wikipedia pages) is given by the logarithm of the number of documents in D 
divided by the number of documents d in D that contain t. The t.f.-i.d.f. is a product 
of the token’s frequency and the token’s i.d.f. Thus, common tokens appearing very 
frequently in the corpus will be down-weighted, while rare terms will be associated 
with a relatively large number. To account for differences in document length, we 
applied a common normalization such that the Euclidean norm of the t.f.-i.d.f. 
vector for a document became 1. After calculating the normalized t.f.-i.d.f. for each 
token, we quantified the similarity between pairs of nodes by computing the cosine 
similarity between all possible pairs of the 18,654 vectors. The cosine similarity 
resulted in a quantification of node similarity ranging from 0 to 1, with higher 
values indicating greater similarity of the text within each Wikipedia page.
We chose to define edges by their cosine similarity rather than by the binary 
hyperlink indicator for two main reasons. First, the participants were not 
constrained to using hyperlinks to navigate Wikipedia and had the option to use 
the search bar, for example. Second, there were cases in which the text between 
two Wikipedia pages indicated high similarity between concepts as reflected in 
the cosine similarity, and there was face validity that two pages were similar to one 
another, yet no hyperlink was present between the pages. For example, the cosine 
similarity of the edge between the Mazda RX-8 and the Mazda RX-7 Wikipedia 
pages (both sports cars manufactured by Japanese automobile manufacturer 
Mazda) was 0.90, indicating high similarity, yet no hyperlink existed between the 
pages. This lack of hyperlink between two pages with similar text may reflect the 
coarse, binary nature of hyperlinks relative to the more fine-grained measure of 
concept similarity available through the cosine similarity ranging from 0 to 1. It 
may also reflect the fact that hyperlink generation depends on users’ subjective 
assessments of concept similarity rather than a text-based approach. Although 
there are differences between the cosine similarity and hyperlink approaches, 
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | March 2021 | 327–336 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
334
Articles
NaTure Human Behaviour
nodes connected by a hyperlink had a larger cosine similarity value (mean = 0.27, 
s.d. = 0.21) than nodes that were not connected by a hyperlink (mean = 0.07, 
s.d. = 0.13), and this difference was statistically significant with a large effect 
size (t(26976) = 97.85, P < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 1.10). There is thus some overlap 
between networks with edges defined by cosine similarity and those with edges 
defined by hyperlinks. We constructed knowledge networks using Wikipedia 
hyperlinks rather than cosine similarity and repeated the main text analyses in the 
Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Results to allow comparison. We find 
that the cosine similarity approach, but not the hyperlink approach, is sensitive to 
individual differences in deprivation curiosity.
Data analysis. We undertook thorough descriptive analyses of the structure of 
the participants’ knowledge networks. We then used model-based approaches to 
uncover the mechanisms underlying knowledge network growth. Throughout, 
we examined associations between knowledge network structure and deprivation 
curiosity. See the Supplementary Methods for the definitions of network statistics 
and descriptions of analysis approaches. The data distribution was assumed to be 
normal, but this was not formally tested.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All data used in the manuscript are available upon request from the corresponding 
author.
Code availability
The analyses in the manuscript used code available through R, MATLAB and the 
Brain Connectivity Toolbox. The code associated with the generative model is 
available at https://github.com/dalejn/kinestheticCuriosity.
Received: 21 September 2019; Accepted: 24 September 2020;  
Published online: 30 November 2020
References
	1.	 Gottlieb, J., Oudeyer, P. Y., Lopes, M. & Baranes, A. Information-seeking, 
curiosity, and attention: computational and neural mechanisms. Trends Cogn. 
Sci. 17, 585–593 (2013).
	2.	 Gottlieb, J. & Oudeyer, P. Y. Towards a neuroscience of active sampling and 
curiosity. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 758–770 (2018).
	3.	 Kidd, C. & Hayden, B. Y. The psychology and neuroscience of curiosity. 
Neuron 88, 449–460 (2015).
	4.	 Blanchard, T. C., Hayden, B. Y. & Bromberg-Martin, E. S. Orbitofrontal 
cortex uses distinct codes for different choice attributes in decisions 
motivated by curiosity. Neuron 85, 602–614 (2015).
	5.	 Brydevall, M., Bennett, D., Murawski, C. & Bode, S. The neural encoding of 
information prediction errors during non-instrumental information seeking. 
Sci. Rep. 8, 6134 (2018).
	6.	 Daddaoua, N., Lopes, M. & Gottlieb, J. Intrinsically motivated oculomotor 
exploration guided by uncertainty reduction and conditioned reinforcement 
in non-human primates. Sci. Rep. 6, 20202 (2016).
	7.	 Lydon-Staley, D. M., Zurn, P. & Bassett, D. S. Within-person variability in 
curiosity during daily life and associations with well-being. J. Pers. 88, 
625–641 (2020).
	8.	 Park, S., Kim, M.-S. & Chun, M. M. Concurrent working memory load can 
facilitate selective attention: evidence for specialized load. J. Exp. Psychol. 
Hum. Percept. Perform. 33, 1062–1075 (2007).
	9.	 Peterson, C., Ruch, W., Beermann, U., Park, N. & Seligman, M. E. Strengths 
of character, orientations to happiness, and life satisfaction. J. Posit. Psychol. 2, 
149–156 (2007).
	10.	Fredrickson, B. L. in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (eds Plant, 
E. A. & Devine, P. G.) 1–53 (Academic Press, 2013).
	11.	Fredrickson, B. L. The role of positive emotions in positive psychology. Am. 
Psychol. 56, 218–226 (2001).
	12.	Kashdan, T. B., Rose, P. & Fincham, F. D. Curiosity and exploration: 
facilitating positive subjective experiences and personal growth opportunities. 
J. Pers. Assess. 82, 291–305 (2004).
	13.	Nowotny, H. Insatiable Curiosity: Innovation in a Fragile Future (MIT Press, 
2010).
	14.	Zurn, P. in Toward New Philosophical Explorations of the Epistemic Desire to 
Know: Just Curious about Curiosity (ed. Papastefanou, M.) 27–49 (Cambridge 
Scholars Press, 2019).
	15.	Heidegger, M. Being and Time (trans. Stambaugh, J.) (State Univ. of New York 
Press, 1996).
	16.	Yonge, C. D. (trans.) The Works of Philo: Complete and Unabridged 
(Hendrickson, 1993).
	17.	Helmbold, W. C. et al. Plutarch’s Moralia Vol. 1 (Harvard Univ. Press, 1960).
	18.	Nietzsche, F. Beyond Good and Evil (trans. Kaufmann, W.) (Vintage Books, 
1996).
	19.	Zurn, P. & Bassett, D. S. On curiosity: a fundamental aspect of personality, a 
practice of network growth. Pers. Neurosci. 1, e13 (2018).
	20.	Baranes, A., Oudeyer, P. Y. & Gottlieb, J. Eye movements reveal epistemic 
curiosity in human observers. Vis. Res. 117, 81–90 (2015).
	21.	Risko, E. F., Anderson, N. C., Lanthier, S. & Kingstone, A. Curious eyes: 
individual differences in personality predict eye movement behavior in 
scene-viewing. Cognition 122, 86–90 (2012).
	22.	Bassett, D. S. in Curiosity Studies: Toward a New Ecology of Knowledge  
(eds Zurn, P. & Shankar, A.) 57–74 (Univ. of Minnesota Press, 2019).
	23.	West, R. & Leskovec, J. Human wayfinding in information networks.  
Proc. 21st Int. Conf. World Wide Web 117, 619–628 (2012).
	24.	Gross, J. L. & Yellen, J. Handbook of Graph Theory (CRC, 2004).
	25.	Newman, M. Networks (Oxford Univ. Press, 2018).
	26.	Loewenstein, G. The psychology of curiosity: a review and reinterpretation. 
Psychol. Bull. 116, 75–98 (1994).
	27.	Litman, J. A. & Mussel, P. Validity of the interest- and deprivation-type 
epistemic curiosity model in Germany. J. Individ. Differ. 34, 59–68 (2013).
	28.	Litman, J. A. Interest and deprivation factors of epistemic curiosity. Pers. 
Individ. Differ. 44, 1585–1595 (2008).
	29.	Litman, J. A. & Jimerson, T. L. The measurement of curiosity as a feeling of 
deprivation. J. Pers. Assess. 82, 147–157 (2004).
	30.	Kashdan, T. B. et al. The five-dimensional curiosity scale: capturing the 
bandwidth of curiosity and identifying four unique subgroups of curious 
people. J. Res. Pers. 73, 130–149 (2018).
	31.	Litman, J. A. Relationships between measures of I- and D-type curiosity, 
ambiguity tolerance, and need for closure: an initial test of the wanting–liking 
model of information-seeking. Pers. Individ. Differ. 48, 397–402 (2010).
	32.	Golman, R. & Loewenstein, G. Information gaps: a theory of  
preferences regarding the presence and absence of information. Decision 5, 
143–164 (2018).
	33.	Litman, J. in The Cambridge Handbook on Motivation and Learning  
(eds Renniger, K. A. & Hidi, S. E.) 418–422 (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2019).
	34.	Lauriola, M. et al. Epistemic curiosity and self-regulation. Pers. Individ. Differ. 
83, 202–207 (2015).
	35.	FitzGibbon, L., Lau, J. K. L. & Murayama, K. The seductive lure of curiosity: 
information as a motivationally salient reward. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 35, 
21–27 (2020).
	36.	Berridge, K. C. From prediction error to incentive salience: mesolimbic 
computation of reward motivation. Eur. J. Neurosci. 35, 1124–1143 (2012).
	37.	Berridge, K. C. The debate over dopamine’s role in reward: the case for 
incentive salience. Psychopharmacology 191, 391–431 (2007).
	38.	Robinson, T. E. & Berridge, K. C. Incentive-sensitization and drug ‘wanting’. 
Psychopharmacology 171, 352–353 (2004).
	39.	Berridge, K. C. & Robinson, T. E. What is the role of dopamine in reward: 
hedonic impact, reward learning, or incentive salience? Brain Res. Rev. 28, 
309–369 (1998).
	40.	Lau, J. K. L., Ozono, H., Kuratomi, K., Komiya, A. & Murayama, K. Shared 
striatal activity in decisions to satisfy curiosity and hunger at the risk of 
electric shocks. Nat. Hum. Behav. 4, 531–543 (2020).
	41.	Kobayashi, K. & Hsu, M. Common neural code for reward and information 
value. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116, 13061–13066 (2019).
	42.	Gruber, M. J., Gelman, B. D. & Ranganath, C. States of curiosity modulate 
hippocampus-dependent learning via the dopaminergic circuit. Neuron 84, 
486–496 (2014).
	43.	Shin, D. D. & Kim, S.-i. Homo curious: curious or interested? Educ. Psychol. 
Rev. 31, 853–874 (2019).
	44.	Scholtes, I. When is a network a network? Multi-order graphical model 
selection in pathways and temporal networks. Preprint at arXiv https://arxiv.
org/abs/1702.05499 (2017).
	45.	West, R. & Leskovec, J. Automatic versus human navigation in information 
networks. In Proc. 6th International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social 
Media (ed. Breslin, J.) 362–369 (AAAI, 2012).
	46.	Lamprecht, D., Lerman, K., Helic, D. & Strohmaier, M. How the structure of 
Wikipedia articles influences user navigation. New Rev. Hypermedia 
Multimed. 23, 29–50 (2017).
	47.	Lemmerich, F., Sáez-Trumper, D., West, R. & Zia, L. Why the world reads 
Wikipedia: beyond English speakers. In Proc. 12th ACM International 
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (eds. Culpepper, J. S. & Moffat, 
A.) 618–626 (ACM, 2019).
	48.	Singer, P. et al. Why we read Wikipedia. In Proc. 26th International 
Conference on World Wide Web (eds. Barrett, R. & Cummings, R.) 1591–1600 
(International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 2017).
	49.	Kashdan, T. B. & Steger, M. F. Curiosity and pathways to well-being and 
meaning in life: traits, states, and everyday behaviors. Motiv. Emot. 31, 
159–173 (2007).
	50.	Zuckerman, M. Behavioral Expressions and Biosocial Bases of Sensation 
Seeking (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1994).
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | March 2021 | 327–336 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
335
Articles
NaTure Human Behaviour
	51.	Lydon-Staley, D. & Bassett, D. Within-person variability in sensation-seeking 
during daily life: positive associations with alcohol use and self-defined risky 
behaviors. Psychol. Addict. Behav. 34, 257–268 (2020).
	52.	Kleiman, E. E. MAtools: Data management tools for real-time monitoring/
ecological momentary assessment data. R package version 0.1.3 (2017).
	53.	Onnela, J. P., Saramäki, J., Kertész, J. & Kaski, K. Intensity and coherence of 
motifs in weighted complex networks. Phys. Rev. E 71, 065103 (2005).
	54.	Latora, V. & Marchiori, M. Efficient behavior of small-world networks. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 87, 198701 (2001).
	55.	Van Wijk, B. C., Stam, C. J. & Daffertshofer, A. Comparing brain networks of 
different size and connectivity density using graph theory. PLoS ONE 5, 
e13701 (2010).
	56.	Viswanathan, G. M. et al. Optimizing the success of random searches. Nature 
401, 911–914 (1999).
	57.	Viswanathan, G. et al. Lévy flights in random searches. Physica A 282, 
208–213 (2000).
	58.	Sims, D. W. et al. Scaling laws of marine predator search behaviour. Nature 
451, 1098–1102 (2008).
	59.	Hills, T. T., Maouene, M., Maouene, J., Sheya, A. & Smith, L. Longitudinal 
analysis of early semantic networks: preferential attachment or preferential 
acquisition? Psychol. Sci. 20, 729–739 (2009).
	60.	Santos, M., Viswanathan, G., Raposo, E. & da Luz, M. Optimization of 
random searches on regular lattices. Phys. Rev. E 72, 046143 (2005).
	61.	Wosniack, M., Santos, M., Raposo, E., Viswanathan, G. & Da Luz, M. 
Robustness of optimal random searches in fragmented environments. Phys. 
Rev. E 91, 052119 (2015).
	62.	Raposo, E. P. et al. How landscape heterogeneity frames optimal diffusivity in 
searching processes. PLoS Comput. Biol. 7, e1002233 (2011).
	63.	Harris, T. H. et al. Generalized Lévy walks and the role of chemokines in 
migration of effector CD8+ T cells. Nature 486, 545–548 (2012).
	64.	Rhee, I. et al. On the Levy-walk nature of human mobility. IEEE ACM Trans. 
Netw. 19, 630–643 (2011).
	65.	Rhodes, T. & Turvey, M. T. Human memory retrieval as Lévy foraging. 
Physica A 385, 255–260 (2007).
	66.	Bartumeus, F. Lévy processes in animal movement: an evolutionary 
hypothesis. Fractals 15, 151–162 (2007).
	67.	Humphries, N. E. et al. Environmental context explains Lévy and Brownian 
movement patterns of marine predators. Nature 465, 1066–1069 (2010).
	68.	Viswanathan, G. M., Da Luz, M. G., Raposo, E. P. & Stanley, H. E. The Physics 
of Foraging: An Introduction to Random Searches and Biological Encounters 
(Cambridge Univ. Press, 2011).
	69.	Wosniack, M. E., Santos, M. C., Raposo, E. P., Viswanathan, G. M. & da Luz, 
M. G. The evolutionary origins of Lévy walk foraging. PLoS Comput. Biol. 13, 
e1005774 (2017).
	70.	Hills, T. T. Animal foraging and the evolution of goal-directed cognition. 
Cogn. Sci. 30, 3–41 (2006).
	71.	Todd, P. M., Hills, T. T. & Robbins, T. W. Cognitive Search: Evolution, 
Algorithms, and the Brain Vol. 9 (MIT Press, 2012).
	72.	Berlyne, D. E. Conflict, Arousal, and Curiosity (McGraw-Hill, 1960).
	73.	Day, H. An Instrument for the Measurement of Intrinsic Motivation: An 
Interim Report to the Department of Manpower and Immigration (York 
University, 1969).
	74.	Leherissey, B. L. The Development of a Measure of State Epistemic Curiosity 
(ERIC, 1971).
	75.	Litman, J. A. & Spielberger, C. D. Measuring epistemic curiosity and its 
diversive and specific components. J. Pers. Assess. 80, 75–86 (2003).
	76.	Zurn, P. & Bassett, D. S. Philosophy of biology: seizing an opportunity. eLife 
8, e48336 (2019).
	77.	Johnson, K. T. in Curiosity Studies: Toward a New Ecology of Knowledge  
(eds Zurn, P. & Shankar, A.) 129–146 (Univ. of Minnesota Press, 2020).
	78.	Kenett, Y. N., Anaki, D. & Faust, M. Investigating the structure of semantic 
networks in low and high creative persons. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8, 407 (2014).
	79.	Kenett, Y. N. & Faust, M. A semantic network cartography of the creative 
mind. Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 271–274 (2019).
	80.	Fosco, G. M. & Lydon-Staley, D. M. A within-family examination of 
interparental conflict, cognitive appraisals, and adolescent mood and 
well-being. Child Dev. 90, e421–e436 (2019).
	81.	Carver, C. S. & White, T. L. Behavioral inhibition, behavioral activation, and 
affective responses to impending reward and punishment: the bis/bas scales. 
J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 67, 319–333 (1994).
	82.	Costa, P. T. & McCrae, R. R. Normal personality assessment in clinical 
practice: the neo personality inventory. Psychol. Assess. 4, 5–13 (1992).
Acknowledgements
We thank J. Dworkin, C. W. Lynn and S. Patankar for feedback on earlier versions 
of the manuscript. D.S.B., D.M.L.-S., D.Z. and A.S.B. acknowledge support from the 
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the 
ISI Foundation, the Paul Allen Foundation, the Army Research Laboratory (grant no. 
W911NF-10-2-0022), the Army Research Office (grant nos Bassett-W911NF-14-1-0679, 
Grafton-W911NF-16-1-0474 and DCIST-W911NF-17-2-0181), the Office of Naval 
Research, the National Institute of Mental Health (grant nos 2-R01-DC-009209-11, 
R01-MH112847, R01-MH107235 and R21-M MH-106799), the National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development (grant no. 1R01HD086888-01), the National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (grant no. R01 NS099348), the National 
Science Foundation (grant nos PHY-1554488 and BCS-1631550) and the National 
Institute on Drug Abuse (grant no. 1K01DA047417). All authors acknowledge support 
from the Center for Curiosity. The funders had no role in study design, data collection 
and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
Author contributions
D.M.L.-S. designed the research with input from D.Z., P.Z. and D.S.B. D.M.L.-S., A.S.B. 
and D.Z. analysed the data. D.M.L.-S. wrote the paper. A.S.B., D.Z., P.Z. and D.S.B. edited 
the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41562-020-00985-7.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.S.B.
Peer review information Primary handling editor: Aisha Bradshaw.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | March 2021 | 327–336 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
336
1
nature research  |  reporting summary
April 2020
Corresponding author(s):
Danielle S. Bassett
Last updated by author(s): Sep 6, 2020
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency 
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided 
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) 
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted 
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection
Data was collected using Qualtrics and Timing
Data analysis
Analyses used in the manuscript used code available through R, MARLAB, and the Brain Connectivity Toolbox. Code assocaited with the 
generative model is available at: http://github.com/dalejn/kinestheticCuriosity
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and 
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable: 
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A list of figures that have associated raw data 
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
All data used in the manuscript are available upon request from the corresponding author
2
nature research  |  reporting summary
April 2020
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences
Behavioural & social sciences
 Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description
Quantitative, intensive longitudinal study
Research sample
Our participant sample comprised 149 individuals (121 female, 26 male, 2 other gender) recruited through poster, Facebook, 
Craigslist, and university research site advertisements in Philadelphia and the surrounding university community, , who completed a 
task that is the focus of the current manuscript, from a full sample of 167 participants on which we have previously reported (Lydon-
Staley, Falk, & Bassett, 2020; Lydon-Staley, Zurn, & Bassett, 2020).
Sampling strategy
 No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample size but our sample size is similar to those reported in previous 21-day 
intensive longitudinal studies (e.g., Fosco & Lydon-Staley, 2019)
Data collection
Interested participants encountering study advertisements were directed to a website with study information and a consent form. 
After confirming that participants met inclusion criteria, participants were contacted via telephone with a description of the study 
and an opportunity to assent or decline participation. If an individual assented, an email was sent with a baseline survey containing 
demographic questionnaires and the curiosity measure used in the present study. The baseline survey contained additional scales 
that were not the focus of the present study. The researcher was not present when the participant completed the baseline survey. 
Once the baseline survey was completed, participants completed a laboratory session. At the laboratory session, participants 
completed additional questionnaires, received training in the daily assessment protocol, and were guided through the installation of 
tracking software (Timing: https://timingapp.com/) necessary for a Wikipedia browsing task. 
 
Following the laboratory study, a 21-day diary assessment protocol was initiated. The 21-day diary assessment consisted of two 
components. The first was a daily diary, delivered using Qualtrics, consisting of survey questionnaires that took approximately 5 
minutes to complete. The second came immediately after the daily diary component and was a 15 minute Wikipedia browsing task. 
Links to the daily assessments were emailed to participants at 6:30 PM each evening. Participants requesting reminders received a 
text message at 6:40 PM to notify them that survey links had been emailed. Participants were instructed to complete the daily 
assessments before going to bed and were also reminded that links remained open until 10:00 AM the next morning. The 21-day 
assessment was completed outside of the laboratory and the researcher was not present. Participants were compensated with gift 
cards to Amazon.com at each study phase: \$25 after completing the baseline assessment and the laboratory visit. For the daily 
assessment, completion was incentivized by making participant payment contingent on completion: completion of 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 
surveys each week was compensated with gift cards worth \$10, \$15, \$20, \$25, and \$35, respectively. Continued participation 
through the daily assessment was further incentivized by using a raffle for which an iPad mini was available as a prize. Completion of 
all 7 surveys each week resulted in one entry into the raffle drawing. The researcher was not blind to study hypotheses.
Timing
Data collection began in October 2017 and ended in July 2018.
Data exclusions
For two analyses in the manuscript, an outlier was removed before analyses were conducted. The outlier scored 9.5 standard 
deviations above the mean on one variable (average clustering coefficient) and 10 standard deviations below the mean on another 
variable (characteristic path length). We report on this exclusion in the Results section when presenting results.
Non-participation
No participants dropped out or declined participation.
Randomization
Participants were not assigned to different experimental groups
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material, 
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response. 
3
nature research  |  reporting summary
April 2020
Materials & experimental systems
n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies
Eukaryotic cell lines
Palaeontology and archaeology
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
Methods
n/a Involved in the study
ChIP-seq
Flow cytometry
MRI-based neuroimaging
Human research participants
Policy information about studies involving human research participants
Population characteristics
Participants were aged between 18.21 and 65.24 years (mean = 25.05, standard deviation = 6.99), and identified as African 
American/Black (6.71\%),  Asian (25.50\%), Hispanic/Latino (5.37\%), Multiracial (5.37\%), other (5.37\%), white (49.66\%), 
and missing information (2.01\%). Of the 149 participants, 121 identified as female, 26 as male, and 2 as other genders.
Recruitment
Participants were recruited through poster, Facebook, Craigslist, and university research site advertisements in Philadelphia 
and the surrounding university community. 
Ethics oversight
All research was conducted in accordance with the Human Subjects Electronic Research Application institutional review 
board (IRB) at the University of Pennsylvania. 
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.
