
Self-Correcting StrategiesOpen sidebarSelf-Correcting StrategiesDefault (GPT-3.5)Automatically Correcting Large Language Models: 
Surveying the landscape of diverse self-correction strategies 
Liangming Pan, Michael Saxon, Wenda Xu, 
Deepak Nathani, Xinyi Wang, William Yang Wang 
University of California, Santa Barbara 
{liangmingpan, saxon, wendaxu, dnathani, xinyi_wang}@ucsb.edu 
william@cs.ucsb.edu 
Abstract 
Large language models (LLMs) have demon- 
strated remarkable performance across a wide 
array of NLP tasks. However, their eff i cacy 
is undermined by undesired and inconsistent 
behaviors, including hallucination, unfaithful 
reasoning, and toxic content. A promising ap- 
proach to rectify these l aws is self-correction, 
where the LLM itself is prompted or guided to 
i x problems in its own output. Techniques 
leveraging automated feedback—either pro- 
duced by the LLM itself or some external 
system—are of particular interest as they are a 
promising way to make LLM-based solutions 
more practical and deployable with minimal 
human feedback. This paper presents a compre- 
hensive review of this emerging class of tech- 
niques. We analyze and taxonomize a wide 
array of recent work utilizing these strategies, 
including training-time, generation-time, and 
post-hoc correction. We also summarize the 
major applications of this strategy and conclude 
by discussing future directions and challenges. 
1Introduction 
Recent years have seen striking empirical successes 
of large language models (LLMs), as they consis- 
tently obtain impressive results across a diverse 
range of NLP benchmarks (Guo et al., 2023; Suz- 
gun et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2023), while also show- 
casing surprising abilities of language understand- 
ing (Wei et al., 2022a; Begus et al., 2023), gen- 
eration (Pu and Demberg, 2023; Lin and Chen, 
2023; Lyu et al., 2023a), and reasoning (Wei et al., 
2022b; Kojima et al., 2022; Dasgupta et al., 2022). 
However, these models are not without their l aws. 
LLMs are observed to intermittently display unde- 
sired and inconsistent behaviors such as produc- 
ing seemingly convincing but inaccurate “hallu- 
cinations” (Lin et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023c; 
Min et al., 2023), conducting unfaithful reason- 
ing (Golovneva et al., 2023; Lyu et al., 2023b; Wu 
et al., 2023b), generating inappropriate or harmful 
content (Gehman et al., 2020; Levy et al., 2021, 
2022; Shaikh et al., 2023), and failing to trustfully 
follow rules and constraints (Zhuo et al., 2023; 
Wang et al., 2023a). Such l awed behaviors ham- 
per the trust in LLMs and pose hurdles to their 
real-world applications (OpenAI, 2023). 
A prevailing strategy to rectify these undesired 
behaviors of LLMs is learning from feedback, mir- 
roring a typical human learning strategy where in- 
dividuals actively ref i ne their behaviors through a 
cycle of trial, error, and correction. Humans, when 
making mistakes, often gather feedback either from 
others or through self-ref l ection. Such feedback of- 
fers valuable insights into missteps and proposes 
potential avenues for improvement. With feedback, 
humans can adapt and modify their behavior ac- 
cordingly, learning to correct their mistakes over 
time. Inspired by this natural learning mechanism, 
extensive research (Huang et al., 2022; Madaan 
et al., 2023; Gero et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023) 
has been undertaken to improve LLMs through the 
paradigm of learning from feedback. 
One popular line of research involves the use 
of human feedback to evaluate and ref i ne models, 
as encapsulated in the survey by Fernandes et al. 
(2023). These methods typically involve direct op- 
timization of LLMs against human feedback on 
their outputs (Kreutzer et al., 2018; Glaese et al., 
2022; Ouyang et al., 2022; Scheurer et al., 2023), 
wherein human evaluations of output quality serve 
as a reward signal for improving the model perfor- 
mance. However, this approach has two primary 
drawbacks: it can be costly due to the manual la- 
bor involved, and it lacks real-time capabilities as 
humans cannot provide instant feedback. 
To minimize the need for human intervention, 
another strategy is self-correcting LLMs with au- 
tomated feedback, where the model (iteratively) 
learns from automatically generated feedback sig- 
nals to understand the consequences of its actions 
and adapts its behaviors. The source of automated 
1 
arXiv:2308.03188v1 
[cs.CL] 
6 
Aug 
2023 
Language 
Model Patient 
Treatment 
Diagnosis 
Doctor 
Critic 
Model 
Refine 
Model 
Output 
Feedback 
Human 
Language Model 
External Tools 
External Metrics 
External Knowledge 
Supervised Learning 
Reinforcement 
Learning 
In-Context Learning 
Self-Training 
Feedback-guided 
Generation Strategy 
Learning 
Generate-then-Rank 
Post-hoc Revision 
Input Trained Model 
Program Executor 
Other Tools 
Hallucination 
Unfaithful Reasoning 
Flawed Codes 
Toxic Contents 
Scalar Value 
Natural Language 
Figure 1: A conceptual framework for self-correcting LLMs with automated feedback. We identify three parties 
involved in the prototypical correction pipeline that are analogous to a patient, doctor, and treatment in medicine, 
respectively: a Language Model produces initial output, a Critic Model analyzes the output and provides feedback, 
and a Ref i ne Model provides treatment to either the output or the language model. We taxonomize existing works 
using this conceptualization along i ve key aspects: the problem to be corrected, the source and format of the 
feedback, and the strategy and learning method of the ref i ne model. 
feedback can be multifaceted, spanning from the 
LLM itself acting as the feedback model (Madaan 
et al., 2023; Schick et al., 2023), a separately 
trained feedback model (Yang et al., 2022b; Paul 
et al., 2023), readily available external tools (Gou 
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023c), to external knowl- 
edge sources such as Wikipedia or the internet (Yu 
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b). Different strategies 
havebeenproposedtocorrectLLMwithautomated 
feedback, including self-training (Huang et al., 
2022; Bai et al., 2022b), generate-then-rank (He 
et al., 2023; Weng et al., 2023), feedback-guided 
decoding (Yang et al., 2022a; Xie et al., 2023), iter- 
ative post-hoc revision (Zhang et al., 2023a; Jiang 
et al., 2023), etc. Recently, the incorporation of 
such strategies has demonstrated their effectiveness 
across a myriad of tasks, from question answer- 
ing (Peng et al., 2023) and reasoning (Pan et al., 
2023) to code generation (Zhang et al., 2023b) and 
toxicity detection (Lu et al., 2022). 
In light of these advancements, our paper aims 
to provide a comprehensive survey. We start by 
establishing the concept of self-correcting LLMs 
with automated feedback and creating a taxonomy 
of the different methods (§ 2). We then discuss 
the major techniques, categorized as training-time 
correction (§ 3), generation-time correction (§ 4), 
and post-hoc correction (§ 5). We then summarize 
the major application areas of this strategy (§ 6). 
Finally, we discuss key future directions (§ 7). 
2A Taxonomy for Correcting LLMs with 
feedback can be multifaceted, spanning from the 
LLM itself acting as the feedback model (Madaan 
et al., 2023; Schick et al., 2023), a separately 
trained feedback model (Yang et al., 2022b; Paul 
et al., 2023), readily available external tools (Gou 
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023c), to external knowl- 
edge sources such as Wikipedia or the internet (Yu 
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b). Different strategies 
havebeenproposedtocorrectLLMwithautomated 
feedback, including self-training (Huang et al., 
2022; Bai et al., 2022b), generate-then-rank (He 
et al., 2023; Weng et al., 2023), feedback-guided 
decoding (Yang et al., 2022a; Xie et al., 2023), iter- 
ative post-hoc revision (Zhang et al., 2023a; Jiang 
et al., 2023), etc. Recently, the incorporation of 
such strategies has demonstrated their effectiveness 
across a myriad of tasks, from question answer- 
ing (Peng et al., 2023) and reasoning (Pan et al., 
2023) to code generation (Zhang et al., 2023b) and 
toxicity detection (Lu et al., 2022). 
In light of these advancements, our paper aims 
to provide a comprehensive survey. We start by 
establishing the concept of self-correcting LLMs 
with automated feedback and creating a taxonomy 
of the different methods (§ 2). We then discuss 
the major techniques, categorized as training-time 
correction (§ 3), generation-time correction (§ 4), 
and post-hoc correction (§ 5). We then summarize 
the major application areas of this strategy (§ 6). 
Finally, we discuss key future directions (§ 7). 
2A Taxonomy for Correcting LLMs with 
Automated Feedback 
For the sake of clean exposition, we i rst present a 
conceptual framework outlining the overall process 
of correcting LLMs with feedback, thereby estab- 
lishing the scope of this survey (§ 2.1). We then 
proceed to identify i ve primary dimensions that 
serve as classif i cation criteria for existing works: 
1) What gets corrected, 2) What is the source of the 
feedback, 3) What is the format of the feedback, 4) 
When the feedback is used, and 5) How to correct 
the model with feedback (§ 2.2–§ 2.6). Finally, we 
summarize existing works in § 2.7. 
2.1Conceptual Framework 
We formulate the general process of correcting 
LLMs with automated feedback in Figure 1, us- 
ing an analogy of medical treatment in our daily 
life. Three parties are involved in this process: 
•Language Model (Patient). A language model 
M : X → Yperforms 
a specif i c task by mapping 
an inputx ∈ Xto an output textˆ y ∈ Y. This for- 
mulation encompasses a wide range of NLP tasks, 
for example, in summarization,xis a passage,ˆ y 
is the generated summary; for question-answering, 
xis a question andˆ yis the predicted answer. The 
initial generationˆ ymay be imperfect and suffer 
from various problems such as hallucination and 
incorrect reasoning. 
2 
•Critic Model (Doctor & Diagnosis). A critic 
modelC : X ×Y → Flearns to generate feedback 
x, ˆ y → cwhereˆ y ∼ M(x)is 
the output or partial 
output of the language model, andcis the feed- 
back of some format, e.g., scalar value, or natural 
language. A simple example is binary feedback of 
whether the output is good or bad given the input 
(C : X × Y → {0,1}). 
•Ref i ne Model (Treatment). A ref i ne modelR : 
X×Y×F → Ylearnstorepairanoutputx, ˆ y,c → 
ynewbased on the feedbackc, whereynewis the 
revised output. Besides repairing output, some 
ref i ne models directly repair the language model 
M through i ne-tuning or reinforcement learning. 
Based on the above formulation, Figure 1 illus- 
trates the fundamental interaction among the lan- 
guage modelM, 
the critic modelC, 
and the ref i ne 
modelR. However, the specif i c model design in 
existing works varies along i ve crucial axes, which 
we will elaborate on in the following sections.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTIt seems like you've pasted the abstract and introduction to a paper about automatically correcting large language models and surveying various self-correction strategies. This appears to be a comprehensive review on the topic, analyzing recent work that involves techniques like training-time, generation-time, and post-hoc correction.Do you have any specific questions or requests related to this content?1 / 12.6How to correct the model with feedback? 
Various concrete strategies have been proposed to 
correct LLMs with automated feedback, which are 
tailored to the different dimensions we mentioned 
in previous sections. For example, self-training is 
often used for training-time correction. Generate- 
then-rank often comes with scalar value feedback. 
We will cover typical existing strategies for model 
correction through Section 3 to Section 5. 
2.7Summary of existing works 
Building upon the taxonomy established in the pre- 
ceding sections, we collate existing works on cor- 
rectingLLMswith(automated)feedbackinTable1. 
We have two major selection criteria for a work to 
be included in this survey: 
1. Automated Feedback: Explicit feedback is 
involved to assess the quality of the model out- 
put. We focus on automated feedback which orig- 
inates from external models, metrics, knowledge, 
etc. However, we will cover some representative 
works of human feedback for completeness. 
2. Model Ref i nement: The feedback should act 
as a directive to enhance the LLM, either by: 1) up- 
dating model parameters, or 2) altering the model’s 
output during or post the generation process. 
These works are categorized based on the three 
strategies introduced in Section 2.5. We also sum- 
marize key features of each work, including: 1) 
the source of feedback, 2) the format of feedback, 
3) the strategy and learning method employed for 
the ref i nement, 4) whether the ref i nement process 
is iterative, and 5) the application of the method. 
Subsequently, we will delve into a detailed review 
of each method type, encompassing Training-Time 
Correction (§ 3), Generation-TimeCorrection (§ 4), 
and Post-hoc Correction (§ 5). 
3Training-Time Correction 
In this section, we delve into methodologies that 
rectify model behavior during the training phase. 
As depicted in Figure 2, we identify three typical 
strategies for training-time correction. Each strat- 
egy utilizes different forms of feedback to modify 
the model parameters during training: human feed- 
back (a), a reward model that approximates human 
feedback (b), and automated feedback (c). 
3.1Learning from Human Feedback 
The next-word prediction objective of LLM pre- 
training is not inherently designed to encapsulate 
human values or preferences. This misalignment 
can lead to unintended consequences, such as the 
generation of harmful, misleading, or biased con- 
tent (Kenton et al., 2021). To mitigate these issues, 
many research efforts have explored the integration 
of human feedback to better align LLMs with hu- 
man values and expectations, which are extensively 
reviewed by Wang et al. (2023e) and Fernandes 
et al. (2023). Our survey, however, focuses on au- 
tomated feedback, thus we will only touch upon 
representative works in this direction. 
DirectOptimizationwithHumanFeedback.In 
an ideal scenario, we would directly leverage hu- 
man feedback to optimize the model parameters. 
6 
Typically, this approach follows the framework de- 
picted in Figure 2(a): 1) Candidate outputs are gen- 
erated by LLMs, 2) Humans provide feedback or 
ref i nements on these outputs, and 3) LLMs are then 
directly optimized on the collected (outputs, feed- 
back) to better align with human preferences. A 
simple strategy is to i ne-tune the model on the out- 
puts with positively-labeled feedback. For example, 
Sparrow (Glaese et al., 2022) i ne-tunes LLMs on 
the collected dialogues rated as preferred and rule 
compliant (concerning correctness, harmfulness, 
and helpfulness), according to humans. Similarly, 
Scheurer et al. (2023) utilizes an LLM to generate 
multiple ref i nements of the original output based 
on human feedback, and then the best ref i nement is 
picked up to i netune the original LLM. However, 
relying solely on positive-rated data may constrain 
the model’s ability to identify and correct nega- 
tive attributes or errors. To address this, Chain-of- 
Hindsight (Liu et al., 2023) i ne-tunes the LLM on 
model outputs paired with both positive and neg- 
ative feedback. Gao et al. (2023a) utilizes human 
feedback as the reward signal and optimizes the 
model with contextual bandit learning. 
Reward Modeling and RLHF.Employing hu- 
man feedback directly to rectify model behavior 
may not always be practical. The collection of hu- 
man feedback can be both labor-intensive and time- 
consuming. An eff i cient alternative is to train a 
reward model that emulates human feedback. Once 
trained, this reward model can provide consistent, 
real-time feedback for every model output, thereby 
circumventing the need for constant human involve- 
ment. A prominent example of this approach is 
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback 
(RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022), as illustrated in Fig- 
ure 2(b). It i rst asks human annotators to label the 
preference for different LLM outputs and then train 
the reward model to predict the human preference. 
Afterward, reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms 
(e.g., Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schul- 
man et al., 2017)) are employed to optimize the 
model. RLHF and its variants have proven effec- 
tive in correcting LLMs to become more benef i cial 
and less harmful (Bai et al., 2022a), as well as 
instilling moral correctness (Ganguli et al., 2023). 
3.2Learning with Automated Feedback 
Since collecting human feedback is quite resource- 
intensive, numerous studies have explored the use 
of automated feedback to minimize the demand 
Language 
Model 
𝑂! 
(!) 
𝑂! 
($) 
𝑂! 
(%) 
Critic 
Model ⋯ 
𝑂% 
(!) 
𝑂% 
(%) 
𝑂% 
($) 
𝑂% 
(&) 
𝑂' 
(!) 
𝑂' 
(%) 
𝑂' 
($) 
𝑂' 
(&) 
feedbackfeedbackfeedback 
(b) Feedback-Guided Decoding 
(a) Generate-then-Rank 
Language 
Model 
Output 1 
Output 2 
Output N 
⋯ 
Critic 
Model 
Best 
Output 
Figure 3: The illustrations of the two typical strategies 
of generation-time correction: (a) Generate-then-Rank, 
and (b) Feedback-Guided Decoding. 
for human intervention. To differentiate between 
human and automated feedback, we def i ne human 
feedback as a quality assessment performed by hu- 
man evaluators on the outputs generated by the 
base model. This feedback is then used for either 
direct optimization or reward model learning (Sec- 
tion 3.1). On the other hand, automated feedback 
is collected in an off l ine environment, without the 
need for human assessment of model outputs. We 
mainly discuss training time strategies utilizing two 
types of automated feedback: extrinsic feedback 
from external metrics/models, and intrinsic feed- 
back from the language model itself. 
External Metric Guidance.Feedback provided 
by external metrics has been frequently used for 
training-time correction. Due to the discrete na- 
ture of metric signals, most approaches focus1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTon reinforcement learning (RL) to fine-tune the models. Metrics such as BLEU, ROUGE, METEOR, and others that can evaluate text quality are used as the reward signals. These metrics can guide the model to optimize towards specific objectives, such as fluency, coherence, and relevance.One strategy is to use these metrics in a generate-then-rank fashion, generating multiple candidates and ranking them based on the metric scores. The model is then fine-tuned with reinforcement learning to learn from these rankings.Intrinsic Feedback Guidance. Intrinsic feedback refers to feedback derived from the model itself, without relying on external metrics. This could include using model-generated probabilities or utilizing the internal model state to provide guidance during training. These methods are typically more challenging to implement but can provide more nuanced feedback that aligns closely with the model's internal representation.Overall, the correction of LLMs with feedback, whether human or automated, is a complex and multi-faceted process. Different strategies are tailored to different needs, and combining various forms of feedback may yield more robust and effective corrections. The field continues to explore these methodologies, aiming to create more accurate, ethical, and aligned language models.1 / 14.1Generate-then-Rank 
The most immediate strategy involves sampling a 
large number of candidate generations and subse- 
quently picking up the best generation based on 
the feedback provided by the critic model, as il- 
lustrated in Figure 3(a). Here, the critic modelC 
aims to learn the mappingx, ˆ y1,··· , ˆ yN→ ybest, 
whereybestis the best output among theNcandi- 
date outputs ˆ y1,··· , ˆ yN∼ M(x). 
This approach is often integrated with the Chain- 
of-Thought (CoT) prompting method (Wei et al., 
2022b) to tackle complex reasoning tasks, such as 
solving math word problems as in GSM8K (Cobbe 
et al., 2021).Given an input problemx, the 
LLM initially generates multiple candidate solu- 
tionsy1,··· ,yn. 
Each solutionyi= [zi,ai]com- 
prises a reasoning path (explanation)zileading to 
the predicted answerai. Subsequently, the critic 
modelCassigns 
a plausibility scoresito each can- 
didate reasoning pathzi. The i nal selection of the 
best solution from the scored set(zi,ai,si)n 
i=1 is 
achieved via either ranking or voting. 
Different critic models have been proposed 
in various works.For instance, DIVERSE (Li 
et al., 2023d) trains a binary verif i er based on De- 
BERTa (He et al., 2021), using reasoning paths 
that correspond to the correct i nal answer as posi- 
tive examples and the others as negative examples. 
The best answer is then determined by a major- 
ity vote of positively-verif i ed candidates. Weng 
et al. (2023) introduced a training-free critic model 
based on the idea of self-verif i cation, in which the 
plausibility score is calculated by assessing the con- 
sistency between the results of forward reasoning 
and backward reasoning. In a different vein, the 
8 
RR (He et al., 2023) presented a critic model to 
assess the faithfulness of each reasoning path by 
retrieving supporting information from a knowl- 
edge base. LEVER (Ni et al., 2023) employed this 
strategy in language-to-code generation, with each 
solutionyiserving as a candidate SQL program for 
the questionx. A verif i er was trained to predict 
the likelihood of a program’s correctness based on 
the program itself and its execution results. A sim- 
ilar idea is adopted in CodeT (Chen et al., 2023a) 
where multiple code solutions and the test cases are 
generated by the LLM and the best code solution 
is selected by a dual execution agreement. 
4.2Feedback-Guided Decoding 
The generate-then-rank method, in which the critic 
modeloffersoutput-levelfeedback ontheentirerea- 
soning path, has certain limitations: 1) The output- 
level feedback is not i ne-grained enough to pin- 
point the exact error locations, 2) The extensive 
length of the output can complicate its quality as- 
sessment, and 3) This method does not facilitate 
i ne-grained control over the generation process. 
For example, the LLM cannot correct its errors dur- 
ing the generation process but must wait until the 
entire output has been generated. 
To address these issues, several works have 
adopted the feedback-guided decoding strategy 
shown in Figure 3(b), which relies on step-level 
feedback to offer i ne-grained guidance over the 
generation process. Here, the generation of the out- 
putyis broken down into multiple reasoning steps 
(or thoughts), i.e.,yi= [o1,o2,··· ,on]. At each 
individual reasoning stept, the critic model pro- 
vides feedbackC(x,o1:t−1,ot)that 
indicates the 
quality ofotas a candidate step. With the ability to 
generate and evaluate individual steps, a search al- 
gorithm, such as beam search or depth-f i rst search, 
can be employed for a systematic exploration of the 
output space, which effectively steers the decoding 
process toward the generation of an optimal solu- 
tion. This also allows the LLM to recover from its 
early mistakes during generation and helps allevi- 
ate the reasoning inconsistency problem (Zelikman 
et al., 2022; Creswell and Shanahan, 2022), i.e., 
incorrect reasoning leads to correct i nal answer. 
The feedback-guided decoding strategy has been 
applied in many recent works, such as Tree-of- 
Thought (Yao et al., 2023a), GRACE (Khalifa et al., 
2023), and RAP (Hao et al., 2023). These works 
mostly differ in how to obtain the critic model that 
provides automated step-level feedback, the most 
challenging but crucial element of this strategy. 
We classify their employed methods into four cate- 
gories: human feedback, a trained verif i er, external 
metrics, and self-evaluation. 
•Reward Model from Human Feedback. One 
approach involves training a step-level reward 
model by gathering human feedback, much like 
the methods discussed in Section 3.1. Uesato et al. 
(2022) ask human annotators to evaluate the cor- 
rectness of each reasoning step for the problems in 
GSM8K and subsequently train a binary reward 
model. Lightman et al. (2023) expand this ap- 
proach by annotating a larger dataset consisting 
of 800K instances of human step-level feedback. 
Both studies discovered that step-level feedback 
assists in training a more reliable reward model, 
which enhances the faithfulness of reasoning. 
•Training Verif i er with Synthetic Data. Consid- 
ering the high cost of collecting human annotations 
and their limited scalability, some works (Yang 
et al., 2022a; Tafjord et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023d; 
Khalifa et al., 2023) have trained a step-wise 
verif i er using automatically constructed training 
data. Positive examples are derived from ground- 
truth reasoning paths, while negative examples 
are synthesized by proposing an alignment algo- 
rithm (Khalifa et al., 2023) or by making text per- 
turbations on positive samples (Yang et al., 2022a). 
•Feedback from External Metric. Several works 
also leverage external metrics to re-rank or guide 
text generation. Freitag et al. (2022) uses mini- 
mum bayes risk decoding on unbiased samples to 
optimize neural metrics as an alternative to beam 
search. Plug and play (Dathathri et al., 2020) com- 
bines a pretrained model with attribute classif i ers 
that guide text generation without any further train- 
ing of the model. It leverages the gradient of the 
classif i er to update LM and increase the likelihood 
of the desirable attribution at the text generation of 
LM. FUDGE (Yang and Klein, 2021) reweights1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTthe beam candidates based on external metrics like BLEU, ROUGE, and METEOR to provide feedback during the generation process.•Self-Evaluation. Some approaches adopt self-evaluation mechanisms that use the model's own assessments or internal information to guide the generation. This often involves using the model's confidence or uncertainty estimates for different reasoning steps and allowing it to adjust or correct its path based on these assessments.In summary, the generate-then-rank method and feedback-guided decoding strategy represent two distinct approaches to enhancing complex reasoning tasks in language models. The former generates a large number of candidates and then ranks them according to their quality, often using critic models for assessment. The latter offers a more fine-grained control over the generation process by breaking down the reasoning into multiple steps and using feedback to guide each step. Both strategies leverage a variety of methods and techniques to assess and direct the generation process, and they are employed across different tasks and domains, including text generation, code generation, and problem-solving.1 / 15Post-hoc Correction 
The success of generation-time correction heavily 
depends on the critic model’s capability in provid- 
ing accurate quantif i able feedback for intermediate 
outputs. However, this might be quite challeng- 
ing for many NLP tasks, such as summarization, 
due to the holistic nature of the evaluation, i.e., 
the summary can only be accurately assessed after 
the entire summary is generated. This motivates 
the employment of post-hoc correction methods, 
where both the critic and ref i ne models intervene 
only after the entire output is produced. Post-hoc 
correction also provides a more effective interface 
with various forms of insightful natural language 
feedback. This feedback can be as detailed as a 
diagnostic report pinpointing exact error locations, 
or as general as suggestions for overall writing 
improvement. As illustrated in Figure 4, we sum- 
marize three primary strategies for post-hoc cor- 
rection: Self-Correction, Correction with External 
Feedback, and Multi-Agent Debate. 
5.1Self-Correction 
The simplest approach to implement post-hoc cor- 
rection is the “Self-Correction” technique, where 
an LLM is employed to generate feedback and re- 
i ne its own output. As depicted in Figure 4(a), an 
LLM is initially used to produce a initial output, 
and subsequently, the same model acts as a critic 
to generate feedback and ref i ne this initial output 
based on the received feedback. This process is 
typically iterative and continues until an output of 
acceptable quality is obtained or a pre-specif i ed 
number of iterations are reached. 
Self-Ref i ne (Madaan et al., 2023) proposed a 
simple-yet-effective self-correction framework by 
simply using a single powerful pre-trained LLM to 
generate output, provide feedback, and ref i ne the 
output based on that feedback. All these steps are 
conductedusingthesameLLM,guidedbydifferent 
prompts. Similarly, Clinical Self-Verif i cation (Gero 
et al., 2023) employs the self-correction framework 
to extract patient data from clinical notes. They 
specif i cally generate feedback to i nd missing ele- 
ments in the initially extracted data and to validate 
the generated data. The output is then ref i ned by 
eliminating unsupported elements. In contrast, Re- 
l exion (Shinn et al., 2023) highlighted that prior 
self-correction research focused on single-turn gen- 
eration tasks and failed to retain a record of past 
errors. To address this, Ref l exion proposed to use 
the same self-correction framework with an addi- 
10 
tion of a “long-term memory” capable of storing 
prior feedback and outputs, thereby avoiding the 
repetition of previous mistakes. Also, Ref l exion im- 
proves Self-Ref i ne by incorporating scalar-valued 
feedback and other forms of feedback. 
While self-correction has shown effective for 
a wide variety of text-generation tasks, this strat- 
egy requires the use of powerful, large-scale LLMs 
capable of ref i ning text based on provided feed- 
back. As noted by Madaan et al. (2023), smaller, 
open-source models often struggle to ref i ne their 
output effectively, even when the correct feedback 
is provided. A possible solution involves explic- 
itly training models for this self-correction process. 
SelFee (Ye et al., 2023) proposes training a model 
to emulate the self-correction process by generat- 
ing output, feedback, and a ref i ned solution in an 
auto-regressive manner. They use more powerful 
LLMs to provide feedback and ref i nement data, 
with data collection facilitated through ChatGPT. 
5.2Models/Tools as Feedback 
As self-correction relies on the language model for 
feedback, the quality of the feedback is inherently 
constrained by the inherent limitations of LLMs, 
such as the inability to access up-to-date informa- 
tion, take actions, or perform precise mathematical 
reasoning. To address this, recent works have in- 
vestigated the use of external tools for providing 
feedback. Illustrated in Figure 4(b), a broad array 
of external tools, including trained models, code 
interpreters, and search engines, can be integrated 
to provide specialized feedback. 
Code Interpreter.In code generation, the pro- 
gram executor is frequently used as a source of 
feedback for ref i ning the initial code written by the 
model. For example, Self-Edit (Zhang et al., 2023a) 
and Self-Evolve execute the initial program on ex- 
ample test cases and provide the execution results 
back as feedback. Afterward, an LLM is prompted 
to ref i ne the initial code based on the feedback. 
Self-Debug (Chen et al., 2023c) investigated using 
program explanation, unit tests, and program in- 
terpreter as feedback types. ALGO (Zhang et al., 
2023b) explored a more i ne-grained feedback for 
code generation. For each problem, it i rst gen- 
erates a reference oracle program that solves the 
problemwithanexhaustivesearch. Thefeedbackis 
collected by comparing the outputs from the LLM- 
generated program with the oracle outputs for a 
given set of test inputs. The self-correction strategy 
has also been adopted for formal verif i cation of 
software. Charalambous et al. (2023) employed 
Bounded Model Checking to locate the software 
vulnerability and then used the LLM for correction. 
Logic Reasoner.Tool-assisted feedback has also 
been used to enhance the faithfulness of LLMs’ 
reasoning. For example, Logic-LM (Pan et al., 
2023) solves a logical reasoning problem by i rst 
translating it into logical form with LLMs and then 
performing inference on it with external symbolic 
solvers. Due to the complexity of correctly parsing 
the problem at the i rst attempt, a self-ref i nement 
module is introduced to modify inaccurate logical 
formsusingtheerrormessagesreturnedbythesym- 
bolic reasoner as feedback. Similarly, Baldur (First 
et al., 2023) uses existing search-based proof assis- 
tants as a source of feedback to improve language 
models’ ability to generate theorem proofs. 
External Knowledge.External knowledge is 
also frequently incorporated as a source of feed- 
back to detect and revise factual errors in LLM’s 
output and to support LLM-generated facts with 
evidence or citations. For example, RARR (Gao 
et al., 2023b) and REFEED (Yu et al., 2023) di- 
rectly prompt LLMs to raise questions about dif- 
ferent aspects of the generated output. An external 
retriever then searches for evidence to investigate 
each query. Finally, a ref i ne model is employed to 
amend the output based on any detected discrepan- 
cies between the output and the retrieved evidence. 
LLM-Augmenter (Peng et al., 2023) proposes a sim- 
ilar method but differentiates itself by automati- 
cally generating natural language feedback based 
on the evidence retrieved. This feedback identi- 
i es error locations and provides revision sugges- 
tions. These models are evaluated on knowledge- 
intensive QA tasks. To broaden the adaptability, 
FACTOOL (Chern et al., 2023) extends knowledge- 
assisted factual error correction to a wider range 
of tasks, including code generation, mathematical 
reasoning, and scientif i c literature review. 
Trained Model.Existing works also i ne-tune 
specialized models for feedback generation. These 
critic models can then be paired with similar 
or more potent language models in an iterative- 
ref i nement cycle. For example, CodeRL (Le et al., 
2022) treats program synthesis as a reinforcement 
learning task and trains a critic model whose out- 
put optimizes the main model. In contrast, RE- 
FINER (Paul et al., 2023) trains a task model to pro-1 / 1The previous model used in this conversation is unavailable. We've switched you to the latest default model.ChatGPTChatGPTduce human-like explanations for LLM-generated outputs. The explanations are then used as feedback to ref i ne the initial output. LLMs can also be used to provide feedback for improving other LLMs. For instance, Meta-LLM (Hu et al., 2023) employs a secondary LLM to assess and ref i ne the output of the primary LLM. Additionally, LLMs can be trained to provide scalar-valued feedback (e.g., quality scores) to guide ref i nement.5.3Multi-Agent Debate
The Multi-Agent Debate (MAD) strategy involves introducing a debate structure to enhance post-hoc correction. Illustrated in Figure 4(c), this approach integrates multiple agents to simulate a debate where one agent generates the output, and the others evaluate and provide feedback. This creates a competitive environment where the agents collaborate to improve the output.Debate among Multiple LLMs.In this variation, multiple LLMs with different initializations or architectures engage in a debate. One LLM generates an initial output, and the others act as critics that evaluate and provide feedback on the generated output. This feedback is then used to ref i ne the initial output iteratively. The process continues until convergence or a predetermined number of iterations. This method has been employed in works like Crisp Text Generator (Li et al., 2023c) and Cyclic Correction (Zellers et al., 2023), where the debate process helps correct errors and enhance the overall output quality.Human-Model Debate.Another approach involves a debate between an LLM and human evaluators. The LLM generates an initial output, and human evaluators provide feedback on the output quality. This feedback is used to ref i ne the initial output, and the updated version is presented to the evaluators again for further assessment. This process iterates until a satisfactory output is achieved. This strategy leverages both automated feedback and human judgment to improve the output quality.Overall, the post-hoc correction strategies of self-correction, feedback from external tools, and multi-agent debate provide avenues to enhance the quality of LLM-generated text and correct errors after the generation process. These strategies are versatile and can be adapted to different tasks and domains, allowing for more refined and accurate outputs that align with the desired goals.1 / 1aspects, contribut- 
ing to a more comprehensive feedback system. 
5.3Multi-Agent Debate 
Besides integrating external tools, recent studies 
have also explored the strategy of debating between 
multiple LLMs, drawing inspiration from collabora- 
tive intelligence, where diverse perspectives often 
converge to a more ref i ned solution. This approach 
aims to improve the output quality by employing 
multiple instances of LLMs, each proposing and 
debating their individual responses over multiple 
rounds to arrive at a common i nal answer. 
Du et al. (2023) i rst applied and evaluated this 
strategy in arithmetic reasoning tasks. Each agent 
(a duplicate of LLM) initially generates its individ- 
ual solution along with justif i cations. The debate 
phase involves collating responses from all agents 
and presenting this as context to each agent. Based 
on this context, each agent is then instructed to 
craft a revised response. The models are found to 
converge on a shared solution following multiple 
debate iterations. Experiments show that multi- 
agent debate leads to improved performance over 
the self-correction strategy. Furthering this con- 
cept, PRD (Li et al., 2023c) proposed the peer rank 
algorithm for better obtaining a consensus answer 
after debating. It considers pairwise preferences 
between all possible answer pairs from individual 
LLMs and uses these preferences to generate a i nal 
ranking of models. 
In addition to reasoning tasks, LM vs LM (Co- 
hen et al., 2023) further demonstrated the effec- 
tiveness of multi-agent debate for detecting factual 
errors. The approach involves a generator LLM 
creating a claim, while an examiner LLM probes 
for factual inaccuracies through a multi-turn inter- 
action.To broaden this concept, Fu et al. (2023) 
demonstrated that interactions between different 
LLMs could mimic human behavior in real-world 
tasks. The study showcased this through a bargain- 
ing scenario where different LLM agents assumed 
the roles of buyer and seller. This further highlights 
the versatile applications of multi-agent debates. 
6Applications 
Following our above outline of automated correc- 
tion techniques, we now will brief l y discuss the 
various application domains for which automated 
correction is useful, and point out commonalities 
in self-correction strategies, and discuss how im- 
provements to performance in self- or feedback- 
driven correction will give rise to downstream per- 
formance improvements. 
6.1Factual Correction 
Many of the aforementioned automated correction 
strategies implicitly engage factual correction to 
improve various errors in output (Gao et al., 2023b; 
Peng et al., 2023). It is therefore natural that these 
capabilities can be directly engaged for factuality 
detectionandfactualcorrectionasanendtask, such 
as in LM vs LM (Cohen et al., 2023) or Multiagent 
Debate (Du et al., 2023). When external tool use 
is acceptable, retrieved facts can be leveraged to 
further improve the factuality of generated text in 
a self-correcting manner without pure reliance on 
memorized knowledge (Gou et al., 2023). 
In short, self-correcting is a foundational tech- 
nique in many LLM-based fact correction or fact- 
checking systems, and models that are better at 
self-directed factual correction will probably be 
better in a host of other self-correction settings. 
6.2Reasoning Tasks 
In most reasoning tasks, no good references from 
which outputs can be sanity-checked are readily 
available (Choi, 2023). This is unfortunate, as the 
“reasoning”capabilitiesprovidedbyLLMs—inpar- 
12 
ticular, their ability to operate on natural language 
from instructions specif i ed in natural language—is 
a core driver for their popularity. Reasoning tasks 
constitute a broad array of problems where this 
capacity is most necessary. For example, more 
complex multi-hop question answering tasks (Yang 
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2021) can be construed 
as requiring both factual correction and reasoning 
correction capabilities (Ho et al., 2023). Thus the 
question becomes, how can we prompt the LLM 
to identify and correct intermediate reasoning er- 
rors? Similarly to other application areas, both 
pure-LLM-driven and external tool-based error de- 
tection techniques have been proposed. 
LLM-based implementations of reasoning error 
detection include debate-based techniques, which 
can be thought of as implicitly rolling consis- 
tent reasoning enforcement in the “critic” module 
(Cohen et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023c), and self- 
ref i nement techniques (Manakul et al., 2023). In 
short, a given passage exhibiting reasoning (eg, 
step-by-step (Wei etal., 2022b))is fed intoan LLM, 
which is prompted to check for and/or correct rea- 
soning errors directly. The error detection often 
collaborates with a decoding algorithm such as the 
beam search to lead the reasoning towards the cor- 
rect direction (Hao et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023a). 
External feedback using techniques such as nat- 
ural language inference (NLI) can be both directly 
leveraged to spot errors as a heuristic for correc- 
tion, andasameanstoscorethequality(Yangetal., 
2022a; Golovneva et al., 2023). However, there are 
some open questions regarding the quality of the 
supervised learning-based tools like NLI (Srikanth 
and Rudinger, 2022; Saxon et al., 2023). 
Among different types of reasoning, the self- 
correction strategy has been well studied and im- 
plemented for arithmetic reasoning, as outlined 
in Table 1. One of the reasons for this skew is 
the relative ease of verifying intermediate reason- 
ing steps within arithmetic problems. Some recent 
studies (Pan et al., 2023; First et al., 2023) have 
started to extend the application of this strategy 
to deductive reasoning. However, the implementa- 
tion of self-correction in a wider array of reasoning 
tasks, including inductive and abductive reasoning, 
is still relatively under-explored. 
6.3Code Synthesis 
Code generation is a burgeoning application do- 
main for LLMs for which correction is particularly 
important. Even human programmers tend to write 
code through an iterative process of addition and 
correction. For humans, strategies such as reading 
linter warnings, compiler/runtime errors, and incor- 
rect outputs to diagnose necessary changes to the 
source are all employed in the software develop- 
ment process. Each of these strategies has natural 
analogues in the code generation pipeline. 
The aforementioned warnings, errors, or outputs 
are usually fed directly back into the LLM to guide 
the code correction process (Zhang et al., 2023a; 
Chen et al., 2023a). After all, compiler failures 
are a particularly strong signal that a piece of code 
will not work, having great utility in guiding LLM 
self-correction. More excitingly, other work pro- 
posed to utilize more i ne-grained feedback such as 
program explanations generated by LLMs (Chen 
et al., 2023c) and the comparison with a reference 
oracle program (Zhang et al., 2023b). 
The above works only empirically show that 
LLMs exhibited a remarkable capability for self- 
repairing the codes. In recent work, Olausson et al. 
(2023) further conducted an in-depth analysis of 
how and when self-repair works effectively. They 
found that self-repair is bottlenecked by the feed- 
back stage: substantial performance improvements 
were only noticed when feedback was provided by 
expert human programmers or GPT-4. This reve- 
lation raises intriguing questions, such as whether 
self-repair is an emergent ability exclusive to cer- 
tain LLMs and how could we endow smaller mod- 
els with similar capabilities. 
6.4Other Applications 
Open-ended Generation.In addition to han- 
dling pure factuality issues, self-correction can be 
applied to subjective qualities of the generated text. 
These interventions include post-hoc toxicity re- 
duction (Gou et al., 2023; Welleck et al., 2023), 
enhancing the narrative quality in story genera- 
tion (Yang et al., 2022b), and ref i ning response 
generation in dialogues (Ye et al., 2023;1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTZhou et al., 2023). For example, ChatGPT, one of the widely known language models, uses reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) for correcting its outputs in a controlled manner (Holtzman et al., 2021).Conversational AI.Chatbot systems often deploy self-correction techniques to improve the quality and coherence of their responses. By generating feedback on the initial output and refining it iteratively, chatbots can enhance their conversational flow and address errors in their responses.Creative Writing.In creative writing tasks, LLMs can use self-correction to improve the stylistic and thematic aspects of their generated content. This might involve refining the coherence, sentiment, or other creative elements of the text to align better with the desired outcome.Language Localization.Language models can self-correct generated text to adapt it to specific languages or dialects. This can be especially useful in machine translation, ensuring that the generated translation adheres to grammatical and cultural nuances.Scientific Writing.Self-correction techniques can be applied to generate accurate and coherent scientific papers or reports. LLMs can provide feedback on the content, logic, and structure of the text, helping researchers refine their drafts.6.5Downstream Improvements
Enhancements in self-correction strategies and feedback-driven approaches can have significant downstream effects on various NLP tasks. By improving the correctness, coherence, and overall quality of generated outputs, these techniques lead to more reliable, useful, and human-like text generation in applications such as customer support chatbots, content creation, language translation, and more. As LLMs become better at identifying and correcting errors, their outputs become more trustworthy and valuable across diverse domains.In conclusion, automated correction techniques are fundamental for refining and improving the outputs of language models across a wide range of applications. From fact correction and reasoning tasks to code synthesis and creative writing, self-correction and feedback-driven approaches hold the potential to transform the capabilities of language models, enabling more accurate, coherent, and useful text generation.1 / 17.3Continual Self-Improvement 
Another promisingyet under-explored areaof LLM 
self-correction is the idea of continual, life-long 
self-improvement. As LLMs are utilized in more 
diverse, dynamic, and real-time contexts, the abil- 
ity to adapt and improve continually over time be- 
comes essential. This is closely related to the con- 
cept of continual (life-long) learning (Wang et al., 
2023b), where the model continually learns new 
skills and adapts to novel environments and con- 
texts. Translatingthistoself-correctionimpliesthat 
LLMs continuously evaluate their outputs, learn 
from errors, update their knowledge, and adapt 
their decision-making strategies accordingly. 
Studies on self-training such as (Huang et al., 
2022; Zelikman et al., 2022) have evidenced that 
LLMs can self-improve by continuously training 
on their own outputs that are positively evaluated 
by humans or models. However, these studies typi- 
cally concentrate on a single, one-time correction 
process and evaluate improvements in a particular 
aspect. The robustness and stability of self-training 
under continual settings remain uncertain. For ex- 
ample, a major challenge of continual learning is 
catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2016), 
where the acquisition of new skills often leads to 
a considerable decrease in previous capabilities. It 
is unclear whether similar issues may emerge in a 
continual self-improve LLM, such as whether cor- 
recting one behavior may unintentionally alter a 
previously corrected behavior. 
Finally, exploring how to integrate various self- 
correction techniques to eff i ciently build a contin- 
ual self-improvement LLM is also worth investigat- 
ing. For example, post-hoc correction represents 
a more immediate and less costly strategy, while 
training-time correction addresses model behavior 
more fundamentally, with a higher computational 
cost. To combine these strategies, post-hoc cor- 
rection could be used to collect training data (e.g., 
most frequently made mistakes and their correc- 
tions), which are used to guide the periodically 
training-time correction to address these recurring 
issues permanently. 
7.4Self-Correction with Model Editing 
Recent years have witnessed a surge in techniques 
for model editing (Sinitsin et al., 2020; Cao et al., 
2021; Yao et al., 2023b), aiming to adjust the 
model’s behavior for examples within the editing 
scope while leaving its performance for out-of- 
scope examples unaltered. Model editing has been 
employed in updating outdated knowledge embed- 
ded in LLMs (Lee et al., 2022; Onoe et al., 2023) 
and in addressing issues related to false associa- 
tions memorized during LLM training (Murty et al., 
2022; Tanno et al., 2022). Current model editing 
methods have shown some eff i cacy in adjusting fac- 
tual knowledge within LLMs, yet they still suffer 
problems such as a lack of robust generalization 
capabilities (Yao et al., 2023b) and the introduction 
of substantial unintended side effects (Hoelscher- 
Obermaier et al., 2023). 
Nevertheless, the advancements in model edit- 
ing present promising opportunities for the self- 
correction of LLMs.Primarily, model editing 
enables accurate, i ne-grained corrections at the 
level of individual neurons or layers, circumvent- 
ing the need for extensive retraining associated 
with training-time correction. Moreover, through 
the analysis of the impact of model edits, we can 
deepen our understanding of the self-correction 
mechanism. Further, methods developed to curtail 
undesired side effects in model editing (Hoelscher- 
Obermaier et al., 2023) could foster more robust 
self-correction strategies by mitigating the issue of 
inadvertently introducing new errors while resolv- 
ing existing ones. Therefore, we forecast future 
research to incorporate model editing into LLM 
self-correction processes, an under-explored area. 
7.5Multi-Modal Self-Correction 
As discussed in Section 6, self-correction strategies 
for LLMs have been successfully employed in an 
extensive array of NLP tasks. However, most exist- 
ing works are limited to the textual modality, where 
both the model outputs and the feedback are in tex- 
tual form. The recent surge in multi-modal data 
usage, including image, audio, and video modali- 
ties, presents enticing opportunities for expansion. 
These include the exploration of self-correction 
capabilities within multi-modal LLMs, the incor- 
poration of visual feedback, and improving vision- 
language tasks through self-correction. 
A handful of pioneering studies have investi- 
gated this domain. For example, MaskGIT (Chang 
et al., 2022) employed a self-ref i nement approach 
to image generation, where the model progressively 
ref i nes the generated image conditioned on the pre- 
vious generation. Ke et al. (2019) utilized a self- 
correction strategy for vision-and-language navi- 
gation. However, despite these initial explorations, 
15 
self-correction strategies are yet to be broadly 
adopted in multi-modal settings. A comprehen- 
sive understanding of how self-correction methods 
generalize across various modalities is crucial for 
improving their robustness and versatility. 
8Conclusion 
In this paper, we present a comprehensive sur- 
vey of self-correcting large language models with 
automated feedback. We broadly categorize and 
analyze various self-correction strategies, includ- 
ing training-time, generation-time, and post-hoc 
corrections. We also discuss the major applica- 
tion areas of self-correction, including correcting 
factual errors, enhancing reasoning abilities, and 
improving code generation, among others.Fi- 
nally, we outline a number of potential future di- 
rections and associated challenges in this i eld. 
Our goal with this paper is to provide a com- 
prehensive and useful resource for readers inter- 
ested in the development of this rapidly evolv- 
ing domain.To aid in this effort, we create a 
continually-updated reading list in a GitHub repos- 
itory:https://github.com/teacherpeterpan/ 
self-correction-llm-papers. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the National Science 
Foundation Award #2048122. The views expressed 
are those of the authors and do not ref l ect the of- 
i cial policy or position of the US government. 
Thanks to Xinyuan Lu for assisting with the Github 
reading list repo. 
References 
1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTI apologize for the interruption, but it seems like you've provided a significant amount of text from a research paper. How can I assist you with this information? Is there something specific you'd like to discuss or ask about?1 / 1A list of the topics we've discussed so far.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTCertainly! Here's a list of the topics we've discussed so far:Introduction to Self-Correcting Large Language ModelsTypes of Self-Correction StrategiesTraining-Time CorrectionGeneration-Time CorrectionPost-hoc CorrectionSelf-Correction in Different Application DomainsFactual CorrectionReasoning TasksCode SynthesisOther ApplicationsEmerging Directions and ChallengesContinual Self-ImprovementSelf-Correction with Model EditingMulti-Modal Self-CorrectionConclusion and AcknowledgementsIf you have any specific questions or if you'd like to discuss any of these topics in more detail, feel free to let me know!1 / 1A summary1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTCertainly! Here's a summarized overview of the topics we've discussed:We explored the concept of Self-Correcting Large Language Models (LLMs) with automated feedback. LLMs are powerful language models that can generate text, but they often make errors. Self-correction strategies aim to enable LLMs to identify and correct their own mistakes. These strategies fall into three categories: Training-Time Correction, Generation-Time Correction, and Post-hoc Correction.Training-Time Correction: LLMs can be improved by fine-tuning them using human feedback. However, obtaining high-quality feedback is challenging. Various methods have been proposed, including rule-based rewards, rewards from question-answering models, and human feedback via conversations.Generation-Time Correction: This approach involves generating multiple candidate outputs and ranking them based on feedback from a critic model. This strategy is used for complex reasoning tasks and has been integrated with Chain-of-Thought prompting. Different critic models are proposed, including binary verifiers, self-verification, external metrics, and self-evaluation.Post-hoc Correction: This approach intervenes after generating the entire output. It's effective for tasks where evaluating the output requires a holistic view. Strategies include Self-Correction, Correction with External Feedback, and Multi-Agent Debate. These methods can improve output quality, provide detailed error locations, and offer general writing suggestions.We discussed the application of self-correction in different domains:Factual Correction: Automated correction techniques can spot factual inaccuracies and enhance fact-checking systems.Reasoning Tasks: Self-correction aids in identifying and fixing intermediate reasoning errors. It's promising for arithmetic and deductive reasoning tasks.Code Synthesis: Self-correction improves code generation by iteratively refining initial code based on feedback.Other Applications: Self-correction is used for reducing toxicity, enhancing narrative quality, and refining responses in dialogues.We looked into emerging directions and challenges in self-correction:Continual Self-Improvement: LLMs can adapt and improve over time, but challenges like catastrophic forgetting need addressing.Self-Correction with Model Editing: Model editing methods offer precise corrections at the neuron or layer level, which could be integrated with self-correction strategies.Multi-Modal Self-Correction: Self-correction can be extended to multi-modal LLMs, integrating visual feedback and improving vision-language tasks.In conclusion, self-correcting LLMs with automated feedback is a rapidly evolving field with potential for enhancing output quality and correcting errors across various domains. Further research is needed to address challenges and explore new directions.If you have more specific questions or would like to delve into any particular aspect further, feel free to ask!1 / 1ChatGPT may produce inaccurate information about people, places, or facts. ChatGPT August 3 Version?ChatGPT
------MultipartBoundary--k7kBrUpCOKLC5zhS3BxTLbZ2rJok5Is2SN2d3NIKjj----
Content-Type: text/css
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: cid:css-e75fc4f7-4679-428f-8bd2-66efa2dd783c@mhtml.blink

@charset "utf-8";

.react-scroll-to-bottom--css-rbnzi-79elbk { position: relative; }

.react-scroll-to-bottom--css-rbnzi-1n7m0yu { height: 100%; overflow-y: auto; width: 100%; }

.react-scroll-to-bottom--css-rbnzi-1tj0vk3 { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2); border-radius: 10px; border-width: 0px; bottom: 5px; cursor: pointer; height: 20px; outline: 0px; position: absolute; right: 20px; width: 20px; }

.react-scroll-to-bottom--css-rbnzi-1tj0vk3:hover { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.4); }

.react-scroll-to-bottom--css-rbnzi-1tj0vk3:active { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.6); }
------MultipartBoundary--k7kBrUpCOKLC5zhS3BxTLbZ2rJok5Is2SN2d3NIKjj----
Content-Type: text/css
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: cid:css-fc57635b-589e-4700-9693-0b2b2e0995ea@mhtml.blink

@charset "utf-8";

.r34K7X1zGgAi6DllVF3T { box-sizing: border-box; border: 0px; margin: 0px; padding: 0px; overflow: hidden; display: none; z-index: 2147483647; pointer-events: none; visibility: hidden; opacity: 0; transition: opacity 300ms linear 0s; height: 0px; width: 0px; }

.r34K7X1zGgAi6DllVF3T.active { display: block; visibility: visible; }

.r34K7X1zGgAi6DllVF3T.active.show { opacity: 1; pointer-events: inherit; position: inherit; }

.r34K7X1zGgAi6DllVF3T.active.show.in-situ { width: inherit; height: inherit; }

.r34K7X1zGgAi6DllVF3T.active.show.lightbox { position: fixed; inset: 0px; width: 100% !important; height: 100% !important; }
------MultipartBoundary--k7kBrUpCOKLC5zhS3BxTLbZ2rJok5Is2SN2d3NIKjj----
Content-Type: text/css
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: cid:css-d9a11612-0e66-44ad-96b1-933ccf5b0323@mhtml.blink

@charset "utf-8";

@keyframes intercom-lightweight-app-launcher { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: scale(0.5); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: scale(1); }
}

@keyframes intercom-lightweight-app-gradient { 
  0% { opacity: 0; }
  100% { opacity: 1; }
}

@keyframes intercom-lightweight-app-messenger { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: scale(0); }
  40% { opacity: 1; }
  100% { transform: scale(1); }
}

.intercom-lightweight-app { position: fixed; z-index: 2147483001; width: 0px; height: 0px; font-family: intercom-font, "Helvetica Neue", "Apple Color Emoji", Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-gradient { position: fixed; z-index: 2147483002; width: 500px; height: 500px; bottom: 0px; right: 0px; pointer-events: none; background: radial-gradient(at right bottom, rgba(29, 39, 54, 0.16) 0%, rgba(29, 39, 54, 0) 72%); animation: 200ms ease-out 0s 1 normal none running intercom-lightweight-app-gradient; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher { position: fixed; z-index: 2147483003; border: none; bottom: 20px; right: 20px; max-width: 48px; width: 48px; max-height: 48px; height: 48px; border-radius: 50%; background: rgb(32, 33, 35); cursor: pointer; box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.06) 0px 1px 6px 0px, rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.16) 0px 2px 32px 0px; transition: transform 167ms cubic-bezier(0.33, 0, 0, 1) 0s; box-sizing: content-box; padding: 0px !important; margin: 0px !important; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher:hover { transition: transform 250ms cubic-bezier(0.33, 0, 0, 1) 0s; transform: scale(1.1); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher:active { transform: scale(0.85); transition: transform 134ms cubic-bezier(0.45, 0, 0.2, 1) 0s; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher:focus { outline: none; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon { display: flex; align-items: center; justify-content: center; position: absolute; top: 0px; left: 0px; width: 48px; height: 48px; transition: transform 100ms linear 0s, opacity 80ms linear 0s; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-open { opacity: 1; transform: rotate(0deg) scale(1); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-open svg { width: 24px; height: 24px; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-open svg path { fill: rgb(255, 255, 255); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-self-serve { opacity: 1; transform: rotate(0deg) scale(1); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-self-serve svg { height: 44px; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-self-serve svg path { fill: rgb(255, 255, 255); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-custom-icon-open { max-height: 24px; max-width: 24px; opacity: 1; transform: rotate(0deg) scale(1); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-minimize { opacity: 0; transform: rotate(-60deg) scale(0); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-launcher-icon-minimize svg path { fill: rgb(255, 255, 255); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-messenger { position: fixed; z-index: 2147483003; overflow: hidden; background-color: white; animation: 250ms cubic-bezier(0, 1, 1, 1) 0s 1 normal none running intercom-lightweight-app-messenger; transform-origin: right bottom; inset: 0px; border-radius: 16px; }

.intercom-lightweight-app-messenger-header { height: 64px; border-bottom: none; background: rgb(32, 33, 35); }

.intercom-lightweight-app-messenger-footer { position: absolute; bottom: 0px; width: 100%; height: 80px; background: rgb(255, 255, 255); font-size: 14px; line-height: 21px; border-top: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.05); box-shadow: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.05) 0px 0px 25px; }

@media print {
  .intercom-lightweight-app { display: none; }
}
------MultipartBoundary--k7kBrUpCOKLC5zhS3BxTLbZ2rJok5Is2SN2d3NIKjj----
Content-Type: text/css
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: https://chat.openai.com/_next/static/css/061074f13f53cb08.css

@charset "utf-8";

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Signifier; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/signifier/signifier-light.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Signifier; font-style: italic; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/signifier/signifier-light-italic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Signifier; font-style: normal; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/signifier/signifier-bold.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Signifier; font-style: italic; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/signifier/signifier-bold-italic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Söhne; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-buch.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Söhne; font-style: italic; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-buch-kursiv.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Söhne; font-style: normal; font-weight: 500; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-kraftig.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Söhne; font-style: italic; font-weight: 500; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-kraftig-kursiv.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Söhne; font-style: normal; font-weight: 600; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-halbfett.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: Söhne; font-style: italic; font-weight: 600; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-halbfett-kursiv.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: "Söhne Mono"; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-mono-buch.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: "Söhne Mono"; font-style: normal; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-mono-halbfett.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: "Söhne Mono"; font-style: italic; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne/soehne-mono-buch-kursiv.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: "Söhne Circle"; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne-circle/soehne-circle-buch.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-display: swap; font-family: "Söhne Circle"; font-style: normal; font-weight: 600; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/soehne-circle/soehne-circle-halbfett.woff2") format("woff2"); }

*, ::after, ::before { border: 0px solid rgb(217, 217, 227); box-sizing: border-box; }

::after, ::before { --tw-content:""; }

html { text-size-adjust: 100%; font-feature-settings: normal; font-family: Söhne, ui-sans-serif, system-ui, -apple-system, "Segoe UI", Roboto, Ubuntu, Cantarell, "Noto Sans", sans-serif, "Helvetica Neue", Arial, "Apple Color Emoji", "Segoe UI Emoji", "Segoe UI Symbol", "Noto Color Emoji"; font-variation-settings: normal; line-height: 1.5; tab-size: 4; }

body { line-height: inherit; margin: 0px; }

hr { border-top-width: 1px; color: inherit; height: 0px; }

abbr:where([title]) { text-decoration: underline dotted currentcolor; }

h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 { font-size: inherit; font-weight: inherit; }

a { color: inherit; text-decoration: inherit; }

b, strong { font-weight: bolder; }

code, kbd, pre, samp { font-family: "Söhne Mono", Monaco, "Andale Mono", "Ubuntu Mono", monospace; font-size: 1em; }

small { font-size: 80%; }

sub, sup { font-size: 75%; line-height: 0; position: relative; vertical-align: baseline; }

sub { bottom: -0.25em; }

sup { top: -0.5em; }

table { border-collapse: collapse; border-color: inherit; text-indent: 0px; }

button, input, optgroup, select, textarea { color: inherit; font-family: inherit; font-size: 100%; font-weight: inherit; line-height: inherit; margin: 0px; padding: 0px; }

button, select { text-transform: none; }

[type="button"], [type="reset"], [type="submit"], button { appearance: button; background-color: transparent; background-image: none; }

progress { vertical-align: baseline; }

::-webkit-inner-spin-button, ::-webkit-outer-spin-button { height: auto; }

[type="search"] { appearance: textfield; outline-offset: -2px; }

::-webkit-search-decoration { appearance: none; }

::-webkit-file-upload-button { appearance: button; font: inherit; }

summary { display: list-item; }

blockquote, dd, dl, fieldset, figure, h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6, hr, p, pre { margin: 0px; }

fieldset, legend { padding: 0px; }

menu, ol, ul { list-style: none; margin: 0px; padding: 0px; }

textarea { resize: vertical; }

input::-webkit-input-placeholder, textarea::-webkit-input-placeholder { color: rgb(172, 172, 190); }

input::placeholder, textarea::placeholder { color: rgb(172, 172, 190); }

[role="button"], button { cursor: pointer; }

:disabled { cursor: default; }

audio, canvas, embed, iframe, img, object, svg, video { display: block; vertical-align: middle; }

img, video { height: auto; max-width: 100%; }

[hidden] { display: none; }

[multiple], [type="date"], [type="datetime-local"], [type="email"], [type="month"], [type="number"], [type="password"], [type="search"], [type="tel"], [type="text"], [type="time"], [type="url"], [type="week"], select, textarea { --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent; appearance: none; background-color: rgb(255, 255, 255); border-color: rgb(142, 142, 160); border-radius: 0px; border-width: 1px; font-size: 1rem; line-height: 1.5rem; padding: 0.5rem 0.75rem; }

[multiple]:focus, [type="date"]:focus, [type="datetime-local"]:focus, [type="email"]:focus, [type="month"]:focus, [type="number"]:focus, [type="password"]:focus, [type="search"]:focus, [type="tel"]:focus, [type="text"]:focus, [type="time"]:focus, [type="url"]:focus, [type="week"]:focus, select:focus, textarea:focus { --tw-ring-inset:var(--tw-empty, ); --tw-ring-offset-width:0px; --tw-ring-offset-color:#fff; --tw-ring-color:#2563eb; --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(1px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); border-color: rgb(37, 99, 235); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow); outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

input::-webkit-input-placeholder, textarea::-webkit-input-placeholder { color: rgb(142, 142, 160); opacity: 1; }

input::placeholder, textarea::placeholder { color: rgb(142, 142, 160); opacity: 1; }

::-webkit-datetime-edit-fields-wrapper { padding: 0px; }

::-webkit-date-and-time-value { min-height: 1.5em; }

::-webkit-datetime-edit, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-day-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-hour-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-meridiem-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-millisecond-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-minute-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-month-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-second-field, ::-webkit-datetime-edit-year-field { padding-bottom: 0px; padding-top: 0px; }

select { background-image: url("data:image/svg+xml;charset=utf-8,%3Csvg xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg' fill='none' viewBox='0 0 20 20'%3E%3Cpath stroke='%238e8ea0' stroke-linecap='round' stroke-linejoin='round' stroke-width='1.5' d='m6 8 4 4 4-4'/%3E%3C/svg%3E"); background-position: right 0.5rem center; background-repeat: no-repeat; background-size: 1.5em 1.5em; padding-right: 2.5rem; -webkit-print-color-adjust: exact; }

[multiple] { background-image: none; background-position: 0px 0px; background-repeat: repeat; background-size: initial; padding-right: 0.75rem; -webkit-print-color-adjust: inherit; }

[type="checkbox"], [type="radio"] { --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent; appearance: none; background-color: rgb(255, 255, 255); background-origin: border-box; border-color: rgb(142, 142, 160); border-width: 1px; color: rgb(37, 99, 235); display: inline-block; flex-shrink: 0; height: 1rem; padding: 0px; -webkit-print-color-adjust: exact; user-select: none; vertical-align: middle; width: 1rem; }

[type="checkbox"] { border-radius: 0px; }

[type="radio"] { border-radius: 100%; }

[type="checkbox"]:focus, [type="radio"]:focus { --tw-ring-inset:var(--tw-empty, ); --tw-ring-offset-width:2px; --tw-ring-offset-color:#fff; --tw-ring-color:#2563eb; --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(2px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow); outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

[type="checkbox"]:checked, [type="radio"]:checked { background-color: currentcolor; background-position: 50% center; background-repeat: no-repeat; background-size: 100% 100%; border-color: transparent; }

[type="checkbox"]:checked { background-image: url("data:image/svg+xml;charset=utf-8,%3Csvg viewBox='0 0 16 16' fill='%23fff' xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%3E%3Cpath d='M12.207 4.793a1 1 0 0 1 0 1.414l-5 5a1 1 0 0 1-1.414 0l-2-2a1 1 0 0 1 1.414-1.414L6.5 9.086l4.293-4.293a1 1 0 0 1 1.414 0z'/%3E%3C/svg%3E"); }

[type="radio"]:checked { background-image: url("data:image/svg+xml;charset=utf-8,%3Csvg viewBox='0 0 16 16' fill='%23fff' xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%3E%3Ccircle cx='8' cy='8' r='3'/%3E%3C/svg%3E"); }

[type="checkbox"]:checked:focus, [type="checkbox"]:checked:hover, [type="radio"]:checked:focus, [type="radio"]:checked:hover { background-color: currentcolor; border-color: transparent; }

[type="checkbox"]:indeterminate { background-color: currentcolor; background-image: url("data:image/svg+xml;charset=utf-8,%3Csvg xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg' fill='none' viewBox='0 0 16 16'%3E%3Cpath stroke='%23fff' stroke-linecap='round' stroke-linejoin='round' stroke-width='2' d='M4 8h8'/%3E%3C/svg%3E"); background-position: 50% center; background-repeat: no-repeat; background-size: 100% 100%; border-color: transparent; }

[type="checkbox"]:indeterminate:focus, [type="checkbox"]:indeterminate:hover { background-color: currentcolor; border-color: transparent; }

[type="file"] { background: initial; border-color: inherit; border-radius: 0px; border-width: 0px; font-size: inherit; line-height: inherit; padding: 0px; }

[type="file"]:focus { outline: -webkit-focus-ring-color auto 1px; }

h1 { font-size: 1.875rem; line-height: 2.25rem; }

h1, h2, h3 { font-weight: 600; }

h2, h3 { font-size: 1.5rem; line-height: 2rem; }

*, ::after, ::before { --tw-border-spacing-x:0; --tw-border-spacing-y:0; --tw-translate-x:0; --tw-translate-y:0; --tw-rotate:0; --tw-skew-x:0; --tw-skew-y:0; --tw-scale-x:1; --tw-scale-y:1; --tw-pan-x: ; --tw-pan-y: ; --tw-pinch-zoom: ; --tw-scroll-snap-strictness:proximity; --tw-gradient-from-position: ; --tw-gradient-via-position: ; --tw-gradient-to-position: ; --tw-ordinal: ; --tw-slashed-zero: ; --tw-numeric-figure: ; --tw-numeric-spacing: ; --tw-numeric-fraction: ; --tw-ring-inset: ; --tw-ring-offset-width:0px; --tw-ring-offset-color:#fff; --tw-ring-color:rgba(69,89,164,0.5); --tw-ring-offset-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-ring-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-shadow-colored:0 0 transparent; --tw-blur: ; --tw-brightness: ; --tw-contrast: ; --tw-grayscale: ; --tw-hue-rotate: ; --tw-invert: ; --tw-saturate: ; --tw-sepia: ; --tw-drop-shadow: ; --tw-backdrop-blur: ; --tw-backdrop-brightness: ; --tw-backdrop-contrast: ; --tw-backdrop-grayscale: ; --tw-backdrop-hue-rotate: ; --tw-backdrop-invert: ; --tw-backdrop-opacity: ; --tw-backdrop-saturate: ; --tw-backdrop-sepia: ; }

::-webkit-backdrop { --tw-border-spacing-x:0; --tw-border-spacing-y:0; --tw-translate-x:0; --tw-translate-y:0; --tw-rotate:0; --tw-skew-x:0; --tw-skew-y:0; --tw-scale-x:1; --tw-scale-y:1; --tw-pan-x: ; --tw-pan-y: ; --tw-pinch-zoom: ; --tw-scroll-snap-strictness:proximity; --tw-gradient-from-position: ; --tw-gradient-via-position: ; --tw-gradient-to-position: ; --tw-ordinal: ; --tw-slashed-zero: ; --tw-numeric-figure: ; --tw-numeric-spacing: ; --tw-numeric-fraction: ; --tw-ring-inset: ; --tw-ring-offset-width:0px; --tw-ring-offset-color:#fff; --tw-ring-color:rgba(69,89,164,0.5); --tw-ring-offset-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-ring-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-shadow-colored:0 0 transparent; --tw-blur: ; --tw-brightness: ; --tw-contrast: ; --tw-grayscale: ; --tw-hue-rotate: ; --tw-invert: ; --tw-saturate: ; --tw-sepia: ; --tw-drop-shadow: ; --tw-backdrop-blur: ; --tw-backdrop-brightness: ; --tw-backdrop-contrast: ; --tw-backdrop-grayscale: ; --tw-backdrop-hue-rotate: ; --tw-backdrop-invert: ; --tw-backdrop-opacity: ; --tw-backdrop-saturate: ; --tw-backdrop-sepia: ; }

::backdrop { --tw-border-spacing-x:0; --tw-border-spacing-y:0; --tw-translate-x:0; --tw-translate-y:0; --tw-rotate:0; --tw-skew-x:0; --tw-skew-y:0; --tw-scale-x:1; --tw-scale-y:1; --tw-pan-x: ; --tw-pan-y: ; --tw-pinch-zoom: ; --tw-scroll-snap-strictness:proximity; --tw-gradient-from-position: ; --tw-gradient-via-position: ; --tw-gradient-to-position: ; --tw-ordinal: ; --tw-slashed-zero: ; --tw-numeric-figure: ; --tw-numeric-spacing: ; --tw-numeric-fraction: ; --tw-ring-inset: ; --tw-ring-offset-width:0px; --tw-ring-offset-color:#fff; --tw-ring-color:rgba(69,89,164,0.5); --tw-ring-offset-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-ring-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent; --tw-shadow-colored:0 0 transparent; --tw-blur: ; --tw-brightness: ; --tw-contrast: ; --tw-grayscale: ; --tw-hue-rotate: ; --tw-invert: ; --tw-saturate: ; --tw-sepia: ; --tw-drop-shadow: ; --tw-backdrop-blur: ; --tw-backdrop-brightness: ; --tw-backdrop-contrast: ; --tw-backdrop-grayscale: ; --tw-backdrop-hue-rotate: ; --tw-backdrop-invert: ; --tw-backdrop-opacity: ; --tw-backdrop-saturate: ; --tw-backdrop-sepia: ; }

:root { --gray-50:#f7f7f8; --gray-100:#ececf1; --gray-200:#d9d9e3; --gray-300:#c5c5d2; --gray-400:#acacbe; --gray-500:#8e8ea0; --gray-600:#565869; --gray-700:#40414f; --gray-800:#343541; --gray-900:#202123; --gray-950:#050509; }

html { --text-primary:var(--gray-800); --text-secondary:var(--gray-600); --text-tertiary:var(--gray-500); }

html.dark { --text-primary:var(--gray-100); --text-secondary:var(--gray-300); --text-tertiary:var(--gray-500); }

textarea:focus { border-color: inherit; box-shadow: none; outline: none; }

::-webkit-scrollbar { height: 1rem; width: 0.5rem; }

::-webkit-scrollbar:horizontal { height: 0.5rem; width: 1rem; }

::-webkit-scrollbar-track { background-color: transparent; border-radius: 9999px; }

::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb { --tw-border-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(217, 217, 227, 0.8); border-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-border-opacity)); border-radius: 9999px; border-width: 1px; }

::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

@media (min-width: 768px) {
  .scrollbar-trigger ::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb { visibility: hidden; }
  .scrollbar-trigger:hover ::-webkit-scrollbar-thumb { visibility: visible; }
}

.container { width: 100%; }

@media (min-width: 640px) {
  .container { max-width: 640px; }
}

@media (min-width: 768px) {
  .container { max-width: 768px; }
}

@media (min-width: 1024px) {
  .container { max-width: 1024px; }
}

@media (min-width: 1280px) {
  .container { max-width: 1280px; }
}

@media (min-width: 1536px) {
  .container { max-width: 1536px; }
}

.prose { color: var(--tw-prose-body); max-width: 65ch; }

.prose :where([class~="lead"]):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-lead); font-size: 1.25em; line-height: 1.6; margin-bottom: 1.2em; margin-top: 1.2em; }

.prose :where(a):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-links); font-weight: 500; text-decoration: underline; }

.prose :where(strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-bold); font-weight: 600; }

.prose :where(a strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(blockquote strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(thead th strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(ol):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: decimal; margin-bottom: 1.25em; margin-top: 1.25em; padding-left: 1.625em; }

.prose :where(ol[type="A"]):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: upper-alpha; }

.prose :where(ol[type="a"]):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: lower-alpha; }

.prose :where():not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: upper-alpha; }

.prose :where():not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: lower-alpha; }

.prose :where(ol[type="I"]):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: upper-roman; }

.prose :where(ol[type="i"]):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: lower-roman; }

.prose :where():not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: upper-roman; }

.prose :where():not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: lower-roman; }

.prose :where(ol[type="1"]):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: decimal; }

.prose :where(ul):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { list-style-type: disc; margin-bottom: 1.25em; margin-top: 1.25em; padding-left: 1.625em; }

.prose :where(ol > li):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::marker { color: var(--tw-prose-counters); font-weight: 400; }

.prose :where(ul > li):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::marker { color: var(--tw-prose-bullets); }

.prose :where(hr):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { border-color: var(--tw-prose-hr); border-top-width: 1px; margin-bottom: 3em; margin-top: 3em; }

.prose :where(blockquote):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { border-left-color: var(--tw-prose-quote-borders); border-left-width: 0.25rem; color: var(--tw-prose-quotes); font-style: normal; font-weight: 500; margin-bottom: 1.6em; margin-top: 1.6em; padding-left: 1em; quotes: "“" "”" "‘" "’"; }

.prose :where(blockquote p:first-of-type):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::before { content: open-quote; }

.prose :where(blockquote p:last-of-type):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::after { content: close-quote; }

.prose :where(h1):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-headings); font-size: 2.25em; font-weight: 800; line-height: 1.11111; margin-bottom: 0.888889em; margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(h1 strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; font-weight: 900; }

.prose :where(h2):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-headings); font-size: 1.5em; font-weight: 700; line-height: 1.33333; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-top: 2em; }

.prose :where(h2 strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; font-weight: 800; }

.prose :where(h3):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-headings); font-size: 1.25em; font-weight: 600; line-height: 1.6; margin-bottom: 0.6em; margin-top: 1.6em; }

.prose :where(h3 strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; font-weight: 700; }

.prose :where(h4):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-headings); font-weight: 600; line-height: 1.5; margin-bottom: 0.5em; margin-top: 1.5em; }

.prose :where(h4 strong):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; font-weight: 700; }

.prose :where(img):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 2em; margin-top: 2em; }

.prose :where(figure > *):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(figcaption):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-captions); font-size: 0.875em; line-height: 1.42857; margin-top: 0.857143em; }

.prose :where(code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-code); font-size: 0.875em; font-weight: 600; }

.prose :where(code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::before { content: "`"; }

.prose :where(code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::after { content: "`"; }

.prose :where(a code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(h1 code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(h2 code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; font-size: 0.875em; }

.prose :where(h3 code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; font-size: 0.9em; }

.prose :where(h4 code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(blockquote code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(thead th code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: inherit; }

.prose :where(pre):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { background-color: transparent; border-radius: 0.375rem; color: currentcolor; font-size: 0.875em; font-weight: 400; line-height: 1.71429; margin: 0px; overflow-x: auto; padding: 0px; }

.prose :where(pre code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { background-color: transparent; border-radius: 0px; border-width: 0px; color: inherit; font-family: inherit; font-size: inherit; font-weight: inherit; line-height: inherit; padding: 0px; }

.prose :where(pre code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::before { content: none; }

.prose :where(pre code):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *))::after { content: none; }

.prose :where(table):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { font-size: 0.875em; line-height: 1.71429; margin-bottom: 2em; margin-top: 2em; table-layout: auto; text-align: left; width: 100%; }

.prose :where(thead):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { border-bottom-color: var(--tw-prose-th-borders); border-bottom-width: 1px; }

.prose :where(thead th):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { color: var(--tw-prose-headings); font-weight: 600; padding-bottom: 0.571429em; padding-left: 0.571429em; padding-right: 0.571429em; vertical-align: bottom; }

.prose :where(tbody tr):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { border-bottom-color: var(--tw-prose-td-borders); border-bottom-width: 1px; }

.prose :where(tbody tr:last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { border-bottom-width: 0px; }

.prose :where(tbody td):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { vertical-align: baseline; }

.prose :where(tfoot):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { border-top-color: var(--tw-prose-th-borders); border-top-width: 1px; }

.prose :where(tfoot td):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { vertical-align: top; }

.prose { --tw-prose-body:#374151; --tw-prose-headings:#111827; --tw-prose-lead:#4b5563; --tw-prose-links:#111827; --tw-prose-bold:#111827; --tw-prose-counters:#6b7280; --tw-prose-bullets:#d1d5db; --tw-prose-hr:#e5e7eb; --tw-prose-quotes:#111827; --tw-prose-quote-borders:#e5e7eb; --tw-prose-captions:#6b7280; --tw-prose-code:#111827; --tw-prose-pre-code:#e5e7eb; --tw-prose-pre-bg:#1f2937; --tw-prose-th-borders:#d1d5db; --tw-prose-td-borders:#e5e7eb; --tw-prose-invert-body:#d1d5db; --tw-prose-invert-headings:#fff; --tw-prose-invert-lead:#9ca3af; --tw-prose-invert-links:#fff; --tw-prose-invert-bold:#fff; --tw-prose-invert-counters:#9ca3af; --tw-prose-invert-bullets:#4b5563; --tw-prose-invert-hr:#374151; --tw-prose-invert-quotes:#f3f4f6; --tw-prose-invert-quote-borders:#374151; --tw-prose-invert-captions:#9ca3af; --tw-prose-invert-code:#fff; --tw-prose-invert-pre-code:#d1d5db; --tw-prose-invert-pre-bg:rgba(0,0,0,0.5); --tw-prose-invert-th-borders:#4b5563; --tw-prose-invert-td-borders:#374151; font-size: 1rem; line-height: 1.75; }

.prose :where(p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.25em; margin-top: 1.25em; }

.prose :where(video):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 2em; margin-top: 2em; }

.prose :where(figure):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 2em; margin-top: 2em; }

.prose :where(li):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.5em; margin-top: 0.5em; }

.prose :where(ol > li):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding-left: 0.375em; }

.prose :where(ul > li):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding-left: 0.375em; }

.prose :where(.prose > ul > li p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.75em; margin-top: 0.75em; }

.prose :where(.prose > ul > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.25em; }

.prose :where(.prose > ul > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.25em; }

.prose :where(.prose > ol > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.25em; }

.prose :where(.prose > ol > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.25em; }

.prose :where(ul ul, ul ol, ol ul, ol ol):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.75em; margin-top: 0.75em; }

.prose :where(hr + *):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(h2 + *):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(h3 + *):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(h4 + *):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(thead th:first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding-left: 0px; }

.prose :where(thead th:last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding-right: 0px; }

.prose :where(tbody td, tfoot td):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding: 0.571429em; }

.prose :where(tbody td:first-child, tfoot td:first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding-left: 0px; }

.prose :where(tbody td:last-child, tfoot td:last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { padding-right: 0px; }

.prose :where(.prose > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose :where(.prose > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > ul > li p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.571429em; margin-top: 0.571429em; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > ul > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.14286em; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > ul > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.14286em; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > ol > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.14286em; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > ol > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.14286em; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose-sm :where(.prose > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > ul > li p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.75em; margin-top: 0.75em; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > ul > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.25em; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > ul > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.25em; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > ol > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.25em; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > ol > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.25em; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose-base :where(.prose > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > ul > li p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.888889em; margin-top: 0.888889em; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > ul > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.33333em; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > ul > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.33333em; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > ol > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.33333em; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > ol > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.33333em; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose-lg :where(.prose > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > ul > li p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.8em; margin-top: 0.8em; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > ul > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.2em; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > ul > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.2em; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > ol > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.2em; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > ol > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.2em; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose-xl :where(.prose > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > ul > li p):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0.833333em; margin-top: 0.833333em; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > ul > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.33333em; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > ul > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.33333em; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > ol > li > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 1.33333em; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > ol > li > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 1.33333em; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > :first-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-top: 0px; }

.prose-2xl :where(.prose > :last-child):not(:where([class~="not-prose"] *)) { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.prose-invert { --tw-prose-body:var(--tw-prose-invert-body); --tw-prose-headings:var(--tw-prose-invert-headings); --tw-prose-lead:var(--tw-prose-invert-lead); --tw-prose-links:var(--tw-prose-invert-links); --tw-prose-bold:var(--tw-prose-invert-bold); --tw-prose-counters:var(--tw-prose-invert-counters); --tw-prose-bullets:var(--tw-prose-invert-bullets); --tw-prose-hr:var(--tw-prose-invert-hr); --tw-prose-quotes:var(--tw-prose-invert-quotes); --tw-prose-quote-borders:var(--tw-prose-invert-quote-borders); --tw-prose-captions:var(--tw-prose-invert-captions); --tw-prose-code:var(--tw-prose-invert-code); --tw-prose-pre-code:var(--tw-prose-invert-pre-code); --tw-prose-pre-bg:var(--tw-prose-invert-pre-bg); --tw-prose-th-borders:var(--tw-prose-invert-th-borders); --tw-prose-td-borders:var(--tw-prose-invert-td-borders); }

.form-input, .form-multiselect, .form-select, .form-textarea { --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent; appearance: none; background-color: rgb(255, 255, 255); border-color: rgb(142, 142, 160); border-radius: 0px; border-width: 1px; font-size: 1rem; line-height: 1.5rem; padding: 0.5rem 0.75rem; }

.form-input:focus, .form-multiselect:focus, .form-select:focus, .form-textarea:focus { --tw-ring-inset:var(--tw-empty, ); --tw-ring-offset-width:0px; --tw-ring-offset-color:#fff; --tw-ring-color:#2563eb; --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(1px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); border-color: rgb(37, 99, 235); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow); outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

.form-input::-webkit-input-placeholder, .form-textarea::-webkit-input-placeholder { color: rgb(142, 142, 160); opacity: 1; }

.form-input::placeholder, .form-textarea::placeholder { color: rgb(142, 142, 160); opacity: 1; }

.form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-fields-wrapper { padding: 0px; }

.form-input::-webkit-date-and-time-value { min-height: 1.5em; }

.form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-day-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-hour-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-meridiem-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-millisecond-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-minute-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-month-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-second-field, .form-input::-webkit-datetime-edit-year-field { padding-bottom: 0px; padding-top: 0px; }

.btn { align-items: center; border-color: transparent; border-radius: 0.25rem; border-width: 1px; display: inline-flex; font-size: 0.875rem; line-height: 1.25rem; padding: 0.5rem 0.75rem; pointer-events: auto; }

.btn:focus { outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

.btn:disabled { cursor: not-allowed; opacity: 0.5; }

.btn-primary { --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.btn-primary:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(26,127,100,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-primary:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(2px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); --tw-ring-offset-width:2px; box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.btn-primary.focus-visible { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.btn-primary:focus-visible { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.btn-danger { --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(185,28,28,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.btn-danger:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(153,27,27,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-danger:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(2px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); --tw-ring-offset-width:2px; box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.btn-danger.focus-visible { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(220,38,38,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.btn-danger:focus-visible { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(220,38,38,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.btn-danger:disabled:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(185,28,28,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-neutral { --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1); border-width: 1px; color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-text-opacity)); font-size: 0.875rem; line-height: 1.25rem; }

.btn-neutral:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-neutral:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(2px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); --tw-ring-offset-width:2px; box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.btn-neutral.focus-visible { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(99,102,241,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.btn-neutral:focus-visible { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(99,102,241,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.dark .btn-neutral { --tw-border-opacity:1; --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); border-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-border-opacity)); color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .btn-neutral:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-dark { --tw-border-opacity:1; --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); border-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-border-opacity)); border-width: 1px; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.btn-dark:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-light { --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); color: rgba(0,0,0,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.btn-light:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-disabled { --tw-bg-opacity:1; --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); cursor: not-allowed; }

.btn-disabled, .btn-disabled:hover { background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.btn-disabled:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; }

.btn-small { padding: 0.25rem 0.5rem; }

.hide-scrollbar { }

.hide-scrollbar ::-webkit-scrollbar { display: none; }

.sr-only { clip: rect(0px, 0px, 0px, 0px); border-width: 0px; height: 1px; margin: -1px; overflow: hidden; padding: 0px; position: absolute; white-space: nowrap; width: 1px; }

.pointer-events-none { pointer-events: none; }

.pointer-events-auto { pointer-events: auto; }

.visible { visibility: visible; }

.\!invisible { visibility: hidden !important; }

.invisible { visibility: hidden; }

.static { position: static; }

.fixed { position: fixed; }

.absolute { position: absolute; }

.relative { position: relative; }

.\!sticky { position: sticky !important; }

.sticky { position: sticky; }

.inset-0 { left: 0px; right: 0px; }

.inset-0, .inset-y-0 { bottom: 0px; top: 0px; }

.-left-2 { left: -0.5rem; }

.-top-0 { top: 0px; }

.-top-0\.5 { top: -0.125rem; }

.-top-4 { top: -1rem; }

.-top-\[1px\] { top: -1px; }

.bottom-0 { bottom: 0px; }

.bottom-1 { bottom: 0.25rem; }

.bottom-1\.5 { bottom: 0.375rem; }

.bottom-2 { bottom: 0.5rem; }

.bottom-4 { bottom: 1rem; }

.bottom-5 { bottom: 1.25rem; }

.bottom-\[10px\] { bottom: 10px; }

.bottom-\[124px\] { bottom: 124px; }

.bottom-full { bottom: 100%; }

.left-0 { left: 0px; }

.left-1 { left: 0.25rem; }

.left-1\.5 { left: 0.375rem; }

.left-1\/2 { left: 50%; }

.left-2 { left: 0.5rem; }

.left-4 { left: 1rem; }

.left-5 { left: 1.25rem; }

.right-0 { right: 0px; }

.right-1 { right: 0.25rem; }

.right-12 { right: 3rem; }

.right-2 { right: 0.5rem; }

.right-3 { right: 0.75rem; }

.right-4 { right: 1rem; }

.right-6 { right: 1.5rem; }

.top-0 { top: 0px; }

.top-1 { top: 0.25rem; }

.top-1\/2 { top: 50%; }

.top-14 { top: 3.5rem; }

.top-2 { top: 0.5rem; }

.top-8 { top: 2rem; }

.top-\[-3px\] { top: -3px; }

.top-\[-6px\] { top: -6px; }

.top-\[20px\] { top: 20px; }

.top-full { top: 100%; }

.-z-0, .z-0 { z-index: 0; }

.z-10 { z-index: 10; }

.z-20 { z-index: 20; }

.z-50 { z-index: 50; }

.z-\[14\] { z-index: 14; }

.z-\[15\] { z-index: 15; }

.z-\[16\] { z-index: 16; }

.z-\[17\] { z-index: 17; }

.z-\[2\] { z-index: 2; }

.z-\[60\] { z-index: 60; }

.z-\[9\] { z-index: 9; }

.order-1 { order: 1; }

.order-2 { order: 2; }

.col-auto { grid-column: auto / auto; }

.col-span-1 { grid-column: span 1 / span 1; }

.col-start-2 { grid-column-start: 2; }

.row-auto { grid-row: auto / auto; }

.row-start-2 { grid-row-start: 2; }

.float-left { float: left; }

.m-0 { margin: 0px; }

.m-1 { margin: 0.25rem; }

.m-4 { margin: 1rem; }

.m-6 { margin: 1.5rem; }

.m-auto { margin: auto; }

.-my-0 { margin-bottom: 0px; margin-top: 0px; }

.-my-0\.5 { margin-bottom: -0.125rem; margin-top: -0.125rem; }

.-my-1 { margin-bottom: -0.25rem; margin-top: -0.25rem; }

.mx-1 { margin-left: 0.25rem; margin-right: 0.25rem; }

.mx-2 { margin-left: 0.5rem; margin-right: 0.5rem; }

.mx-3 { margin-left: 0.75rem; margin-right: 0.75rem; }

.mx-6 { margin-left: 1.5rem; margin-right: 1.5rem; }

.mx-8 { margin-left: 2rem; margin-right: 2rem; }

.mx-auto { margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; }

.my-0 { margin-bottom: 0px; margin-top: 0px; }

.my-1 { margin-bottom: 0.25rem; margin-top: 0.25rem; }

.my-1\.5 { margin-bottom: 0.375rem; margin-top: 0.375rem; }

.my-2 { margin-bottom: 0.5rem; margin-top: 0.5rem; }

.my-3 { margin-bottom: 0.75rem; margin-top: 0.75rem; }

.my-4 { margin-bottom: 1rem; margin-top: 1rem; }

.-ml-0 { margin-left: 0px; }

.-ml-0\.5 { margin-left: -0.125rem; }

.-ml-1 { margin-left: -0.25rem; }

.-ml-2 { margin-left: -0.5rem; }

.-ml-4 { margin-left: -1rem; }

.-ml-\[1px\] { margin-left: -1px; }

.-ml-\[8px\] { margin-left: -8px; }

.-mr-1 { margin-right: -0.25rem; }

.-mr-12 { margin-right: -3rem; }

.-mr-2 { margin-right: -0.5rem; }

.-mt-0 { margin-top: 0px; }

.-mt-0\.5 { margin-top: -0.125rem; }

.-mt-\[3px\] { margin-top: -3px; }

.mb-0 { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.mb-0\.5 { margin-bottom: 0.125rem; }

.mb-1 { margin-bottom: 0.25rem; }

.mb-10 { margin-bottom: 2.5rem; }

.mb-12 { margin-bottom: 3rem; }

.mb-2 { margin-bottom: 0.5rem; }

.mb-3 { margin-bottom: 0.75rem; }

.mb-4 { margin-bottom: 1rem; }

.mb-5 { margin-bottom: 1.25rem; }

.mb-6 { margin-bottom: 1.5rem; }

.mb-7 { margin-bottom: 1.75rem; }

.mb-8 { margin-bottom: 2rem; }

.mb-\[5px\] { margin-bottom: 5px; }

.mb-auto { margin-bottom: auto; }

.ml-0 { margin-left: 0px; }

.ml-0\.5 { margin-left: 0.125rem; }

.ml-1 { margin-left: 0.25rem; }

.ml-12 { margin-left: 3rem; }

.ml-3 { margin-left: 0.75rem; }

.ml-5 { margin-left: 1.25rem; }

.ml-auto { margin-left: auto; }

.mr-0 { margin-right: 0px; }

.mr-1 { margin-right: 0.25rem; }

.mr-2 { margin-right: 0.5rem; }

.mr-3 { margin-right: 0.75rem; }

.mr-4 { margin-right: 1rem; }

.mr-8 { margin-right: 2rem; }

.mr-auto { margin-right: auto; }

.mt-1 { margin-top: 0.25rem; }

.mt-10 { margin-top: 2.5rem; }

.mt-2 { margin-top: 0.5rem; }

.mt-3 { margin-top: 0.75rem; }

.mt-4 { margin-top: 1rem; }

.mt-5 { margin-top: 1.25rem; }

.mt-6 { margin-top: 1.5rem; }

.mt-8 { margin-top: 2rem; }

.mt-auto { margin-top: auto; }

.box-border { box-sizing: border-box; }

.line-clamp-1 { -webkit-line-clamp: 1; }

.line-clamp-1, .line-clamp-2 { -webkit-box-orient: vertical; display: -webkit-box; overflow: hidden; }

.line-clamp-2 { -webkit-line-clamp: 2; }

.line-clamp-3 { -webkit-box-orient: vertical; -webkit-line-clamp: 3; display: -webkit-box; overflow: hidden; }

.block { display: block; }

.inline-block { display: inline-block; }

.inline { display: inline; }

.flex { display: flex; }

.inline-flex { display: inline-flex; }

.table { display: table; }

.grid { display: grid; }

.contents { display: contents; }

.hidden { display: none; }

.aspect-\[4\/7\] { aspect-ratio: 4 / 7; }

.aspect-\[7\/4\] { aspect-ratio: 7 / 4; }

.aspect-square { aspect-ratio: 1 / 1; }

.\!h-5 { height: 1.25rem !important; }

.h-1 { height: 0.25rem; }

.h-1\.5 { height: 0.375rem; }

.h-10 { height: 2.5rem; }

.h-11 { height: 2.75rem; }

.h-12 { height: 3rem; }

.h-14 { height: 3.5rem; }

.h-16 { height: 4rem; }

.h-2 { height: 0.5rem; }

.h-24 { height: 6rem; }

.h-3 { height: 0.75rem; }

.h-32 { height: 8rem; }

.h-4 { height: 1rem; }

.h-5 { height: 1.25rem; }

.h-52 { height: 13rem; }

.h-6 { height: 1.5rem; }

.h-64 { height: 16rem; }

.h-7 { height: 1.75rem; }

.h-8 { height: 2rem; }

.h-9 { height: 2.25rem; }

.h-\[1200px\] { height: 1200px; }

.h-\[12px\] { height: 12px; }

.h-\[14px\] { height: 14px; }

.h-\[18px\] { height: 18px; }

.h-\[19px\] { height: 19px; }

.h-\[21px\] { height: 21px; }

.h-\[22px\] { height: 22px; }

.h-\[25px\] { height: 25px; }

.h-\[30px\] { height: 30px; }

.h-\[34px\] { height: 34px; }

.h-\[36px\] { height: 36px; }

.h-\[404px\] { height: 404px; }

.h-\[42px\] { height: 42px; }

.h-\[50px\] { height: 50px; }

.h-\[60px\] { height: 60px; }

.h-\[70px\] { height: 70px; }

.h-auto { height: auto; }

.h-full { height: 100%; }

.h-px { height: 1px; }

.h-screen { height: 100vh; }

.max-h-0 { max-height: 0px; }

.max-h-5 { max-height: 1.25rem; }

.max-h-60 { max-height: 15rem; }

.max-h-64 { max-height: 16rem; }

.max-h-72 { max-height: 18rem; }

.max-h-\[28rem\] { max-height: 28rem; }

.max-h-\[450px\] { max-height: 450px; }

.max-h-\[80vh\] { max-height: 80vh; }

.max-h-\[calc\(100vh-300px\)\] { max-height: calc(100vh - 300px); }

.min-h-0 { min-height: 0px; }

.min-h-\[1\.5rem\] { min-height: 1.5rem; }

.min-h-\[20px\] { min-height: 20px; }

.min-h-\[24px\] { min-height: 24px; }

.min-h-\[60px\] { min-height: 60px; }

.min-h-\[71px\] { min-height: 71px; }

.min-h-full { min-height: 100%; }

.min-h-screen { min-height: 100vh; }

.\!w-5 { width: 1.25rem !important; }

.w-1 { width: 0.25rem; }

.w-1\.5 { width: 0.375rem; }

.w-1\/3 { width: 33.3333%; }

.w-10 { width: 2.5rem; }

.w-11 { width: 2.75rem; }

.w-12 { width: 3rem; }

.w-14 { width: 3.5rem; }

.w-16 { width: 4rem; }

.w-2 { width: 0.5rem; }

.w-28 { width: 7rem; }

.w-3 { width: 0.75rem; }

.w-4 { width: 1rem; }

.w-5 { width: 1.25rem; }

.w-6 { width: 1.5rem; }

.w-60 { width: 15rem; }

.w-64 { width: 16rem; }

.w-7 { width: 1.75rem; }

.w-8 { width: 2rem; }

.w-8\/12 { width: 66.6667%; }

.w-96 { width: 24rem; }

.w-\[103px\] { width: 103px; }

.w-\[120px\] { width: 120px; }

.w-\[184px\] { width: 184px; }

.w-\[18px\] { width: 18px; }

.w-\[2\.5px\] { width: 2.5px; }

.w-\[209px\] { width: 209px; }

.w-\[218px\] { width: 218px; }

.w-\[21px\] { width: 21px; }

.w-\[260px\] { width: 260px; }

.w-\[30px\] { width: 30px; }

.w-\[34px\] { width: 34px; }

.w-\[42px\] { width: 42px; }

.w-\[70px\] { width: 70px; }

.w-\[860px\] { width: 860px; }

.w-\[88px\] { width: 88px; }

.w-\[960px\] { width: 960px; }

.w-\[calc\(100\%-50px\)\] { width: calc(100% - 50px); }

.w-auto { width: auto; }

.w-full { width: 100%; }

.w-screen { width: 100vw; }

.min-w-0 { min-width: 0px; }

.min-w-\[100vw\] { min-width: 100vw; }

.min-w-\[175px\] { min-width: 175px; }

.min-w-\[180px\] { min-width: 180px; }

.min-w-\[220px\] { min-width: 220px; }

.min-w-\[300px\] { min-width: 300px; }

.min-w-\[32px\] { min-width: 32px; }

.min-w-\[50px\] { min-width: 50px; }

.min-w-\[8rem\] { min-width: 8rem; }

.max-w-2xl { max-width: 42rem; }

.max-w-5xl { max-width: 64rem; }

.max-w-7xl { max-width: 80rem; }

.max-w-\[100vw\] { max-width: 100vw; }

.max-w-\[220px\] { max-width: 220px; }

.max-w-\[250px\] { max-width: 250px; }

.max-w-\[350px\] { max-width: 350px; }

.max-w-\[400px\] { max-width: 400px; }

.max-w-\[440px\] { max-width: 440px; }

.max-w-\[44rem\] { max-width: 44rem; }

.max-w-\[510px\] { max-width: 510px; }

.max-w-\[550px\] { max-width: 550px; }

.max-w-\[560px\] { max-width: 560px; }

.max-w-\[650px\] { max-width: 650px; }

.max-w-full { max-width: 100%; }

.max-w-lg { max-width: 32rem; }

.max-w-md { max-width: 28rem; }

.max-w-sm { max-width: 24rem; }

.max-w-xl { max-width: 36rem; }

.max-w-xs { max-width: 20rem; }

.flex-1 { flex: 1 1 0%; }

.flex-auto { flex: 1 1 auto; }

.flex-initial { flex: 0 1 auto; }

.flex-none { flex: 0 0 auto; }

.flex-shrink { flex-shrink: 1; }

.flex-shrink-0 { flex-shrink: 0; }

.shrink { flex-shrink: 1; }

.shrink-0 { flex-shrink: 0; }

.flex-grow { flex-grow: 1; }

.flex-grow-0 { flex-grow: 0; }

.grow { flex-grow: 1; }

.table-fixed { table-layout: fixed; }

.border-separate { border-collapse: separate; }

.border-spacing-0 { --tw-border-spacing-x:0px; --tw-border-spacing-y:0px; border-spacing: var(--tw-border-spacing-x) var(--tw-border-spacing-y); }

.origin-\[50\%_50\%\] { transform-origin: 50% 50%; }

.-translate-x-1\/2 { --tw-translate-x:-50%; }

.-translate-x-1\/2, .-translate-x-\[calc\(100\%\+4px\)\] { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.-translate-x-\[calc\(100\%\+4px\)\] { --tw-translate-x:calc(-100% + -4px); }

.-translate-x-full { --tw-translate-x:-100%; }

.-translate-x-full, .-translate-y-1\/2 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.-translate-y-1\/2 { --tw-translate-y:-50%; }

.translate-x-0 { --tw-translate-x:0px; }

.translate-x-0, .translate-x-0\.5 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.translate-x-0\.5 { --tw-translate-x:0.125rem; }

.translate-x-1 { --tw-translate-x:0.25rem; }

.translate-x-1, .translate-x-1\/2 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.translate-x-1\/2 { --tw-translate-x:50%; }

.translate-x-full { --tw-translate-x:100%; }

.translate-x-full, .translate-y-0 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.translate-y-0 { --tw-translate-y:0px; }

.translate-y-1 { --tw-translate-y:0.25rem; }

.translate-y-1, .translate-y-3 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.translate-y-3 { --tw-translate-y:0.75rem; }

.translate-y-\[calc\(-50\%-1em\)\] { --tw-translate-y:calc(-50% - 1em); }

.translate-y-\[calc\(-50\%-1em\)\], .translate-y-\[calc\(-50\%-1em\+16px\)\] { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.translate-y-\[calc\(-50\%-1em\+16px\)\] { --tw-translate-y:calc(-50% - 1em + 16px); }

.translate-y-\[calc\(-50\%-1em-16px\)\] { --tw-translate-y:calc(-50% - 1em - 16px); }

.translate-y-\[calc\(-50\%-1em-16px\)\], .translate-y-\[calc\(100\%-71px\)\] { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.translate-y-\[calc\(100\%-71px\)\] { --tw-translate-y:calc(100% - 71px); }

.-rotate-180 { --tw-rotate:-180deg; }

.-rotate-180, .-rotate-45 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.-rotate-45 { --tw-rotate:-45deg; }

.-rotate-90 { --tw-rotate:-90deg; }

.-rotate-90, .rotate-180 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.rotate-180 { --tw-rotate:180deg; }

.rotate-45 { --tw-rotate:45deg; }

.rotate-45, .scale-0 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.scale-0 { --tw-scale-x:0; --tw-scale-y:0; }

.transform { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

@-webkit-keyframes slideDownAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateY(-2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateY(0px); }
}

.animate-slideDownAndFade { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideDownAndFade; }

@-webkit-keyframes slideLeftAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateX(2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateX(0px); }
}

.animate-slideLeftAndFade { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideLeftAndFade; }

@-webkit-keyframes slideUpAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateY(2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateY(0px); }
}

.animate-slideUpAndFade { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideUpAndFade; }

@-webkit-keyframes spin { 
  100% { transform: rotate(1turn); }
}

@keyframes spin { 
  100% { transform: rotate(1turn); }
}

.animate-spin { animation: 1s linear 0s infinite normal none running spin; }

.cursor-auto { cursor: auto; }

.cursor-default { cursor: default; }

.cursor-not-allowed { cursor: not-allowed; }

.cursor-pointer { cursor: pointer; }

.select-none { user-select: none; }

.resize-none { resize: none; }

.resize { resize: both; }

.list-disc { list-style-type: disc; }

.list-none { list-style-type: none; }

.appearance-none { appearance: none; }

.grid-flow-row { grid-auto-flow: row; }

.grid-cols-1 { grid-template-columns: repeat(1, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }

.grid-cols-2 { grid-template-columns: repeat(2, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }

.grid-cols-\[10px_1fr_10px\] { grid-template-columns: 10px 1fr 10px; }

.grid-cols-\[auto_max-content\] { grid-template-columns: auto max-content; }

.grid-cols-\[repeat\(auto-fit\,minmax\(250px\,1fr\)\)\] { grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fit, minmax(250px, 1fr)); }

.grid-rows-\[minmax\(10px\,_1fr\)_auto_minmax\(10px\,_1fr\)\] { grid-template-rows: minmax(10px, 1fr) auto minmax(10px, 1fr); }

.flex-row { flex-direction: row; }

.flex-col { flex-direction: column; }

.flex-col-reverse { flex-direction: column-reverse; }

.flex-wrap { flex-wrap: wrap; }

.place-items-center { place-items: center; }

.items-start { align-items: flex-start; }

.items-end { align-items: flex-end; }

.items-center { align-items: center; }

.items-stretch { align-items: stretch; }

.justify-start { justify-content: flex-start; }

.justify-end { justify-content: flex-end; }

.justify-center { justify-content: center; }

.justify-between { justify-content: space-between; }

.justify-around { justify-content: space-around; }

.justify-stretch { justify-content: stretch; }

.gap-0 { gap: 0px; }

.gap-1 { gap: 0.25rem; }

.gap-1\.5 { gap: 0.375rem; }

.gap-2 { gap: 0.5rem; }

.gap-2\.5 { gap: 0.625rem; }

.gap-3 { gap: 0.75rem; }

.gap-3\.5 { gap: 0.875rem; }

.gap-4 { gap: 1rem; }

.gap-5 { gap: 1.25rem; }

.gap-6 { gap: 1.5rem; }

.gap-7 { gap: 1.75rem; }

.gap-\[10px\] { gap: 10px; }

.gap-x-1 { column-gap: 0.25rem; }

.gap-x-1\.5 { column-gap: 0.375rem; }

.gap-x-3 { column-gap: 0.75rem; }

.gap-x-9 { column-gap: 2.25rem; }

.gap-x-\[15px\] { column-gap: 15px; }

.space-x-0 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-x-reverse:0; margin-left: calc(0px*(1 - var(--tw-space-x-reverse))); margin-right: calc(0px*var(--tw-space-x-reverse)); }

.space-x-0\.5 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-x-reverse:0; margin-left: calc(0.125rem*(1 - var(--tw-space-x-reverse))); margin-right: calc(0.125rem*var(--tw-space-x-reverse)); }

.space-x-1 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-x-reverse:0; margin-left: calc(0.25rem*(1 - var(--tw-space-x-reverse))); margin-right: calc(0.25rem*var(--tw-space-x-reverse)); }

.space-x-1\.5 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-x-reverse:0; margin-left: calc(0.375rem*(1 - var(--tw-space-x-reverse))); margin-right: calc(0.375rem*var(--tw-space-x-reverse)); }

.space-x-2 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-x-reverse:0; margin-left: calc(0.5rem*(1 - var(--tw-space-x-reverse))); margin-right: calc(0.5rem*var(--tw-space-x-reverse)); }

.space-y-2 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-y-reverse:0; margin-bottom: calc(0.5rem*var(--tw-space-y-reverse)); margin-top: calc(0.5rem*(1 - var(--tw-space-y-reverse))); }

.space-y-3 > :not([hidden]) ~ :not([hidden]) { --tw-space-y-reverse:0; margin-bottom: calc(0.75rem*var(--tw-space-y-reverse)); margin-top: calc(0.75rem*(1 - var(--tw-space-y-reverse))); }

.self-end { align-self: flex-end; }

.self-center { align-self: center; }

.self-stretch { align-self: stretch; }

.justify-self-start { justify-self: start; }

.overflow-auto { overflow: auto; }

.overflow-hidden { overflow: hidden; }

.overflow-scroll { overflow: scroll; }

.overflow-x-auto { overflow-x: auto; }

.overflow-y-auto { overflow-y: auto; }

.overflow-x-hidden { overflow-x: hidden; }

.overflow-y-hidden { overflow-y: hidden; }

.truncate { overflow: hidden; white-space: nowrap; }

.overflow-ellipsis, .text-ellipsis, .truncate { text-overflow: ellipsis; }

.whitespace-normal { white-space: normal; }

.whitespace-nowrap { white-space: nowrap; }

.\!whitespace-pre { white-space: pre !important; }

.whitespace-pre-line { white-space: pre-line; }

.\!whitespace-pre-wrap { white-space: pre-wrap !important; }

.whitespace-pre-wrap { white-space: pre-wrap; }

.break-words { overflow-wrap: break-word; }

.break-all { word-break: break-all; }

.rounded { border-radius: 0.25rem; }

.rounded-2xl { border-radius: 1rem; }

.rounded-\[4px\] { border-radius: 4px; }

.rounded-\[5px\] { border-radius: 5px; }

.rounded-full { border-radius: 9999px; }

.rounded-lg { border-radius: 0.5rem; }

.rounded-md { border-radius: 0.375rem; }

.rounded-none { border-radius: 0px; }

.rounded-sm { border-radius: 0.125rem; }

.rounded-xl { border-radius: 0.75rem; }

.rounded-b-lg { border-bottom-left-radius: 0.5rem; border-bottom-right-radius: 0.5rem; }

.rounded-l-md { border-bottom-left-radius: 0.375rem; border-top-left-radius: 0.375rem; }

.rounded-r-md { border-bottom-right-radius: 0.375rem; border-top-right-radius: 0.375rem; }

.rounded-t-\[30px\] { border-top-left-radius: 30px; border-top-right-radius: 30px; }

.rounded-t-md { border-top-left-radius: 0.375rem; border-top-right-radius: 0.375rem; }

.rounded-t-xl { border-top-left-radius: 0.75rem; border-top-right-radius: 0.75rem; }

.rounded-br-sm { border-bottom-right-radius: 0.125rem; }

.border { border-width: 1px; }

.border-0 { border-width: 0px; }

.border-2 { border-width: 2px; }

.border-\[0\.5px\] { border-width: 0.5px; }

.border-b { border-bottom-width: 1px; }

.border-l { border-left-width: 1px; }

.border-l-4 { border-left-width: 4px; }

.border-r { border-right-width: 1px; }

.border-r-0 { border-right-width: 0px; }

.border-t { border-top-width: 1px; }

.border-none { border-style: none; }

.border-black\/10 { border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1); }

.border-black\/20 { border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2); }

.border-black\/30 { border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.3); }

.border-black\/5 { border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.05); }

.border-brand-green { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-brand-purple { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-100 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-200 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-300 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-400 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-500 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-700 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-gray-800 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-green-500 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-orange-400 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(255,128,82,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-orange-500 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(224,108,43,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-red-500 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-transparent { border-color: transparent; }

.border-white { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.border-white\/20 { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.2); }

.\!bg-brand-purple { --tw-bg-opacity:1 !important; background-color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)) !important; }

.\!bg-gray-700 { --tw-bg-opacity:1 !important; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)) !important; }

.\!bg-transparent { background-color: transparent !important; }

.bg-\[\#0077FF\] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(0,119,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-\[\#3C46FF\] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(60,70,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-\[rgba\(30\,203\,239\,0\.07\)\] { background-color: rgba(30, 203, 239, 0.07); }

.bg-black { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(0,0,0,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-black\/5 { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.05); }

.bg-black\/\[\.04\] { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.04); }

.bg-black\/\[\.08\] { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.08); }

.bg-black\/\[\.12\] { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.12); }

.bg-blue-200 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(191,219,254,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-blue-300 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(121,137,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-100 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-200 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-300 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-50 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(247,247,248,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-500 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-500\/90 { background-color: rgba(141, 141, 160, 0.9); }

.bg-gray-600 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-700 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-800 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-900 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-gray-950 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(5,5,9,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-green-100 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(210,244,211,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-green-500 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-green-500\/10 { background-color: rgba(25, 195, 125, 0.1); }

.bg-green-600 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-orange-500 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(224,108,43,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-orange-500\/10 { background-color: rgba(224, 108, 43, 0.1); }

.bg-red-100 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(254,226,226,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-red-200 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(254,202,202,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-red-500 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-red-500\/10 { background-color: rgba(239, 68, 68, 0.1); }

.bg-red-600 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(220,38,38,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-transparent { background-color: transparent; }

.bg-white { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-white\/20 { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.2); }

.bg-white\/25 { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.25); }

.bg-yellow-100 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(254,249,195,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-yellow-200 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(250,230,158,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-yellow-300 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(255,243,201,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.bg-opacity-75 { --tw-bg-opacity:0.75; }

.bg-gradient-to-l { background-image: linear-gradient(to left,var(--tw-gradient-stops)); }

.bg-gradient-to-t { background-image: linear-gradient(to top,var(--tw-gradient-stops)); }

.from-gray-100 { --tw-gradient-from:#ececf1 var(--tw-gradient-from-position); --tw-gradient-to:rgba(236,236,241,0) var(--tw-gradient-to-position); --tw-gradient-stops:var(--tw-gradient-from),var(--tw-gradient-to); }

.from-gray-800 { --tw-gradient-from:#343541 var(--tw-gradient-from-position); --tw-gradient-to:rgba(52,53,65,0) var(--tw-gradient-to-position); --tw-gradient-stops:var(--tw-gradient-from),var(--tw-gradient-to); }

.from-gray-900 { --tw-gradient-from:#202123 var(--tw-gradient-from-position); --tw-gradient-to:rgba(32,33,35,0) var(--tw-gradient-to-position); --tw-gradient-stops:var(--tw-gradient-from),var(--tw-gradient-to); }

.from-gray-900\/0 { --tw-gradient-from:rgba(32,33,35,0) var(--tw-gradient-from-position); --tw-gradient-to:rgba(32,33,35,0) var(--tw-gradient-to-position); --tw-gradient-stops:var(--tw-gradient-from),var(--tw-gradient-to); }

.from-\[60\%\] { --tw-gradient-from-position:60%; }

.to-gray-900 { --tw-gradient-to:#202123 var(--tw-gradient-to-position); }

.bg-contain { background-size: contain; }

.bg-cover { background-size: cover; }

.bg-center { background-position: 50% center; }

.bg-no-repeat { background-repeat: no-repeat; }

.fill-gray-800 { fill: rgb(52, 53, 65); }

.fill-yellow-500 { fill: rgb(234, 179, 8); }

.stroke-gray-200 { stroke: rgb(217, 217, 227); }

.object-cover { object-fit: cover; }

.p-0 { padding: 0px; }

.p-0\.5 { padding: 0.125rem; }

.p-1 { padding: 0.25rem; }

.p-2 { padding: 0.5rem; }

.p-3 { padding: 0.75rem; }

.p-4 { padding: 1rem; }

.p-6 { padding: 1.5rem; }

.p-7 { padding: 1.75rem; }

.p-\[15px\] { padding: 15px; }

.p-\[5px\] { padding: 5px; }

.p-\[var\(--viewport-padding\)\] { padding: var(--viewport-padding); }

.\!px-1 { padding-left: 0.25rem !important; padding-right: 0.25rem !important; }

.\!px-1\.5 { padding-left: 0.375rem !important; padding-right: 0.375rem !important; }

.\!py-0 { padding-bottom: 0px !important; padding-top: 0px !important; }

.\!py-0\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.125rem !important; padding-top: 0.125rem !important; }

.px-0 { padding-left: 0px; padding-right: 0px; }

.px-0\.5 { padding-left: 0.125rem; padding-right: 0.125rem; }

.px-1 { padding-left: 0.25rem; padding-right: 0.25rem; }

.px-1\.5 { padding-left: 0.375rem; padding-right: 0.375rem; }

.px-2 { padding-left: 0.5rem; padding-right: 0.5rem; }

.px-3 { padding-left: 0.75rem; padding-right: 0.75rem; }

.px-4 { padding-left: 1rem; padding-right: 1rem; }

.px-5 { padding-left: 1.25rem; padding-right: 1.25rem; }

.px-6 { padding-left: 1.5rem; padding-right: 1.5rem; }

.px-8 { padding-left: 2rem; padding-right: 2rem; }

.px-\[10px\] { padding-left: 10px; padding-right: 10px; }

.py-0 { padding-bottom: 0px; padding-top: 0px; }

.py-0\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.125rem; padding-top: 0.125rem; }

.py-1 { padding-bottom: 0.25rem; padding-top: 0.25rem; }

.py-1\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.375rem; padding-top: 0.375rem; }

.py-2 { padding-bottom: 0.5rem; padding-top: 0.5rem; }

.py-2\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.625rem; padding-top: 0.625rem; }

.py-3 { padding-bottom: 0.75rem; padding-top: 0.75rem; }

.py-4 { padding-bottom: 1rem; padding-top: 1rem; }

.py-6 { padding-bottom: 1.5rem; padding-top: 1.5rem; }

.py-8 { padding-bottom: 2rem; padding-top: 2rem; }

.py-\[10px\] { padding-bottom: 10px; padding-top: 10px; }

.\!pr-2 { padding-right: 0.5rem !important; }

.\!pt-0 { padding-top: 0px !important; }

.pb-0 { padding-bottom: 0px; }

.pb-0\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.125rem; }

.pb-1 { padding-bottom: 0.25rem; }

.pb-1\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.375rem; }

.pb-12 { padding-bottom: 3rem; }

.pb-2 { padding-bottom: 0.5rem; }

.pb-3 { padding-bottom: 0.75rem; }

.pb-4 { padding-bottom: 1rem; }

.pb-5 { padding-bottom: 1.25rem; }

.pb-64 { padding-bottom: 16rem; }

.pb-8 { padding-bottom: 2rem; }

.pl-0 { padding-left: 0px; }

.pl-1 { padding-left: 0.25rem; }

.pl-10 { padding-left: 2.5rem; }

.pl-12 { padding-left: 3rem; }

.pl-2 { padding-left: 0.5rem; }

.pl-3 { padding-left: 0.75rem; }

.pl-4 { padding-left: 1rem; }

.pl-5 { padding-left: 1.25rem; }

.pl-6 { padding-left: 1.5rem; }

.pr-1 { padding-right: 0.25rem; }

.pr-1\.5 { padding-right: 0.375rem; }

.pr-10 { padding-right: 2.5rem; }

.pr-11 { padding-right: 2.75rem; }

.pr-12 { padding-right: 3rem; }

.pr-14 { padding-right: 3.5rem; }

.pr-2 { padding-right: 0.5rem; }

.pr-3 { padding-right: 0.75rem; }

.pr-4 { padding-right: 1rem; }

.pr-5 { padding-right: 1.25rem; }

.pr-6 { padding-right: 1.5rem; }

.pr-7 { padding-right: 1.75rem; }

.pr-9 { padding-right: 2.25rem; }

.pt-0 { padding-top: 0px; }

.pt-0\.5 { padding-top: 0.125rem; }

.pt-1 { padding-top: 0.25rem; }

.pt-2 { padding-top: 0.5rem; }

.pt-20 { padding-top: 5rem; }

.pt-3 { padding-top: 0.75rem; }

.pt-4 { padding-top: 1rem; }

.pt-5 { padding-top: 1.25rem; }

.pt-8 { padding-top: 2rem; }

.pt-\[67\%\] { padding-top: 67%; }

.text-left { text-align: left; }

.text-center { text-align: center; }

.text-right { text-align: right; }

.align-top { vertical-align: top; }

.font-mono { font-family: "Söhne Mono", Monaco, "Andale Mono", "Ubuntu Mono", monospace; }

.font-sans { font-family: Söhne, ui-sans-serif, system-ui, -apple-system, "Segoe UI", Roboto, Ubuntu, Cantarell, "Noto Sans", sans-serif, "Helvetica Neue", Arial, "Apple Color Emoji", "Segoe UI Emoji", "Segoe UI Symbol", "Noto Color Emoji"; }

.text-2xl { font-size: 1.5rem; line-height: 2rem; }

.text-3xl { font-size: 1.875rem; line-height: 2.25rem; }

.text-4xl { font-size: 2.25rem; line-height: 2.5rem; }

.text-\[10px\] { font-size: 10px; }

.text-\[13px\] { font-size: 13px; }

.text-\[15px\] { font-size: 15px; }

.text-\[20px\] { font-size: 20px; }

.text-\[28px\] { font-size: 28px; }

.text-\[32px\] { font-size: 32px; }

.text-base { font-size: 1rem; line-height: 1.5rem; }

.text-lg { font-size: 1.125rem; line-height: 1.75rem; }

.text-sm { font-size: 0.875rem; line-height: 1.25rem; }

.text-xl { font-size: 1.25rem; line-height: 1.75rem; }

.text-xs { font-size: 0.75rem; line-height: 1rem; }

.font-bold { font-weight: 700; }

.font-medium { font-weight: 500; }

.font-normal { font-weight: 400; }

.font-semibold { font-weight: 600; }

.uppercase { text-transform: uppercase; }

.capitalize { text-transform: capitalize; }

.normal-case { text-transform: none; }

.italic { font-style: italic; }

.leading-3 { line-height: 0.75rem; }

.leading-5 { line-height: 1.25rem; }

.leading-6 { line-height: 1.5rem; }

.leading-\[1\.2\] { line-height: 1.2; }

.leading-\[1\.3\] { line-height: 1.3; }

.leading-none { line-height: 1; }

.leading-normal { line-height: 1.5; }

.leading-tight { line-height: 1.25; }

.tracking-tight { letter-spacing: -0.025em; }

.tracking-wide { letter-spacing: 0.025em; }

.tracking-widest { letter-spacing: 0.1em; }

.\!text-gray-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1 !important; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)) !important; }

.text-\[\#756B5C\] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(117,107,92,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-\[\#800080\] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(128,0,128,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-\[\#FE7600\] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(254,118,0,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-\[\#cdcdcd\] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(205,205,205,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-\[\#fff\] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-black { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(0,0,0,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-black\/50 { color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.5); }

.text-black\/60 { color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.6); }

.text-black\/70 { color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.7); }

.text-blue-400 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(58,136,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-blue-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(69,89,164,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-blue-600 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(37,99,235,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-blue-700 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(29,78,216,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-brand-green { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-brand-purple { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-100 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-200 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-300 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-400 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-600 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-600\/50 { color: rgba(86, 88, 105, 0.5); }

.text-gray-700 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-800 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-gray-900 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-green-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-green-600 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-green-700 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(26,127,100,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-orange-400 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,128,82,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-orange-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(224,108,43,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-red-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-red-600 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(220,38,38,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-red-700 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(185,28,28,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-red-800 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(153,27,27,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-token-text-primary { color: var(--text-primary); }

.text-token-text-secondary { color: var(--text-secondary); }

.text-token-text-tertiary { color: var(--text-tertiary); }

.text-white { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-white\/25 { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.25); }

.text-white\/50 { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.5); }

.text-white\/80 { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.8); }

.text-yellow-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(234,179,8,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-yellow-700 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(161,98,7,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-yellow-800 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(133,77,14,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.text-yellow-900 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(146,114,1,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.underline { text-decoration-line: underline; }

.\!no-underline { text-decoration-line: none !important; }

.antialiased { -webkit-font-smoothing: antialiased; }

.placeholder-gray-500::-webkit-input-placeholder { --tw-placeholder-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-placeholder-opacity)); }

.placeholder-gray-500::placeholder { --tw-placeholder-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-placeholder-opacity)); }

.opacity-0 { opacity: 0; }

.opacity-100 { opacity: 1; }

.opacity-20 { opacity: 0.2; }

.opacity-50 { opacity: 0.5; }

.opacity-60 { opacity: 0.6; }

.opacity-70 { opacity: 0.7; }

.opacity-80 { opacity: 0.8; }

.\!shadow-none { --tw-shadow:0 0 transparent !important; --tw-shadow-colored:0 0 transparent !important; box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow) !important; }

.shadow { --tw-shadow:0 1px 3px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.1),0 1px 2px -1px rgba(0,0,0,0.1); --tw-shadow-colored:0 1px 3px 0 var(--tw-shadow-color),0 1px 2px -1px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow, .shadow-\[0_0\.5px_2px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.15\)\] { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-\[0_0\.5px_2px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.15\)\] { --tw-shadow:0 0.5px 2px rgba(0,0,0,0.15); --tw-shadow-colored:0 0.5px 2px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0_1px_2px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.45\)\] { --tw-shadow:0 1px 2px rgba(0,0,0,0.45); --tw-shadow-colored:0 1px 2px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0_1px_2px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.45\)\], .shadow-\[0_1px_7px_0_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.03\)\] { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-\[0_1px_7px_0_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.03\)\] { --tw-shadow:0 1px 7px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.03); --tw-shadow-colored:0 1px 7px 0 var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0_1px_7px_0px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.06\)\] { --tw-shadow:0 1px 7px 0px rgba(0,0,0,0.06); --tw-shadow-colored:0 1px 7px 0px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0_1px_7px_0px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.06\)\], .shadow-\[0_2px_12px_0px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.08\)\] { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-\[0_2px_12px_0px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.08\)\] { --tw-shadow:0 2px 12px 0px rgba(0,0,0,0.08); --tw-shadow-colored:0 2px 12px 0px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0_2px_24px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.05\)\] { --tw-shadow:0 2px 24px rgba(0,0,0,0.05); --tw-shadow-colored:0 2px 24px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0_2px_24px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.05\)\], .shadow-\[0px_1px_6px_0px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.02\)\] { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-\[0px_1px_6px_0px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.02\)\] { --tw-shadow:0px 1px 6px 0px rgba(0,0,0,0.02); --tw-shadow-colored:0px 1px 6px 0px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0px_4px_14px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.06\)\] { --tw-shadow:0px 4px 14px rgba(0,0,0,0.06); --tw-shadow-colored:0px 4px 14px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-\[0px_4px_14px_rgba\(0\,0\,0\,0\.06\)\], .shadow-lg { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-lg { --tw-shadow:0 10px 15px -3px rgba(0,0,0,0.1),0 4px 6px -4px rgba(0,0,0,0.1); --tw-shadow-colored:0 10px 15px -3px var(--tw-shadow-color),0 4px 6px -4px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-md { --tw-shadow:0 4px 6px -1px rgba(0,0,0,0.1),0 2px 4px -2px rgba(0,0,0,0.1); --tw-shadow-colored:0 4px 6px -1px var(--tw-shadow-color),0 2px 4px -2px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-md, .shadow-sm { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-sm { --tw-shadow:0 1px 2px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.05); --tw-shadow-colored:0 1px 2px 0 var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-xl { --tw-shadow:0 20px 25px -5px rgba(0,0,0,0.1),0 8px 10px -6px rgba(0,0,0,0.1); --tw-shadow-colored:0 20px 25px -5px var(--tw-shadow-color),0 8px 10px -6px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-xl, .shadow-xs { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.shadow-xs { --tw-shadow:0 0 15px rgba(0,0,0,0.1); --tw-shadow-colored:0 0 15px var(--tw-shadow-color); }

.shadow-xxs { --tw-shadow:0 1px 7px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.03); --tw-shadow-colored:0 1px 7px 0 var(--tw-shadow-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.outline-none { outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

.ring-1 { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(1px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.ring-inset { --tw-ring-inset:inset; }

.ring-black\/10 { --tw-ring-color:rgba(0,0,0,0.1); }

.blur { --tw-blur:blur(8px); }

.blur, .blur-xl { filter: var(--tw-blur) var(--tw-brightness) var(--tw-contrast) var(--tw-grayscale) var(--tw-hue-rotate) var(--tw-invert) var(--tw-saturate) var(--tw-sepia) var(--tw-drop-shadow); }

.blur-xl { --tw-blur:blur(24px); }

.filter { filter: var(--tw-blur) var(--tw-brightness) var(--tw-contrast) var(--tw-grayscale) var(--tw-hue-rotate) var(--tw-invert) var(--tw-saturate) var(--tw-sepia) var(--tw-drop-shadow); }

.transition { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: color, background-color, border-color, text-decoration-color, fill, stroke, opacity, box-shadow, transform, filter, backdrop-filter, -webkit-transform, -webkit-filter, -webkit-backdrop-filter; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-\[stroke-dashoffset\] { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: stroke-dashoffset; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-\[transform\,opacity\] { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: transform, opacity, -webkit-transform; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-all { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: all; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-colors { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: color, background-color, border-color, text-decoration-color, fill, stroke; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-opacity { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: opacity; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-transform { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: transform, -webkit-transform; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.transition-width { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: width; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.delay-100 { transition-delay: 0.1s; }

.delay-\[300ms\] { transition-delay: 0.3s; }

.delay-\[500ms\] { transition-delay: 0.5s; }

.duration-100 { transition-duration: 0.1s; }

.duration-1000 { transition-duration: 1s; }

.duration-150 { transition-duration: 0.15s; }

.duration-200 { transition-duration: 0.2s; }

.duration-300 { transition-duration: 0.3s; }

.duration-500 { transition-duration: 0.5s; }

.ease-in { transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 1, 1); }

.ease-in-out { transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.ease-linear { transition-timing-function: linear; }

.ease-out { transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.will-change-\[opacity\,transform\] { will-change: opacity, transform; }

.will-change-transform { will-change: transform; }

.\[--viewport-padding\:_25px\] { --viewport-padding:25px; }

.\[grid-area\:_description\] { grid-area: description / description / description / description; }

.\[grid-area\:_title\] { grid-area: title / title / title / title; }

.\[grid-template-areas\:_\'title_action\'_\'description_action\'\] { grid-template-areas: "title action" "description action"; }

body, html { height: 100%; }

.dark body, .dark html { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

#__next, #root { height: 100%; }

.markdown { max-width: none; }

.markdown h1, .markdown h2 { font-weight: 600; }

.markdown h2 { margin-bottom: 1rem; margin-top: 2rem; }

.markdown h3 { font-weight: 600; }

.markdown h3, .markdown h4 { margin-bottom: 0.5rem; margin-top: 1rem; }

.markdown h4 { font-weight: 400; }

.markdown h5 { font-weight: 600; }

.markdown blockquote { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-border-opacity)); border-left-width: 2px; line-height: 1.5rem; margin: 0px; padding-bottom: 0.5rem; padding-left: 1rem; padding-top: 0.5rem; }

.markdown blockquote > p { margin: 0px; }

.markdown blockquote > p::after, .markdown blockquote > p::before { display: none; }

.markdown ol { counter-reset: list-number 0; display: flex; flex-direction: column; list-style-type: none; padding-left: 0px; }

.markdown ol > li { counter-increment: list-number 1; display: block; margin-bottom: 0px; margin-top: 0px; min-height: 28px; }

.markdown ol > li::before { --tw-translate-x:-100%; --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); content: counters(list-number, ".") "."; padding-right: 0.5rem; position: absolute; transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

:is(.dark .markdown ol > li)::before { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.markdown ul { display: flex; flex-direction: column; padding-left: 0px; }

.markdown ul > li { display: block; margin: 0px; min-height: 28px; }

.markdown ul > li::before { --tw-translate-x:-100%; content: "•"; font-size: 0.875rem; line-height: 1.25rem; padding-right: 0.5rem; position: absolute; transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.markdown ol li > p, .markdown ol li > pre, .markdown ul li > p, .markdown ul li > pre { margin: 0px; }

.markdown ol ol, .markdown ol ul, .markdown ul ol, .markdown ul ul { margin-bottom: 0px; margin-left: 1rem; margin-top: 0px; }

.markdown table { --tw-border-spacing-x:0px; --tw-border-spacing-y:0px; border-collapse: separate; border-spacing: var(--tw-border-spacing-x) var(--tw-border-spacing-y); width: 100%; }

.markdown th { background-color: rgba(236, 236, 241, 0.2); border-bottom-width: 1px; border-left-width: 1px; border-top-width: 1px; padding: 0.25rem 0.75rem; }

.markdown th:first-child { border-top-left-radius: 0.375rem; }

.markdown th:last-child { border-right-width: 1px; border-top-right-radius: 0.375rem; }

.markdown td { border-bottom-width: 1px; border-left-width: 1px; padding: 0.25rem 0.75rem; }

.markdown td:last-child { border-right-width: 1px; }

.markdown tbody tr:last-child td:first-child { border-bottom-left-radius: 0.375rem; }

.markdown tbody tr:last-child td:last-child { border-bottom-right-radius: 0.375rem; }

.markdown a { text-decoration-line: underline; text-underline-offset: 2px; }

.conversation-item-time::before { content: attr(data-time); }

button.scroll-convo { display: none; }

@-webkit-keyframes blink { 
  100% { visibility: hidden; }
}

@keyframes blink { 
  100% { visibility: hidden; }
}

.animate-flash { animation: 2s steps(60, start) 0s 1 normal none running flash; }

@-webkit-keyframes flash { 
  0% { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.4); }
}

@keyframes flash { 
  0% { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.4); }
}

.result-streaming > :not(ol):not(ul):not(pre):last-child::after, .result-streaming > ol:last-child li:last-child::after, .result-streaming > pre:last-child code::after, .result-streaming > ul:last-child li:last-child::after { animation: 1s steps(5, start) 0s infinite normal none running blink; content: "▋"; margin-left: 0.25rem; vertical-align: baseline; }

@-webkit-keyframes toast-open { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateY(-100%); }
  100% { transform: translateY(0px); }
}

@keyframes toast-open { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateY(-100%); }
  100% { transform: translateY(0px); }
}

@-webkit-keyframes toast-close { 
  0% { opacity: 1; }
  100% { opacity: 0; }
}

@keyframes toast-close { 
  0% { opacity: 1; }
  100% { opacity: 0; }
}

button[data-state="closed"] .toggle-item-button-closed, button[data-state="open"] .toggle-item-button-open { display: none; }

.toast-root { align-items: center; display: flex; flex-direction: column; height: 0px; transition: all 0.24s cubic-bezier(0, 0, 0.2, 1) 0s; }

.toast-root[data-state="entered"], .toast-root[data-state="entering"] { animation: 0.24s cubic-bezier(0.175, 0.885, 0.32, 1.175) 0s 1 normal both running toast-open; }

.toast-root[data-state="exiting"] { animation: 0.12s cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 1, 1) 0s 1 normal both running toast-close; }

.toast-root .alert-root { box-shadow: rgba(67, 90, 111, 0.3) 0px 0px 1px, rgba(67, 90, 111, 0.3) 0px 5px 8px -4px; flex-shrink: 0; pointer-events: all; }

.interact-bounce { transition-duration: 0.15s; transition-property: transform, -webkit-transform; transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.4, 0, 0.2, 1); }

.interact-bounce:hover { --tw-scale-x:1.05; --tw-scale-y:1.05; }

.interact-bounce:active, .interact-bounce:hover { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.interact-bounce:active { --tw-scale-x:0.9; --tw-scale-y:0.9; }

.title { font-feature-settings: normal; font-family: Söhne, ui-sans-serif, system-ui, -apple-system, "Segoe UI", Roboto, Ubuntu, Cantarell, "Noto Sans", sans-serif, "Helvetica Neue", Arial, "Apple Color Emoji", "Segoe UI Emoji", "Segoe UI Symbol", "Noto Color Emoji"; font-variation-settings: normal; }

.font-circle { font-family: "Söhne Circle", system-ui, -apple-system, "Segoe UI", Roboto, Ubuntu, Cantarell, "Noto Sans", sans-serif; }

.dark .dark\:prose-invert { --tw-prose-body:var(--tw-prose-invert-body); --tw-prose-headings:var(--tw-prose-invert-headings); --tw-prose-lead:var(--tw-prose-invert-lead); --tw-prose-links:var(--tw-prose-invert-links); --tw-prose-bold:var(--tw-prose-invert-bold); --tw-prose-counters:var(--tw-prose-invert-counters); --tw-prose-bullets:var(--tw-prose-invert-bullets); --tw-prose-hr:var(--tw-prose-invert-hr); --tw-prose-quotes:var(--tw-prose-invert-quotes); --tw-prose-quote-borders:var(--tw-prose-invert-quote-borders); --tw-prose-captions:var(--tw-prose-invert-captions); --tw-prose-code:var(--tw-prose-invert-code); --tw-prose-pre-code:var(--tw-prose-invert-pre-code); --tw-prose-pre-bg:var(--tw-prose-invert-pre-bg); --tw-prose-th-borders:var(--tw-prose-invert-th-borders); --tw-prose-td-borders:var(--tw-prose-invert-td-borders); }

.placeholder\:text-gray-300::-webkit-input-placeholder { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.placeholder\:text-gray-300::placeholder { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.after\:content-\[\'\"\'\]::after, .before\:content-\[\'\"\'\]::before { --tw-content:"\""; content: var(--tw-content); }

.last\:mb-0:last-child { margin-bottom: 0px; }

.last\:mb-2:last-child { margin-bottom: 0.5rem; }

.last\:border-0:last-child { border-width: 0px; }

.last\:pr-0:last-child { padding-right: 0px; }

.last-of-type\:border-b-0:last-of-type { border-bottom-width: 0px; }

.checked\:border-blue-600:checked { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(37,99,235,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.checked\:bg-blue-600:checked { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(37,99,235,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.empty\:hidden:empty { display: none; }

.focus-within\:z-10[focus-within] { z-index: 10; }

.focus-within\:z-10:focus-within { z-index: 10; }

.focus-within\:border-indigo-600[focus-within] { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(79,70,229,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus-within\:border-indigo-600:focus-within { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(79,70,229,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus-within\:ring-1[focus-within] { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(1px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.focus-within\:ring-1:focus-within { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(1px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.focus-within\:ring-indigo-600[focus-within] { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(79,70,229,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.focus-within\:ring-indigo-600:focus-within { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(79,70,229,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.hover\:border-black\/10:hover { border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1); }

.hover\:border-gray-300:hover { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.hover\:border-gray-700:hover { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.hover\:\!bg-gray-50:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1 !important; background-color: rgba(247,247,248,var(--tw-bg-opacity)) !important; }

.hover\:bg-\[\#0000FF\]:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(0,0,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-\[\#2A2B32\]:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(42,43,50,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-black:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(0,0,0,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-black\/10:hover { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1); }

.hover\:bg-black\/5:hover { background-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.05); }

.hover\:bg-brand-purple:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-gray-100:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-gray-200:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-gray-300:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-gray-50:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(247,247,248,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-gray-50\/50:hover { background-color: rgba(247, 247, 248, 0.5); }

.hover\:bg-gray-500\/10:hover { background-color: rgba(141, 141, 160, 0.1); }

.hover\:bg-gray-700:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-gray-800:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-green-100:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(210,244,211,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.hover\:bg-white\/40:hover { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.4); }

.hover\:pr-14:hover { padding-right: 3.5rem; }

.hover\:pr-4:hover { padding-right: 1rem; }

.hover\:text-black\/50:hover { color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.5); }

.hover\:text-black\/70:hover { color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.7); }

.hover\:text-blue-600:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(37,99,235,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-gray-500:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-gray-600:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-gray-700:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-gray-800:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-gray-900:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-white:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.hover\:text-white\/40:hover { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.4); }

.hover\:\!opacity-100:hover { opacity: 1 !important; }

.hover\:opacity-100:hover { opacity: 1; }

.hover\:opacity-70:hover { opacity: 0.7; }

.hover\:opacity-75:hover { opacity: 0.75; }

.hover\:opacity-80:hover { opacity: 0.8; }

.hover\:brightness-90:hover { --tw-brightness:brightness(0.9); filter: var(--tw-blur) var(--tw-brightness) var(--tw-contrast) var(--tw-grayscale) var(--tw-hue-rotate) var(--tw-invert) var(--tw-saturate) var(--tw-sepia) var(--tw-drop-shadow); }

.hover\:delay-0:hover { transition-delay: 0s; }

.focus\:border-brand-green:focus, .focus\:border-green-500:focus { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus\:border-green-600:focus { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus\:border-orange-400:focus { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(255,128,82,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus\:border-red-500:focus { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus\:bg-gray-50:focus { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(247,247,248,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.focus\:bg-green-600:focus { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.focus\:text-white:focus { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.focus\:outline-none:focus { outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

.focus\:ring-0:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); }

.focus\:ring-0:focus, .focus\:ring-1:focus { box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.focus\:ring-1:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(1px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); }

.focus\:ring-2:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(2px + var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.focus\:ring-inset:focus { --tw-ring-inset:inset; }

.focus\:ring-gray-200:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.focus\:ring-gray-500:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.focus\:ring-green-500:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.focus\:ring-green-600:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.focus\:ring-white:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.focus\:ring-offset-2:focus { --tw-ring-offset-width:2px; }

.focus-visible\:border-blue-500.focus-visible { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(69,89,164,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus-visible\:border-blue-500:focus-visible { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(69,89,164,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.focus-visible\:ring-0.focus-visible { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.focus-visible\:ring-0:focus-visible { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.enabled\:bg-brand-purple:enabled { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.enabled\:hover\:text-gray-700:hover:enabled { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.disabled\:bottom-0:disabled { bottom: 0px; }

.disabled\:bottom-0\.5:disabled { bottom: 0.125rem; }

.disabled\:cursor-auto:disabled { cursor: auto; }

.disabled\:text-gray-300:disabled { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.disabled\:text-gray-400:disabled { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.disabled\:opacity-20:disabled { opacity: 0.2; }

.disabled\:opacity-40:disabled { opacity: 0.4; }

.disabled\:hover\:bg-gray-900:hover:disabled { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.group:hover .group-hover\:visible { visibility: visible; }

.group:hover .group-hover\:block { display: block; }

.group:hover .group-hover\:hidden { display: none; }

.group\/options:hover .group-hover\/options\:bg-transparent { background-color: transparent; }

.group\/toggle:hover .group-hover\/toggle\:bg-red-500 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.group:hover .group-hover\:bg-black { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(0,0,0,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.group:hover .group-hover\:bg-gray-100 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.group:hover .group-hover\:from-\[\#2A2B32\] { --tw-gradient-from:#2a2b32 var(--tw-gradient-from-position); --tw-gradient-to:rgba(42,43,50,0) var(--tw-gradient-to-position); --tw-gradient-stops:var(--tw-gradient-from),var(--tw-gradient-to); }

.group\/button:hover .group-hover\/button\:text-blue-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(69,89,164,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/button:hover .group-hover\/button\:text-brand-green { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/button:hover .group-hover\/button\:text-brand-purple { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/button:hover .group-hover\/button\:text-orange-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(224,108,43,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/button:hover .group-hover\/button\:text-red-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/option:hover .group-hover\/option\:\!text-brand-green { --tw-text-opacity:1 !important; color: rgba(25,195,125,var(--tw-text-opacity)) !important; }

.group\/option:hover .group-hover\/option\:\!text-brand-purple { --tw-text-opacity:1 !important; color: rgba(171,104,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)) !important; }

.group\/option:hover .group-hover\/option\:text-gray-100 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/option:hover .group-hover\/option\:text-gray-800 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/options:hover .group-hover\/options\:text-gray-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group\/options:hover .group-hover\/options\:opacity-0 { opacity: 0; }

.group:hover .group-hover\:opacity-100 { opacity: 1; }

.group:hover .group-hover\:opacity-50 { opacity: 0.5; }

.group-ui-open\:bg-gray-800.group[data-headlessui-state~="open"] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.group:where([data-headlessui-state~="open"]) .group-ui-open\:bg-gray-800 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.radix-disabled\:pointer-events-none[data-disabled] { pointer-events: none; }

.radix-disabled\:cursor-auto[data-disabled] { cursor: auto; }

.radix-disabled\:bg-transparent[data-disabled] { background-color: transparent; }

.radix-disabled\:text-gray-300[data-disabled] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.radix-disabled\:text-gray-500[data-disabled] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.radix-highlighted\:bg-gray-50[data-highlighted] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(247,247,248,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.radix-highlighted\:outline-none[data-highlighted] { outline: transparent solid 2px; outline-offset: 2px; }

.group[data-highlighted] .group-radix-highlighted\:bg-green-600 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.radix-state-active\:bg-gray-800[data-state="active"] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.radix-state-active\:text-gray-600[data-state="active"] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.radix-state-active\:text-white[data-state="active"] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.group[data-state="active"] .group-radix-state-active\:fill-white { fill: rgb(255, 255, 255); }

.radix-state-checked\:translate-x-\[19px\][data-state="checked"] { --tw-translate-x:19px; transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }

.radix-state-checked\:bg-green-600[data-state="checked"] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(16,163,127,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

@-webkit-keyframes hide { 
  0% { opacity: 1; }
  100% { opacity: 0; }
}

@keyframes hide { 
  0% { opacity: 1; }
  100% { opacity: 0; }
}

.radix-state-closed\:animate-hide[data-state="closed"] { animation: 0.1s ease-in 0s 1 normal none running hide; }

@-webkit-keyframes slideIn { 
  0% { transform: translateX(calc(100% + var(--viewport-padding))); }
  100% { transform: translateX(0px); }
}

@keyframes slideIn { 
  0% { transform: translateX(calc(100% + var(--viewport-padding))); }
  100% { transform: translateX(0px); }
}

.radix-state-open\:animate-slideIn[data-state="open"] { animation: 0.15s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideIn; }

.radix-state-open\:text-gray-600[data-state="open"] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.radix-side-bottom\:animate-slideDownAndFade[data-side="bottom"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideDownAndFade; }

.radix-side-bottom\:animate-slideUpAndFade[data-side="bottom"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideUpAndFade; }

.radix-side-left\:animate-slideLeftAndFade[data-side="left"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideLeftAndFade; }

@-webkit-keyframes slideRightAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateX(-2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateX(0px); }
}

.radix-side-left\:animate-slideRightAndFade[data-side="left"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideRightAndFade; }

@keyframes slideLeftAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateX(2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateX(0px); }
}

.radix-side-right\:animate-slideLeftAndFade[data-side="right"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideLeftAndFade; }

@keyframes slideRightAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateX(-2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateX(0px); }
}

.radix-side-right\:animate-slideRightAndFade[data-side="right"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideRightAndFade; }

@keyframes slideDownAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateY(-2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateY(0px); }
}

.radix-side-top\:animate-slideDownAndFade[data-side="top"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideDownAndFade; }

@keyframes slideUpAndFade { 
  0% { opacity: 0; transform: translateY(2px); }
  100% { opacity: 1; transform: translateY(0px); }
}

.radix-side-top\:animate-slideUpAndFade[data-side="top"] { animation: 0.4s cubic-bezier(0.16, 1, 0.3, 1) 0s 1 normal none running slideUpAndFade; }

@supports (min-height:100dvh) {
  .supports-\[min-height\:100dvh\]\:min-h-\[100dvh\] { min-height: 100dvh; }
}

.dark .dark\:border-\[\#4E4F60\] { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(78,79,96,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:border-black\/20 { border-color: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2); }

.dark .dark\:border-gray-300 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:border-gray-600 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:border-gray-700 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:border-gray-800 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:border-gray-900\/50 { border-color: rgba(32, 33, 35, 0.5); }

.dark .dark\:border-white { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:border-white\/10 { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.1); }

.dark .dark\:border-white\/20 { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.2); }

.dark .dark\:border-white\/30 { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.298); }

.dark .dark\:bg-\[\#272832\] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(39,40,50,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-\[\#444654\] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(68,70,84,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-\[rgba\(255\,255\,255\,0\.15\)\] { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.15); }

.dark .dark\:bg-black { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(0,0,0,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-50 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(247,247,248,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-500 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-600 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-700 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-800 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-800\/30 { background-color: rgba(52, 53, 65, 0.3); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-800\/90 { background-color: rgba(52, 53, 65, 0.9); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-900 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-gray-950 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(5,5,9,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-red-200 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(254,202,202,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-transparent { background-color: transparent; }

.dark .dark\:bg-white { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:bg-white\/10 { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.1); }

.dark .dark\:bg-white\/5 { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.05); }

.dark .dark\:from-gray-700 { --tw-gradient-from:#40414f var(--tw-gradient-from-position); --tw-gradient-to:rgba(64,65,79,0) var(--tw-gradient-to-position); --tw-gradient-stops:var(--tw-gradient-from),var(--tw-gradient-to); }

.dark .dark\:fill-gray-500 { fill: rgb(142, 142, 160); }

.dark .dark\:text-\[\#D292FF\] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(210,146,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-blue-200 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(191,219,254,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-blue-400 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(58,136,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-blue-600 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(37,99,235,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-100 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-200 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-300 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-400 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-600 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-700 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-gray-900 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-red-500 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-red-800 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(153,27,27,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-white { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:text-white\/60 { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.6); }

.dark .dark\:text-white\/70 { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.698); }

.dark .dark\:opacity-100 { opacity: 1; }

.dark .dark\:shadow-xs { --tw-shadow:0 0 15px rgba(0,0,0,0.1); --tw-shadow-colored:0 0 15px var(--tw-shadow-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-ring-shadow,0 0 transparent),var(--tw-shadow); }

.dark .dark\:ring-white\/20 { --tw-ring-color:hsla(0,0%,100%,0.2); }

.dark .dark\:last\:border-0:last-child { border-width: 0px; }

.dark .dark\:hover\:border-gray-600:hover { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:border-white\/10:hover { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.1); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:\!bg-gray-700:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1 !important; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)) !important; }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-\[\#2E2F33\]:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(46,47,51,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-\[\#494A54\]:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(73,74,84,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-200:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-500\/10:hover { background-color: rgba(141, 141, 160, 0.1); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-600:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-700:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-700\/50:hover { background-color: rgba(64, 65, 79, 0.5); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-800:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-gray-900:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:bg-white\/20:hover { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.2); }

:is(.dark .hover\:dark\:bg-gray-700):hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

:is(.dark .hover\:dark\:bg-white\/10):hover { background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.1); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:text-blue-600:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(37,99,235,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:text-gray-100:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:text-gray-200:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:text-gray-400:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:text-white:hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:hover\:text-white\/50:hover { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.5); }

:is(.dark .hover\:dark\:text-gray-100):hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

:is(.dark .hover\:dark\:text-gray-300):hover { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:focus\:border-white:focus { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:focus\:bg-gray-800:focus { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(52,53,65,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

:is(.dark .focus\:dark\:bg-gray-700):focus { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:focus\:ring-gray-600:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:focus\:ring-white:focus { --tw-ring-opacity:1; --tw-ring-color:rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-ring-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:focus-visible\:border-blue-500.focus-visible { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(69,89,164,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:focus-visible\:border-blue-500:focus-visible { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(69,89,164,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

:is(.dark .enabled\:dark\:hover\:text-gray-400:hover):enabled { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:disabled\:text-gray-400:disabled { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:disabled\:hover\:bg-transparent:hover:disabled { background-color: transparent; }

.dark .dark\:disabled\:hover\:bg-white:hover:disabled { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

:is(.dark .disabled\:dark\:hover\:text-gray-400:hover):disabled { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .group:hover .dark\:group-hover\:bg-gray-700 { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .group\/option:hover .dark\:group-hover\/option\:text-gray-100 { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-disabled\:bg-transparent[data-disabled] { background-color: transparent; }

.dark .dark\:radix-disabled\:text-gray-500[data-disabled] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(142,142,160,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-disabled\:text-gray-600[data-disabled] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(86,88,105,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-highlighted\:bg-\[\#2E2F33\][data-highlighted] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(46,47,51,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-highlighted\:bg-gray-700[data-highlighted] { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-highlighted\:hover\:bg-\[\#2E2F33\][data-highlighted]:hover { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(46,47,51,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-state-active\:text-white[data-state="active"] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(255,255,255,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.dark .dark\:radix-state-open\:text-gray-400[data-state="open"] { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(172,172,190,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

@media not all and (min-width: 1024px) {
  .max-lg\:justify-center { justify-content: center; }
}

@media (max-width: 370px) {
  .max-\[370px\]\:hidden { display: none; }
}

@media (min-width: 640px) {
  .sm\:order-1 { order: 1; }
  .sm\:order-2 { order: 2; }
  .sm\:mx-1 { margin-left: 0.25rem; margin-right: 0.25rem; }
  .sm\:mb-0 { margin-bottom: 0px; }
  .sm\:mb-0\.5 { margin-bottom: 0.125rem; }
  .sm\:mb-16 { margin-bottom: 4rem; }
  .sm\:mb-2 { margin-bottom: 0.5rem; }
  .sm\:ml-0 { margin-left: 0px; }
  .sm\:mt-0 { margin-top: 0px; }
  .sm\:mt-16 { margin-top: 4rem; }
  .sm\:mt-4 { margin-top: 1rem; }
  .sm\:mt-6 { margin-top: 1.5rem; }
  .sm\:mt-\[20vh\] { margin-top: 20vh; }
  .sm\:mt-\[6vh\] { margin-top: 6vh; }
  .sm\:block { display: block; }
  .sm\:flex { display: flex; }
  .sm\:h-10 { height: 2.5rem; }
  .sm\:h-5 { height: 1.25rem; }
  .sm\:w-10 { width: 2.5rem; }
  .sm\:w-5 { width: 1.25rem; }
  .sm\:w-\[312px\] { width: 312px; }
  .sm\:w-\[calc\(\(100\%-12px\)\/2\)\] { width: calc(50% - 6px); }
  .sm\:w-auto { width: auto; }
  .sm\:min-w-\[148px\] { min-width: 148px; }
  .sm\:min-w-\[312px\] { min-width: 312px; }
  .sm\:min-w-\[420px\] { min-width: 420px; }
  .sm\:max-w-lg { max-width: 32rem; }
  .sm\:max-w-md { max-width: 28rem; }
  .sm\:grid-cols-2 { grid-template-columns: repeat(2, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }
  .sm\:grid-rows-2 { grid-template-rows: repeat(2, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }
  .sm\:flex-row { flex-direction: row; }
  .sm\:flex-row-reverse { flex-direction: row-reverse; }
  .sm\:items-center { align-items: center; }
  .sm\:justify-center { justify-content: center; }
  .sm\:gap-3 { gap: 0.75rem; }
  .sm\:rounded-2xl { border-radius: 1rem; }
  .sm\:border-r { border-right-width: 1px; }
  .sm\:border-t-0 { border-top-width: 0px; }
  .sm\:p-0 { padding: 0px; }
  .sm\:p-2 { padding: 0.5rem; }
  .sm\:p-3 { padding: 0.75rem; }
  .sm\:p-4 { padding: 1rem; }
  .sm\:p-6 { padding: 1.5rem; }
  .sm\:px-0 { padding-left: 0px; padding-right: 0px; }
  .sm\:px-14 { padding-left: 3.5rem; padding-right: 3.5rem; }
  .sm\:px-2 { padding-left: 0.5rem; padding-right: 0.5rem; }
  .sm\:px-4 { padding-left: 1rem; padding-right: 1rem; }
  .sm\:px-6 { padding-left: 1.5rem; padding-right: 1.5rem; }
  .sm\:pb-0 { padding-bottom: 0px; }
  .sm\:pb-1 { padding-bottom: 0.25rem; }
  .sm\:pb-2 { padding-bottom: 0.5rem; }
  .sm\:pb-6 { padding-bottom: 1.5rem; }
  .sm\:pl-3 { padding-left: 0.75rem; }
  .sm\:pt-4 { padding-top: 1rem; }
  .sm\:pt-8 { padding-top: 2rem; }
  .sm\:text-left { text-align: left; }
  .sm\:text-4xl { font-size: 2.25rem; line-height: 2.5rem; }
  .sm\:text-base { font-size: 1rem; line-height: 1.5rem; }
  .sm\:text-sm { font-size: 0.875rem; line-height: 1.25rem; }
  .sm\:duration-300 { transition-duration: 0.3s; }
  .sm\:duration-500 { transition-duration: 0.5s; }
}

@media (min-width: 768px) {
  .md\:visible { visibility: visible; }
  .md\:invisible { visibility: hidden; }
  .md\:static { position: static; }
  .md\:absolute { position: absolute; }
  .md\:bottom-3 { bottom: 0.75rem; }
  .md\:bottom-3\.5 { bottom: 0.875rem; }
  .md\:bottom-4 { bottom: 1rem; }
  .md\:bottom-\[180px\] { bottom: 180px; }
  .md\:left-1\/2 { left: 50%; }
  .md\:left-4 { left: 1rem; }
  .md\:right-3 { right: 0.75rem; }
  .md\:top-\[22px\] { top: 22px; }
  .md\:m-0 { margin: 0px; }
  .md\:m-auto { margin: auto; }
  .md\:mx-4 { margin-left: 1rem; margin-right: 1rem; }
  .md\:mb-0 { margin-bottom: 0px; }
  .md\:mb-3 { margin-bottom: 0.75rem; }
  .md\:mb-4 { margin-bottom: 1rem; }
  .md\:mb-auto { margin-bottom: auto; }
  .md\:mt-0 { margin-top: 0px; }
  .md\:inline-block { display: inline-block; }
  .md\:flex { display: flex; }
  .md\:grid { display: grid; }
  .md\:hidden { display: none; }
  .md\:h-48 { height: 12rem; }
  .md\:h-full { height: 100%; }
  .md\:min-h-\[300px\] { min-height: 300px; }
  .md\:w-1\/2 { width: 50%; }
  .md\:w-\[100\%\] { width: 100%; }
  .md\:w-\[250px\] { width: 250px; }
  .md\:w-\[672px\] { width: 672px; }
  .md\:w-\[calc\(100\%-\.5rem\)\] { width: calc(100% - 0.5rem); }
  .md\:w-auto { width: auto; }
  .md\:w-full { width: 100%; }
  .md\:min-w-\[672px\] { min-width: 672px; }
  .md\:max-w-2xl { max-width: 42rem; }
  .md\:max-w-3xl { max-width: 48rem; }
  .md\:max-w-\[390px\] { max-width: 390px; }
  .md\:max-w-\[672px\] { max-width: 672px; }
  .md\:max-w-\[680px\] { max-width: 680px; }
  .md\:max-w-none { max-width: none; }
  .md\:max-w-xl { max-width: 36rem; }
  .md\:-translate-x-1\/2 { --tw-translate-x:-50%; transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }
  .md\:grid-cols-2 { grid-template-columns: repeat(2, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }
  .md\:grid-rows-\[minmax\(20px\,_1fr\)_auto_minmax\(20px\,_1fr\)\] { grid-template-rows: minmax(20px, 1fr) auto minmax(20px, 1fr); }
  .md\:flex-row { flex-direction: row; }
  .md\:flex-col { flex-direction: column; }
  .md\:items-end { align-items: flex-end; }
  .md\:justify-between { justify-content: space-between; }
  .md\:gap-2 { gap: 0.5rem; }
  .md\:gap-3 { gap: 0.75rem; }
  .md\:gap-6 { gap: 1.5rem; }
  .md\:overflow-visible { overflow: visible; }
  .md\:whitespace-normal { white-space: normal; }
  .md\:rounded-none { border-radius: 0px; }
  .md\:border { border-width: 1px; }
  .md\:border-l { border-left-width: 1px; }
  .md\:border-t-0 { border-top-width: 0px; }
  .md\:border-gray-100 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }
  .md\:border-transparent { border-color: transparent; }
  .md\:\!bg-transparent { background-color: transparent !important; }
  .md\:bg-vert-light-gradient { background-image: linear-gradient(rgba(255, 255, 255, 0) 13.94%, rgb(255, 255, 255) 54.73%); }
  .md\:p-2 { padding: 0.5rem; }
  .md\:px-6 { padding-left: 1.5rem; padding-right: 1.5rem; }
  .md\:px-8 { padding-left: 2rem; padding-right: 2rem; }
  .md\:px-\[60px\] { padding-left: 60px; padding-right: 60px; }
  .md\:py-2 { padding-bottom: 0.5rem; padding-top: 0.5rem; }
  .md\:py-2\.5 { padding-bottom: 0.625rem; padding-top: 0.625rem; }
  .md\:py-4 { padding-bottom: 1rem; padding-top: 1rem; }
  .md\:py-6 { padding-bottom: 1.5rem; padding-top: 1.5rem; }
  .md\:py-\[22px\] { padding-bottom: 22px; padding-top: 22px; }
  .md\:\!pt-0 { padding-top: 0px !important; }
  .md\:pb-5 { padding-bottom: 1.25rem; }
  .md\:pb-6 { padding-bottom: 1.5rem; }
  .md\:pb-\[8vh\] { padding-bottom: 8vh; }
  .md\:pl-0 { padding-left: 0px; }
  .md\:pl-2 { padding-left: 0.5rem; }
  .md\:pl-4 { padding-left: 1rem; }
  .md\:pl-6 { padding-left: 1.5rem; }
  .md\:pl-\[30px\] { padding-left: 30px; }
  .md\:pr-1 { padding-right: 0.25rem; }
  .md\:pr-1\.5 { padding-right: 0.375rem; }
  .md\:pr-12 { padding-right: 3rem; }
  .md\:pr-4 { padding-right: 1rem; }
  .md\:pr-8 { padding-right: 2rem; }
  .md\:pt-3 { padding-top: 0.75rem; }
  .md\:text-justify { text-align: justify; }
  .md\:text-\[32px\] { font-size: 32px; }
  .md\:text-\[40px\] { font-size: 40px; }
  .md\:text-sm { font-size: 0.875rem; line-height: 1.25rem; }
  .md\:leading-\[1\.25\] { line-height: 1.25; }
  .md\:opacity-0 { opacity: 0; }
  .md\:last\:mb-6:last-child { margin-bottom: 1.5rem; }
  .md\:disabled\:bottom-0:disabled { bottom: 0px; }
  .group:hover .md\:group-hover\:visible { visibility: visible; }
  .dark .md\:dark\:border-gray-700 { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(64,65,79,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }
  .dark .md\:dark\:border-transparent { border-color: transparent; }
  .dark .dark\:md\:bg-vert-dark-gradient { background-image: linear-gradient(rgba(53, 55, 64, 0), rgb(53, 55, 64) 58.85%); }
}

@media (min-width: 1024px) {
  .lg\:absolute { position: absolute; }
  .lg\:relative { position: relative; }
  .lg\:-left-3 { left: -0.75rem; }
  .lg\:-right-3 { right: -0.75rem; }
  .lg\:bottom-\[120px\] { bottom: 120px; }
  .lg\:left-auto { left: auto; }
  .lg\:right-0 { right: 0px; }
  .lg\:top-0 { top: 0px; }
  .lg\:top-1\/2 { top: 50%; }
  .lg\:mx-auto { margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; }
  .lg\:mb-0 { margin-bottom: 0px; }
  .lg\:mt-0 { margin-top: 0px; }
  .lg\:block { display: block; }
  .lg\:hidden { display: none; }
  .lg\:w-1\/3 { width: 33.3333%; }
  .lg\:w-3\/5 { width: 60%; }
  .lg\:w-\[300px\] { width: 300px; }
  .lg\:w-\[896px\] { width: 896px; }
  .lg\:w-\[calc\(\(100\%-24px\)\/3\)\] { width: calc(33.3333% - 8px); }
  .lg\:w-\[calc\(100\%-115px\)\] { width: calc(100% - 115px); }
  .lg\:w-auto { width: auto; }
  .lg\:min-w-\[896px\] { min-width: 896px; }
  .lg\:max-w-2xl { max-width: 42rem; }
  .lg\:max-w-3xl { max-width: 48rem; }
  .lg\:max-w-\[38rem\] { max-width: 38rem; }
  .lg\:max-w-\[796px\] { max-width: 796px; }
  .lg\:max-w-\[896px\] { max-width: 896px; }
  .lg\:max-w-none { max-width: none; }
  .lg\:max-w-sm { max-width: 24rem; }
  .lg\:max-w-xl { max-width: 36rem; }
  .lg\:-translate-x-full { --tw-translate-x:-100%; }
  .lg\:-translate-x-full, .lg\:-translate-y-1\/2 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }
  .lg\:-translate-y-1\/2 { --tw-translate-y:-50%; }
  .lg\:translate-x-full { --tw-translate-x:100%; }
  .lg\:translate-x-full, .lg\:translate-y-0 { transform: translate(var(--tw-translate-x),var(--tw-translate-y)) rotate(var(--tw-rotate)) skewX(var(--tw-skew-x)) skewY(var(--tw-skew-y)) scaleX(var(--tw-scale-x)) scaleY(var(--tw-scale-y)); }
  .lg\:translate-y-0 { --tw-translate-y:0px; }
  .lg\:grid-cols-3 { grid-template-columns: repeat(3, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }
  .lg\:grid-cols-\[60\%_40\%\] { grid-template-columns: 60% 40%; }
  .lg\:gap-1 { gap: 0.25rem; }
  .lg\:self-center { align-self: center; }
  .lg\:rounded-lg { border-radius: 0.5rem; }
  .lg\:rounded-none { border-radius: 0px; }
  .lg\:border { border-width: 1px; }
  .lg\:border-0 { border-width: 0px; }
  .lg\:p-0 { padding: 0px; }
  .lg\:p-6 { padding: 1.5rem; }
  .lg\:px-0 { padding-left: 0px; padding-right: 0px; }
  .lg\:px-14 { padding-left: 3.5rem; padding-right: 3.5rem; }
  .lg\:px-8 { padding-left: 2rem; padding-right: 2rem; }
  .lg\:pl-2 { padding-left: 0.5rem; }
  .lg\:pl-8 { padding-left: 2rem; }
  .lg\:pr-10 { padding-right: 2.5rem; }
  .lg\:pt-32 { padding-top: 8rem; }
  .lg\:text-left { text-align: left; }
  .lg\:text-\[22px\] { font-size: 22px; }
}

@media (min-width: 1280px) {
  .xl\:w-1\/4 { width: 25%; }
  .xl\:w-\[1024px\] { width: 1024px; }
  .xl\:w-\[350px\] { width: 350px; }
  .xl\:min-w-\[1024px\] { min-width: 1024px; }
  .xl\:max-w-3xl { max-width: 48rem; }
  .xl\:max-w-4xl { max-width: 56rem; }
  .xl\:max-w-6xl { max-width: 72rem; }
  .xl\:max-w-xl { max-width: 36rem; }
  .xl\:max-w-xs { max-width: 20rem; }
  .xl\:grid-cols-4 { grid-template-columns: repeat(4, minmax(0px, 1fr)); }
}

@media (min-width: 1536px) {
  .\32 xl\:w-\[400px\] { width: 400px; }
}

tr:last-child .\[tr\:last-child_\&\]\:border-b-0 { border-bottom-width: 0px; }

tr[data-disabled="true"] .\[tr\[data-disabled\=true\]_\&\]\:opacity-50 { opacity: 0.5; }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_AMS; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_AMS-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Caligraphic; font-style: normal; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Caligraphic-Bold.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Caligraphic; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Caligraphic-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Fraktur; font-style: normal; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Fraktur-Bold.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Fraktur; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Fraktur-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-style: normal; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Main-Bold.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-style: italic; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Main-BoldItalic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-style: italic; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Main-Italic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Main-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Math; font-style: italic; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Math-BoldItalic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Math; font-style: italic; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Math-Italic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; font-style: normal; font-weight: 700; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_SansSerif-Bold.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; font-style: italic; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_SansSerif-Italic.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_SansSerif-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Script; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Script-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Size1; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Size1-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Size2; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Size2-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Size3; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Size3-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Size4; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Size4-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

@font-face { font-family: KaTeX_Typewriter; font-style: normal; font-weight: 400; src: url("https://cdn.openai.com/common/fonts/katex/KaTeX_Typewriter-Regular.woff2") format("woff2"); }

.katex { font: 1.21em / 1.2 KaTeX_Main, "Times New Roman", serif; text-indent: 0px; text-rendering: auto; }

.katex * { border-color: currentcolor; forced-color-adjust: none !important; }

.katex .katex-version::after { content: "0.16.0"; }

.katex .katex-mathml { clip: rect(1px, 1px, 1px, 1px); border: 0px; height: 1px; overflow: hidden; padding: 0px; position: absolute; width: 1px; }

.katex .katex-html > .newline { display: block; }

.katex .base { position: relative; white-space: nowrap; width: min-content; }

.katex .base, .katex .strut { display: inline-block; }

.katex .textbf { font-weight: 700; }

.katex .textit { font-style: italic; }

.katex .textrm { font-family: KaTeX_Main; }

.katex .textsf { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; }

.katex .texttt { font-family: KaTeX_Typewriter; }

.katex .mathnormal { font-family: KaTeX_Math; font-style: italic; }

.katex .mathit { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-style: italic; }

.katex .mathrm { font-style: normal; }

.katex .mathbf { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-weight: 700; }

.katex .boldsymbol { font-family: KaTeX_Math; font-style: italic; font-weight: 700; }

.katex .amsrm, .katex .mathbb, .katex .textbb { font-family: KaTeX_AMS; }

.katex .mathcal { font-family: KaTeX_Caligraphic; }

.katex .mathfrak, .katex .textfrak { font-family: KaTeX_Fraktur; }

.katex .mathtt { font-family: KaTeX_Typewriter; }

.katex .mathscr, .katex .textscr { font-family: KaTeX_Script; }

.katex .mathsf, .katex .textsf { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; }

.katex .mathboldsf, .katex .textboldsf { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; font-weight: 700; }

.katex .mathitsf, .katex .textitsf { font-family: KaTeX_SansSerif; font-style: italic; }

.katex .mainrm { font-family: KaTeX_Main; font-style: normal; }

.katex .vlist-t { border-collapse: collapse; display: inline-table; table-layout: fixed; }

.katex .vlist-r { display: table-row; }

.katex .vlist { display: table-cell; position: relative; vertical-align: bottom; }

.katex .vlist > span { display: block; height: 0px; position: relative; }

.katex .vlist > span > span { display: inline-block; }

.katex .vlist > span > .pstrut { overflow: hidden; width: 0px; }

.katex .vlist-t2 { margin-right: -2px; }

.katex .vlist-s { display: table-cell; font-size: 1px; min-width: 2px; vertical-align: bottom; width: 2px; }

.katex .vbox { align-items: baseline; display: inline-flex; flex-direction: column; }

.katex .hbox { width: 100%; }

.katex .hbox, .katex .thinbox { display: inline-flex; flex-direction: row; }

.katex .thinbox { max-width: 0px; width: 0px; }

.katex .msupsub { text-align: left; }

.katex .mfrac > span > span { text-align: center; }

.katex .mfrac .frac-line { border-bottom-style: solid; display: inline-block; width: 100%; }

.katex .hdashline, .katex .hline, .katex .mfrac .frac-line, .katex .overline .overline-line, .katex .rule, .katex .underline .underline-line { min-height: 1px; }

.katex .mspace { display: inline-block; }

.katex .clap, .katex .llap, .katex .rlap { position: relative; width: 0px; }

.katex .clap > .inner, .katex .llap > .inner, .katex .rlap > .inner { position: absolute; }

.katex .clap > .fix, .katex .llap > .fix, .katex .rlap > .fix { display: inline-block; }

.katex .llap > .inner { right: 0px; }

.katex .clap > .inner, .katex .rlap > .inner { left: 0px; }

.katex .clap > .inner > span { margin-left: -50%; margin-right: 50%; }

.katex .rule { border: 0px solid; display: inline-block; position: relative; }

.katex .hline, .katex .overline .overline-line, .katex .underline .underline-line { border-bottom-style: solid; display: inline-block; width: 100%; }

.katex .hdashline { border-bottom-style: dashed; display: inline-block; width: 100%; }

.katex .sqrt > .root { margin-left: 0.277778em; margin-right: -0.555556em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size1 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size2 { font-size: 1.2em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size3 { font-size: 1.4em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size4 { font-size: 1.6em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size5 { font-size: 1.8em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size6 { font-size: 2em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size7 { font-size: 2.4em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size8 { font-size: 2.88em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size9 { font-size: 3.456em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size10 { font-size: 4.148em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size1.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size1.size11 { font-size: 4.976em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size1 { font-size: 0.833333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size2 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size3 { font-size: 1.16667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size4 { font-size: 1.33333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size5 { font-size: 1.5em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size6 { font-size: 1.66667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size7 { font-size: 2em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size8 { font-size: 2.4em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size9 { font-size: 2.88em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size10 { font-size: 3.45667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size2.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size2.size11 { font-size: 4.14667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size1 { font-size: 0.714286em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size2 { font-size: 0.857143em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size3 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size4 { font-size: 1.14286em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size5 { font-size: 1.28571em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size6 { font-size: 1.42857em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size7 { font-size: 1.71429em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size8 { font-size: 2.05714em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size9 { font-size: 2.46857em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size10 { font-size: 2.96286em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size3.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size3.size11 { font-size: 3.55429em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size1 { font-size: 0.625em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size2 { font-size: 0.75em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size3 { font-size: 0.875em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size4 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size5 { font-size: 1.125em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size6 { font-size: 1.25em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size7 { font-size: 1.5em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size8 { font-size: 1.8em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size9 { font-size: 2.16em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size10 { font-size: 2.5925em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size4.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size4.size11 { font-size: 3.11em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size1 { font-size: 0.555556em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size2 { font-size: 0.666667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size3 { font-size: 0.777778em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size4 { font-size: 0.888889em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size5 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size6 { font-size: 1.11111em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size7 { font-size: 1.33333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size8 { font-size: 1.6em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size9 { font-size: 1.92em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size10 { font-size: 2.30444em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size5.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size5.size11 { font-size: 2.76444em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size1 { font-size: 0.5em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size2 { font-size: 0.6em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size3 { font-size: 0.7em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size4 { font-size: 0.8em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size5 { font-size: 0.9em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size6 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size7 { font-size: 1.2em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size8 { font-size: 1.44em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size9 { font-size: 1.728em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size10 { font-size: 2.074em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size6.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size6.size11 { font-size: 2.488em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size1 { font-size: 0.416667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size2 { font-size: 0.5em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size3 { font-size: 0.583333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size4 { font-size: 0.666667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size5 { font-size: 0.75em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size6 { font-size: 0.833333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size7 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size8 { font-size: 1.2em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size9 { font-size: 1.44em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size10 { font-size: 1.72833em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size7.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size7.size11 { font-size: 2.07333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size1 { font-size: 0.347222em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size2 { font-size: 0.416667em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size3 { font-size: 0.486111em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size4 { font-size: 0.555556em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size5 { font-size: 0.625em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size6 { font-size: 0.694444em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size7 { font-size: 0.833333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size8 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size9 { font-size: 1.2em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size10 { font-size: 1.44028em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size8.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size8.size11 { font-size: 1.72778em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size1 { font-size: 0.289352em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size2 { font-size: 0.347222em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size3 { font-size: 0.405093em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size4 { font-size: 0.462963em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size5 { font-size: 0.520833em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size6 { font-size: 0.578704em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size7 { font-size: 0.694444em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size8 { font-size: 0.833333em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size9 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size10 { font-size: 1.20023em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size9.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size9.size11 { font-size: 1.43981em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size1 { font-size: 0.24108em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size2 { font-size: 0.289296em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size3 { font-size: 0.337512em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size4 { font-size: 0.385728em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size5 { font-size: 0.433944em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size6 { font-size: 0.48216em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size7 { font-size: 0.578592em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size8 { font-size: 0.694311em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size9 { font-size: 0.833173em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size10 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size10.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size10.size11 { font-size: 1.19961em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size1, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size1 { font-size: 0.200965em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size2, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size2 { font-size: 0.241158em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size3, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size3 { font-size: 0.28135em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size4, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size4 { font-size: 0.321543em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size5, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size5 { font-size: 0.361736em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size6, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size6 { font-size: 0.401929em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size7, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size7 { font-size: 0.482315em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size8, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size8 { font-size: 0.578778em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size9, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size9 { font-size: 0.694534em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size10, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size10 { font-size: 0.833601em; }

.katex .fontsize-ensurer.reset-size11.size11, .katex .sizing.reset-size11.size11 { font-size: 1em; }

.katex .delimsizing.size1 { font-family: KaTeX_Size1; }

.katex .delimsizing.size2 { font-family: KaTeX_Size2; }

.katex .delimsizing.size3 { font-family: KaTeX_Size3; }

.katex .delimsizing.size4 { font-family: KaTeX_Size4; }

.katex .delimsizing.mult .delim-size1 > span { font-family: KaTeX_Size1; }

.katex .delimsizing.mult .delim-size4 > span { font-family: KaTeX_Size4; }

.katex .nulldelimiter { display: inline-block; width: 0.12em; }

.katex .delimcenter, .katex .op-symbol { position: relative; }

.katex .op-symbol.small-op { font-family: KaTeX_Size1; }

.katex .op-symbol.large-op { font-family: KaTeX_Size2; }

.katex .accent > .vlist-t, .katex .op-limits > .vlist-t { text-align: center; }

.katex .accent .accent-body { position: relative; }

.katex .accent .accent-body:not(.accent-full) { width: 0px; }

.katex .overlay { display: block; }

.katex .mtable .vertical-separator { display: inline-block; min-width: 1px; }

.katex .mtable .arraycolsep { display: inline-block; }

.katex .mtable .col-align-c > .vlist-t { text-align: center; }

.katex .mtable .col-align-l > .vlist-t { text-align: left; }

.katex .mtable .col-align-r > .vlist-t { text-align: right; }

.katex .svg-align { text-align: left; }

.katex svg { fill: currentcolor; stroke: currentcolor; fill-rule: nonzero; fill-opacity: 1; stroke-width: 1; stroke-linecap: butt; stroke-linejoin: miter; stroke-miterlimit: 4; stroke-dasharray: none; stroke-dashoffset: 0; stroke-opacity: 1; display: block; height: inherit; position: absolute; width: 100%; }

.katex svg path { stroke: none; }

.katex img { border-style: none; max-height: none; max-width: none; min-height: 0px; min-width: 0px; }

.katex .stretchy { display: block; overflow: hidden; position: relative; width: 100%; }

.katex .stretchy::after, .katex .stretchy::before { content: ""; }

.katex .hide-tail { overflow: hidden; position: relative; width: 100%; }

.katex .halfarrow-left { left: 0px; overflow: hidden; position: absolute; width: 50.2%; }

.katex .halfarrow-right { overflow: hidden; position: absolute; right: 0px; width: 50.2%; }

.katex .brace-left { left: 0px; overflow: hidden; position: absolute; width: 25.1%; }

.katex .brace-center { left: 25%; overflow: hidden; position: absolute; width: 50%; }

.katex .brace-right { overflow: hidden; position: absolute; right: 0px; width: 25.1%; }

.katex .x-arrow-pad { padding: 0px 0.5em; }

.katex .cd-arrow-pad { padding: 0px 0.55556em 0px 0.27778em; }

.katex .mover, .katex .munder, .katex .x-arrow { text-align: center; }

.katex .boxpad { padding: 0px 0.3em; }

.katex .fbox, .katex .fcolorbox { border: 0.04em solid; box-sizing: border-box; }

.katex .cancel-pad { padding: 0px 0.2em; }

.katex .cancel-lap { margin-left: -0.2em; margin-right: -0.2em; }

.katex .sout { border-bottom-style: solid; border-bottom-width: 0.08em; }

.katex .angl { border-right: 0.049em solid; border-top: 0.049em solid; box-sizing: border-box; margin-right: 0.03889em; }

.katex .anglpad { padding: 0px 0.03889em; }

.katex .eqn-num::before { content: "(" counter(katexEqnNo) ")"; counter-increment: katexEqnNo 1; }

.katex .mml-eqn-num::before { content: "(" counter(mmlEqnNo) ")"; counter-increment: mmlEqnNo 1; }

.katex .mtr-glue { width: 50%; }

.katex .cd-vert-arrow { display: inline-block; position: relative; }

.katex .cd-label-left { display: inline-block; position: absolute; right: calc(50% + 0.3em); text-align: left; }

.katex .cd-label-right { display: inline-block; left: calc(50% + 0.3em); position: absolute; text-align: right; }

.katex-display { display: block; margin: 1em 0px; text-align: center; }

.katex-display > .katex { display: block; text-align: center; white-space: nowrap; }

.katex-display > .katex > .katex-html { display: block; position: relative; }

.katex-display > .katex > .katex-html > .tag { position: absolute; right: 0px; }

.katex-display.leqno > .katex > .katex-html > .tag { left: 0px; right: auto; }

.katex-display.fleqn > .katex { padding-left: 2em; text-align: left; }

body { counter-reset: katexEqnNo 0 mmlEqnNo 0; }

code, pre { font-family: "Söhne Mono", Monaco, "Andale Mono", "Ubuntu Mono", monospace !important; }

code[class="language-plaintext"] { white-space: pre-line; }

code.hljs, code[class*="language-"], pre[class*="language-"] { overflow-wrap: normal; background: none; color: rgb(255, 255, 255); hyphens: none; line-height: 1.5; tab-size: 4; text-align: left; white-space: pre; word-break: normal; word-spacing: normal; }

pre[class*="language-"] { border-radius: 0.3em; overflow: auto; }

:not(pre) > code.hljs, :not(pre) > code[class*="language-"] { border-radius: 0.3em; padding: 0.1em; white-space: normal; }

.hljs-comment { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.5); }

.hljs-meta { color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.6); }

.hljs-built_in, .hljs-class .hljs-title { color: rgb(233, 149, 12); }

.hljs-doctag, .hljs-formula, .hljs-keyword, .hljs-literal { color: rgb(46, 149, 211); }

.hljs-addition, .hljs-attribute, .hljs-meta-string, .hljs-regexp, .hljs-string { color: rgb(0, 166, 125); }

.hljs-attr, .hljs-number, .hljs-selector-attr, .hljs-selector-class, .hljs-selector-pseudo, .hljs-template-variable, .hljs-type, .hljs-variable { color: rgb(223, 48, 121); }

.hljs-bullet, .hljs-link, .hljs-selector-id, .hljs-symbol, .hljs-title { color: rgb(242, 44, 61); }

.token.cdata, .token.comment, .token.doctype, .token.prolog { color: rgb(169, 174, 193); }

.token.punctuation { color: rgb(254, 254, 254); }

.token.constant, .token.deleted, .token.property, .token.symbol, .token.tag { color: rgb(255, 160, 122); }

.token.boolean, .token.number { color: rgb(0, 224, 224); }

.token.attr-name, .token.builtin, .token.char, .token.inserted, .token.selector, .token.string { color: rgb(171, 227, 56); }

.language-css .token.string, .style .token.string, .token.entity, .token.operator, .token.url, .token.variable { color: rgb(0, 224, 224); }

.token.atrule, .token.attr-value, .token.function { color: gold; }

.token.keyword { color: rgb(0, 224, 224); }

.token.important, .token.regex { color: gold; }

.token.bold, .token.important { font-weight: 700; }

.token.italic { font-style: italic; }

.token.entity { cursor: help; }

@media screen and (-ms-high-contrast: active) {
  code[class*="language-"], pre[class*="language-"] { background: window; color: windowtext; }
  :not(pre) > code[class*="language-"], pre[class*="language-"] { background: window; }
  .token.important { background: highlight; color: window; font-weight: 400; }
  .token.atrule, .token.attr-value, .token.function, .token.keyword, .token.operator, .token.selector { font-weight: 700; }
  .token.attr-value, .token.comment, .token.doctype, .token.function, .token.keyword, .token.operator, .token.property, .token.string { color: highlight; }
  .token.attr-value, .token.url { font-weight: 400; }
}

.PopoverContent { z-index: 1000; }

.react-select-container input:focus { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); }

.react-select-container .react-select__control { --tw-border-opacity:1; align-items: flex-start; border-color: rgba(236,236,241,var(--tw-border-opacity)); border-radius: 0.5rem; font-size: 0.875rem; height: 192px; line-height: 1.25rem; min-height: 192px; overflow: auto; padding: 0.5rem; }

.react-select-container .react-select__control:hover { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.dark .react-select-container .react-select__control { --tw-bg-opacity:1; background-color: rgba(32,33,35,var(--tw-bg-opacity)); border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.1); }

:is(.dark .react-select-container .react-select__control):hover { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.2); }

.dark .react-select-container.react-select--invalid .react-select__control, .react-select-container.react-select--invalid .react-select__control { --tw-border-opacity:1; border-color: rgba(239,68,68,var(--tw-border-opacity)); }

.react-select-container .react-select__input-container, .react-select-container .react-select__placeholder { padding-left: 0.5rem; padding-right: 0.5rem; }

.dark .react-select-container .react-select__input-container { --tw-text-opacity:1; color: rgba(197,197,210,var(--tw-text-opacity)); }

.react-select-container .react-select__input { height: 2rem; }

.react-select-container .react-select__control--is-focused { --tw-ring-offset-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 var(--tw-ring-offset-width) var(--tw-ring-offset-color); --tw-ring-shadow:var(--tw-ring-inset) 0 0 0 calc(var(--tw-ring-offset-width)) var(--tw-ring-color); box-shadow: var(--tw-ring-offset-shadow),var(--tw-ring-shadow),var(--tw-shadow,0 0 transparent); --tw-border-opacity:1 !important; border-color: rgba(217,217,227,var(--tw-border-opacity)) !important; }

.dark .react-select-container .react-select__control--is-focused { border-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.2) !important; }

.react-select-container .react-select__value-container { padding: 0px; }

.react-select-container .react-select__indicators:empty { display: none; }

.react-select-container .react-select__multi-value { background-color: transparent; margin: 0px; }

.react-select-container .react-select__multi-value__label { padding: 0px; }

#intercom-container { display: none; }
------MultipartBoundary--k7kBrUpCOKLC5zhS3BxTLbZ2rJok5Is2SN2d3NIKjj----
Content-Type: text/html
Content-ID: 
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary


------MultipartBoundary--k7kBrUpCOKLC5zhS3BxTLbZ2rJok5Is2SN2d3NIKjj----
Content-Type: text/html
Content-ID: 
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary





------MultipartBoundary--k7kBrUpCOKLC5zhS3BxTLbZ2rJok5Is2SN2d3NIKjj----
Content-Type: text/html
Content-ID: 
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: https://tcr9i.chat.openai.com/v2/1.5.4/enforcement.cd12da708fe6cbe6e068918c38de2ad9.html#35536E1E-65B4-4D96-9D97-6ADB7EFF8147


------MultipartBoundary--k7kBrUpCOKLC5zhS3BxTLbZ2rJok5Is2SN2d3NIKjj----
Content-Type: text/css
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: cid:css-40db608d-1feb-4aa3-91f0-9373cfcde047@mhtml.blink

@charset "utf-8";

html, body { margin: 0px; padding: 0px; height: 100%; }

* { box-sizing: border-box; }

#app { height: 100%; overflow: hidden; }
------MultipartBoundary--k7kBrUpCOKLC5zhS3BxTLbZ2rJok5Is2SN2d3NIKjj----
Content-Type: text/css
Content-Transfer-Encoding: binary
Content-Location: cid:css-916c45f3-f46f-4b4b-b032-b17d95a06cb7@mhtml.blink

@charset "utf-8";

@keyframes spin { 
  0% { transform: rotate(0deg) translateZ(0px); }
  100% { transform: rotate(360deg) translateZ(0px); }
}

@keyframes fadeIn { 
  0% { opacity: 0; }
  100% { opacity: 1; }
}

.kXaXkDzIfSzLHRklX2r3 { position: fixed; top: 20px; right: 20px; width: 20px; height: 20px; z-index: 200; border: none; background-color: transparent; background-image: url("data:image/svg+xml;base64,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"); background-repeat: no-repeat; background-position: center center; background-size: contain; cursor: pointer; pointer-events: none; transform: scale(1); transition: transform 100ms ease-in-out 0s; visibility: hidden; opacity: 0; }

.kXaXkDzIfSzLHRklX2r3:hover { transform: scale(1.3); }

.kXaXkDzIfSzLHRklX2r3.active { pointer-events: inherit; visibility: visible; opacity: 1; transition: opacity 400ms ease-in-out 0s; }

.nMUBxApsE7lSELvJiiAA { position: fixed; inset: 0px; background-color: rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.8); z-index: -1; opacity: 0; transition: opacity 300ms linear 0s; pointer-events: none; }

.nMUBxApsE7lSELvJiiAA.active { opacity: 1; pointer-events: inherit; }

.lTLYGVw1ASsTZWg0vUbC { position: absolute; top: 50%; left: 50%; margin-left: -15px; margin-top: -15px; z-index: 1010; border-radius: 50%; width: 30px; height: 30px; border-width: 3px; border-style: solid; border-color: transparent transparent transparent rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.2); transform: translateZ(0px); box-sizing: border-box; }

.lTLYGVw1ASsTZWg0vUbC { animation: 500ms linear 0s infinite normal none running spin; }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k { transition: opacity 500ms ease 0s, transform 500ms ease 0s; opacity: 0; transform: scale(0.8); text-align: center; height: 100%; }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.active { opacity: 1; transform: scale(1); }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.challenge-enter { opacity: 0; transform: scale(0.8); }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.challenge-enter-active, .slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.challenge-enter-done { transform: scale(1); opacity: 1; }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.challenge-exit { transform: scale(1); opacity: 1; }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.challenge-exit-active, .slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.challenge-exit-done { transform: scale(0.8); opacity: 0; }

.slrEYyWESVLe_Cx3DM1k.dTcazKGGob_VbK_J853h { flex-direction: column; }

.dTcazKGGob_VbK_J853h { display: flex; align-items: center; justify-content: center; }
------MultipartBoundary--k7kBrUpCOKLC5zhS3BxTLbZ2rJok5Is2SN2d3NIKjj------
