Sociolinguistics and Second 
Language Acquisition

Sociolinguistics and Second Language Acquisition is a comprehensive textbook 
that bridges the gap between the fields of sociolinguistics and second language 
acquisition, exploring the variety of ways in which social context influences 
the acquisition of a second language. It reviews basic principles of sociolinguistics, provides a unified account of the multiple theoretical approaches to 
social factors in second languages, summarizes the growing body of empirical 
research, including examples of findings from a wide range of second languages, and discusses the application of sociolinguistics to the second language 
classroom. Written for an audience that extends beyond specialists in the field, 
complete with summary tables, additional readings, discussion questions, and 
application activities throughout, this volume will serve as the ideal textbook 
for advanced undergraduate or graduate students of second language acquisition and instruction, and will also be of interest to researchers in the fields of 
second language acquisition, second language instruction, and sociolinguistics.
Kimberly L. Geeslin is Professor at Indiana University. She is the editor of
The Handbook of Spanish Second Language Acquisition (2013) and has published research articles in Studies in Second Language Acquisition and Language 
Learning.
Avizia Yim Long is a doctoral candidate in Hispanic linguistics at Indiana University. Her research interests include variationist second language acquisition—
with particular attention given to Korean-speaking learners of Spanish—and 
sociolinguistics.
This page intentionally left blank
 Sociolinguistics and 
Second Language 
Acquisition 
 Learning to Use Language 
in Context 
 Kimberly L. Geeslin 
 with Avizia Yim Long 
First published 2014
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2014 Taylor & Francis
The right of Kimberly L. Geeslin to be identified as author of this work 
has been asserted by her in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the 
publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent 
to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Geeslin, Kimberly L.
Sociolinguistics and second language acquisition : learning to use language in
context / Kimberly L. Geeslin, with Avizia Yim Long, Indiana University.
 pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Second language acquisition—Study and teaching. 2. Language and 
languages—Variation. 3. Sociolinguistics—Study and teaching. I. Long, 
Avizia Yim. II. Title. 
P118.2.G44 2014
418.0071—dc23
2013047559
ISBN: 978-0-415-52947-1 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-415-52948-8 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-0-203-11783-5 (ebk)
Typeset in MinionPro
by Apex CoVantage, LLC
This project is dedicated to teachers: Those who gave me a strong 
foundation, those students who have taught me so much, those 
who give me comfort because I know my children are in good 
hands, and those in my personal life who teach me daily.
Kimberly L. Geeslin
To my teachers, mentors, colleagues, family, and friends. Above 
all I dedicate this to Kim Geeslin, a wonderful teacher, mentor, 
colleague, “mother hen,” and friend.
Avizia Y. Long
This page intentionally left blank
Contents
List of Tables xiii
List of Figures xv
List of Examples xvii
Preface xix
Acknowledgments xxiii
Section I Principles of Sociolinguistic Variation and 
Second Language Acquisition 1
1 What Sociolinguistics Means for the Second Language Learner 3
Definitions of Communicative Competence 5
Sociolinguistics and Language Comprehension 7
Sociolinguistics and Language Production 10
Sociolinguistics and Learner Identities 11
Central Issues in Second Language Acquisition 12
What Is Input and What Does It Do? 12
How Can Learner Grammars Be Characterized? 13
How Does Acquisition Proceed? 15
What Is Linguistic Knowledge and Where Do We Store It? 18
What Role Does the First Language Play? 19
Can Metalinguistic Knowledge Help? 20
Social Factors in SLA: Now That We Know That They 
Matter, What to Do? 23
Reading Beyond the Text 25
Comprehension and Application 25
viii Contents
2 Introduction to Sociolinguistic Variation 27
What Is Sociolinguistic Variation? 27
Key Concepts in Sociolinguistics 29
Ways to Think About Variation 29
Ways to Study Variation 32
Summary 36
How Do Languages Vary? 36
Case 1. Phonological Variation in the Arabic of Saudi Arabia 36
Case 2. Morphological Variation in Spanish 38
Case 3. Syntactic Variation in Chinese 40
Case 4. Pragmatic Variation in Spanish 42
Case 5. Lexical Variation in American English 44
Conclusion 45
Reading Beyond the Text 46
Comprehension and Application 46
3 The Role of Social Characteristics in Language Variation 48
What Is Individual Variation? 48
How Do We Study Variation in Groups of Speakers? 49
The Role of Social Characteristics in Language Change 53
How Are Social Characteristics Reflected in Language Variation? 54
Case 1. The Role of Gender in Language Variation 54
Case 2. The Role of Age in Language Variation 57
Case 3. The Role of Ethnicity in Language Variation 61
Case 4. The Role of Socioeconomic Factors in 
Language Variation 63
Case 5. The Role of Level of Education in Language Variation 65
Case 6. The Role of Discourse Context in Language Variation 67
How Does Social Variation Relate to Communicative Competence? 70
Reading Beyond the Text 71
Comprehension and Application 71
Section II Approaches to the Study of Sociolinguistics 
and Second Language Acquisition 75
4 Social Approaches to Second Language Acquisition 77
What Is a Social Approach to Second Language Acquisition? 77
Examples of Social Approaches to Second Language Acquisition 79
The Acculturation Model 79
Accommodation Theory 83
Sociocultural Theory 85
Identity Approach 89
Contents ix
Language Socialization Approach 92
Conversation-Analytic Approach 94
Sociocognitive Approach 99
Summary 103
Evaluation of Social Approaches 103
Reading Beyond the Text 106
Comprehension and Application 106
5 Cognitive Approaches to the Acquisition of 
Sociolinguistic Competence 109
Examples of Cognitive Approaches to Second 
Language Acquisition 109
Optimality Theory 110
Connectionism 116
Usage-Based Models 122
Systems-Based Theories 128
Summary 133
Evaluation of Cognitive Approaches 134
Reading Beyond the Text 135
Comprehension and Application 135
6 Variationist Approaches to the Acquisition of 
Sociolinguistic Competence 138
Probabilistic Models of Variation 139
Tools of Elicitation and Analysis 140
Predictive Factors 149
Models of Second Language Variation 152
Level I Factors 155
Level II Factors 157
Level III Factors 158
Summary of Preston’s (1996) Model 159
Additional Theoretical Considerations in Second 
Language Variation 160
Evaluation of Variationist Approaches 161
Reading Beyond the Text 163
Comprehension and Application 163
7	Empirical Research on the Acquisition of 
Sociolinguistic Competence 166
Early Developments in Second Language Variation 167
Showing Development in Second Language 
Sociolinguistic Competence 171
x Contents
Research on Phonological Variation 191
The Nature of Near-Native Competence 193
Individual Differences 194
Multilingual Targets 195
Incorporating New Theoretical Insights: Lexical Effects 
and Frequency 195
Conclusion 197
Reading Beyond the Text 197
Comprehension and Application 198
8 The Role of Study Abroad on the Acquisition of 
Sociolinguistic Competence 200
Researching the Effects of Study Abroad: The Historical Context 200
The Development of Sociolinguistic Competence in the 
Study Abroad Setting 202
Morphosyntax 203
Pragmatics 210
Production and Perception of the Second Language 
Sound System 214
Individual Differences and the Study Abroad Experience 216
The Effect of Dialect Exposure 221
Study Abroad and the Acquisition of Second Language 
Sociolinguistic Competence 223
Reading Beyond the Text 224
Comprehension and Application 224
Section III Implications of Research on the Acquisition of 
Sociolinguistic Competence in Second Languages 227
9	Norms and Targets 229
‘Standards’, ‘Norms’, and ‘Targets’ 230
How Are Norms Related to Language Variation? 236
How Does the Identification of Linguistic Norms Affect the 
Second Language Classroom? 238
Grammar Instruction 239
Heritage Speakers 243
Second Dialect Acquisition 246
Materials Selection and Development 248
How Are Classroom Learners Different From Naturalistic Learners? 250
Summary 251
Reading Beyond the Text 252
Comprehension and Application 252
Contents xi
10 Integrating Sociolinguistics Into the Second Language Classroom 255
How Much Does a Teacher Need to Know to Integrate 
Sociolinguistics? 257
All Speakers Vary Their Language 258
Language Varies at All Levels of the Grammar 258
Our Language Choices Reflect Who We Are 259
We Use Language Differently in Different Contexts 259
Being Polite Is About Varying Our Language Appropriately 260
Summary 260
Recommendations for Second Language Instruction 261
Be Aware of the Process of Target-Selection 261
Creating Effective Course Materials 263
Setting Reasonable Expectations 265
Maximizing the Range of Varieties in the Language Classroom 269
Keeping Current Pedagogical Practices in Mind 270
Remember the Basics 270
Keep Learner Goals in Mind 271
Focus on Communication 271
Provide Opportunities to Develop All Aspects of Competence 272
Pay Attention to Individual Learning Styles 272
Apply Existing Practices to New Goals 272
Conclusion 275
Reading Beyond the Text 275
Comprehension and Application 276
References 279
Index 313
This page intentionally left blank
Tables
1.1 Summary of communicative competence as described 
by Canale & Swain (1980) 6
1.2 Examples of variable forms from several languages 9
2.1 Summary of coding scheme for Example 2.2 35
2.2 Summary of details of Al-Rojaie (2013) 38
2.3 Summary of details of Barnes (2012) 40
2.4 Summary of details of Li, Chen, & Chen (2012) 42
2.5 Summary of details of Nelson & Hall (1999) 44
3.1 Summary of details of Lauwereyns (2002) 56
3.2 Summary of details of Wagner & Sankoff (2011) 59
3.3 Summary of details of Hoffman & Walker (2010) 62
3.4 Summary of details of Squires (2013) 64
3.5 Summary of details of Campbell-Kibler (2009) 66
3.6 Summary of details of Travis (2007) 68
4.1 Factors believed to impact social distance (based on 
Schumann, 1986) 81
4.2 Example of Conversation Analysis transcription conventions 
(based on Markee & Kasper, 2004, pp. 499–500) 98
4.3 Summary of social approaches to language learning 104
5.1 Basic components of Optimality Theory 111
5.2 Example of how constraint ranking accounts for cross-linguistic 
differences 112
5.3 Summary of relevant constraints in Lombardi (2003) 114
5.4 Summary of second language substitutions from 
Lombardi (2003) 115
5.5 Summary of learner challenges in Bybee (2008) 125
5.6 Overview of cognitive approaches to the acquisition of 
a second language 133
xiv Tables
6.1 Goldvarb results for /l/-deletion in Howard, Lemée, & Regan 
(2006, adapted from Table 2, p. 14) 145
6.2 Summary of findings from Howard, Lemée, & Regan (2006) 145
6.3 Predictive factors examined in variationist sociolinguistic studies 151
6.4 Summary of linguistic factors in Bayley (1996) 157
6.5 Summary of coding for ‘barked’ in ‘the dog barked all night’ 158
6.6 Summary of three levels of Preston’s (1996) model 160
7.1 Summary of results from Adamson & Regan (1991) 169
7.2 Summary of coding scheme for Sax (2003) 174
7.3 Coding scheme for Geeslin (2000) 176
7.4 Summary of coding scheme for Gudmestad (2012, pp. 379–381) 178
7.5 Summary of coding scheme in Killam (2011) 182
7.6 Summary of coding scheme for Fafulas (2013) 187
8.1 Examples of study abroad contexts 201
8.2 Constraints on use of the present perfect by learners across 
time in Leon, Spain, in Geeslin et al. (2012) 208
8.3 (Assumed) characteristics of study abroad learners 
(Lafford, 2006) 220
9.1 French question formation and the pedagogical norm 236
9.2 Acceptability ratings 241
9.3 Summary of evidence for second dialect acquisition 247
10.1 Rubric for evaluating linguistic diversity in classroom materials 263
Figures
1.1 Examples of greetings in American English 4
1.2 Examples of geographic variation in US English 8
2.1 Distribution of the words for carbonated beverages in 
the United States 45
6.1 Sample scatterplot with linear trend line 143
9.1 List adapted from Bell (1976) to examine prestige 232
This page intentionally left blank
Examples
2.1 Language changes in progress 29
2.2 Subject expression in Geeslin & Gudmestad (2008b) 35
4.1 Transcription following Conversation Analysis conventions 
(Ishida, 2009, p. 360) 99
4.2 Excerpt from Mori & Hayashi (2006) 102
7.1 Ne deletion 172
7.2 On and nous alternation 172
7.3 /l/-deletion in French 173
7.4 Copula contrast in Spanish 175
7.5 Mood contrast in Spanish 177
7.6 Item from task two (Gudmestad, 2012) 177
7.7 Item from task three (Gudmestad, 2012) 178
7.8 Object marking in Spanish 180
7.9 Oral picture description task (Killam, 2011) 180
7.10 Written contextualized task item (Killam, 2011) 181
7.11 Object topicalization in Spanish 181
7.12 Present progressive in Spanish 184
7.13 Variation in progressive auxiliaries 184
7.14 Sample item from written contextualized task (Fafulas, 2013) 185
7.15 Judgment task item from Fafulas (2013) 186
7.16 The particle de in Chinese (Li, 2010, pp. 369–371) 189
7.17 Null and overt subjects in Chinese (Li, 2014) 190
8.1 Future time expression in French 204
8.2 Sample item from Kanwit & Solon (2013, p. 210) 206
8.3 Preterit and present perfect forms in Spanish 206
8.4 Object pronouns in Spanish 209
xviii Examples
10.1 Sample activity for lower proficiency 267
10.2 Sample activity for intermediate proficiency 268
10.3 Sample activity for advanced proficiency 268
10.4 Sample processing instruction activity 273
10.5 Processing instruction activity for sociolinguistic competence 274
Preface
Although grammatical competence has generally been the dominant concern of researchers in the field of second language acquisition, it is widely 
recognized that the development of sociolinguistic competence is essential in 
order for a learner to communicate effectively. The ever-increasing body of 
research that bridges the gap between the fields of sociolinguistics and second language acquisition has explored the variety of ways in which social context influences the acquisition of a second language. Learners face variation 
in the input they receive, which is constrained by the characteristics of the 
speaker, the geographic location of the interaction, and the context in which 
the interaction takes place. Moreover, they must learn to correctly interpret the 
social information included in the input they encounter. Additionally, learners 
must acquire the ability to vary their own speech as a reflection of these social 
factors in order to produce language that is appropriate and consistent with 
the expectations of their interlocutors and their own communicative goals. 
Finally, the means by which social information is conveyed through learner 
speech must be acquired in order for language learners to develop and project 
their own identity in the second language. Research on these topics encompasses empirical work on a wide range of second languages, including at least 
German, Spanish, English, French, and Chinese, as well as a variety of theoretical accounts as to how the human mind identifies, produces, and stores variable structures. As such, this body of work provides an account of an essential 
component of language acquisition and is consequently of interest to readers 
with backgrounds in second language acquisition, sociolinguistics, psycholinguistics, speech and hearing sciences, anthropology, linguistics, and education.
Given the importance of this area of research and the relative lack of coverage in existing works, the current book has three primary goals. The first 
goal is to provide a unified account of research on social factors in second 
language acquisition with a scope that is sufficiently broad to include diverse 
xx Preface
approaches and sufficiently focused to provide a coherent and reasonable 
quantity of information for a standard college-level semester-long course. 
Although edited collections with extremely broad coverage of social issues 
in language learning and language teaching exist, these volumes may be less 
useful as course textbooks because the breadth of coverage may come at the 
expense of focused coverage of the central issues in second language sociolinguistics. Likewise, research monographs on a single approach to social factors 
in second languages or on a set of empirical analyses of a single dataset are the 
building blocks for advancing research in the field, but do not serve to provide 
a contextualized view in which multiple approaches, second languages, and 
methods of analysis are included. Thus, in response to the need for an academic resource with appropriate scope, the current volume aims to provide 
a comprehensive introduction to the importance of social factors in second 
language acquisition, establish the foundations necessary to assess research in 
this field, review current research conducted on a variety of second languages 
in a range of learning contexts, critically examine several different theoretical 
approaches to second language variation, and explore the implications of these 
findings on language learning and language instruction.
The second goal of this book is to provide an appropriate and accessible 
text for advanced undergraduate and graduate classes. The topic of social 
factors in second language acquisition has increased in popularity in the last 
decade and is taught across the country, at times to students specializing in 
language acquisition or language teaching and at times to students with more 
general interests in linguistics or sociolinguistics. The current text is geared 
primarily toward students with backgrounds in second language acquisition 
or language education but is also written with the expectation that readers 
may have varying depths of knowledge in these fields. Consequently, this text 
is designed with introductory chapters to review the most central issues in second language acquisition (Chapter One) and sociolinguistics (Chapters Two 
and Three). Each subsequent chapter has been written with an awareness of 
the need to provide additional background when necessary and to provide an 
accessible account of current research, regardless of reader experience with 
second language variation. The final chapters address the implications of findings from research on social factors in second language acquisition with an 
eye to making additional connections between language instruction, second 
language acquisition, and sociolinguistics. These chapters are included to further solidify the interdisciplinary nature of the manuscript and also to reach a 
broader audience than a more narrowly focused volume might.
The final goal of the current book is to include a current, detailed account of 
the most recent research in the field of second language sociolinguistics. This 
includes the most recent empirical research on the topic as well as a critical 
review of recent theoretical developments intended to account for variation in 
Preface xxi
language. It is this aspect of the text that will appeal to researchers in the field 
of second language sociolinguistics, even those who are experts in their respective areas of inquiry. The value of this book among researchers in the field stems 
from the fact that there are several different research paradigms that currently 
address social factors in language acquisition. For example, theories of social 
interaction and social identity are pursued parallel to variationist accounts of 
the linguistic and social factors that constrain variation. Moreover, although 
the variationist paradigm of analysis is predominant in this field, there are 
several cognitive models within which variation may fit. These include, but are 
not limited to, Optimality Theory, Connectionism, Dynamic Systems Theory, 
Complexity Theory, and usage-based accounts. This variety of approaches has 
generally meant that researchers work within a single framework, even though 
findings from one study are often quite relevant for those working under other, 
competing frameworks. To this end, there are three chapters (Chapters Four, 
Five, and Six) that provide an overview of these approaches with information 
on recent developments in each. To my knowledge, no other work currently 
provides a synthesis of this breadth of approaches and, thus, specialists in the 
field will find this source of information valuable in contextualizing their own 
research paradigms.
This book seeks to meet the growing demand for textbooks that cross the 
disciplinary boundary between second language acquisition and sociolinguistics. It is designed to provide a unified account of multiple approaches 
to this issue, with an eye to including examples of research from a wide range 
of second languages. It has been written with the non-expert reader in mind, 
providing a review of the basic principles of sociolinguistics necessary to 
evaluate the theoretical approaches and empirical studies reviewed in later 
chapters. Finally, it provides a uniquely broad account of multiple theoretical 
approaches to social factors in second languages such that experts in one of 
these theoretical frameworks may use this book as a source for current information about competing approaches. We hope that this book will serve as a 
resource for students, instructors, and researchers and, even more so, that it 
will stimulate interest and expand scholarly inquiry into research that explores 
the intersection of sociolinguistics and second language acquisition.
This page intentionally left blank
Acknowledgments
This project was conceptualized several years ago and has developed over time 
as a result of the support and guidance of many people. I would like to take a 
moment here to recognize these efforts and influences. I begin with a special 
thanks to Ivy Ip for her invitation to write a book on sociolinguistics and second language acquisition. It was quite inspiring to learn that a field that was 
once so limited in numbers had grown enough to merit a focused account of 
the research it encompassed. I am also grateful to Mae Lum, Elysse Preposi, and 
Leah Babb-Rosenfeld, who provided invaluable assistance in keeping this project moving forward. This assistance included allowing me to bring Avizia Yim 
Long into the process of researching and writing this book, and I am continually impressed by her intellect, her attention to detail, her positive approach to 
very hard work, and her enthusiasm for this topic. Although people may first 
notice her tireless work ethic, what truly sets her apart is the quality of the 
work she produces. In every sense she is a rising star in the field of second language acquisition. I cannot overstate the value of her participation in this project and I am especially thankful for the opportunity to collaborate with her.
Throughout the process of researching, drafting, and finalizing the manuscript, several individuals have lent their expertise, support, and time. Stephen 
Fafulas, Aarnes Gudmestad, Avizia Yim Long, and Megan Solon all worked as 
research assistants at different times, and their skill in identifying new studies 
and synthesizing existing research was essential to both the proposal and the 
manuscript writing process. I am also thankful for the students in my Fall 2012 
seminar on social approaches to second language acquisition, whose thoughtful questions and lively debates helped to identify the key issues in the field as 
well as the individual contributions of various theoretical approaches to language learning. Likewise, several colleagues provided feedback on early drafts, 
helped check the final drafts for accurate descriptions of their own research, 
or provided assistance in locating important contributions they have made 
xxiv ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
to the field. Each of them has played an important role in shaping the final 
product, and their willingness to provide quick and accurate feedback at very 
busy times is greatly appreciated. These friends and colleagues include Stephen 
Fafulas, Aarnes Gudmestad, Laura Gurzynski-Weiss, Jason Killam, Jennifer 
Leeman, Kelly Sax, and Lauren Schmidt. Finally, Matt Kanwit provided invaluable and exceptional assistance with the pedagogical materials in this manuscript. His talent in the classroom coupled with his depth of knowledge of the 
field allowed him to provide irreplaceable support to this project. I am further 
grateful to the anonymous proposal reviewers who provided guidance and 
whose comments significantly improved the final version of this manuscript.
I am especially thankful for our fellow “book bootcampers”: Rob Bedinghaus, Silvina Bongiovanni, Jordan Garrett, Bret Linford, Megan Solon, Melissa 
Whatley, and Sara Zahler. Each of these individuals gave their time, intelligence, hard work, and cheer in the final stages of preparing this manuscript. 
There is no doubt that we could not have met our deadlines without their skill 
and dedication. I particularly want to acknowledge Megan Solon for sticking 
with Avizia and me to the very end in the process of getting the manuscript out 
for review—her hard work and unfailing willingness to help provided much 
needed support and assistance that will be forever appreciated.
I would also like to recognize those around me who create a work environment that has allowed for the production of good research in a context of 
lively engagement. Steven Wagschal, Chair of the Department of Spanish and 
Portuguese, has shown unfailing dedication to the support of faculty research 
and, on a personal level, has provided flexibility and good humor that have 
made the completion of this manuscript possible. Likewise, several colleagues 
here at Indiana University have provided expert advice and kind support in 
navigating the publication process and the balance of writing with other obligations. Most especially, Manuel Díaz-Campos and Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig 
have provided cheerful insights, encouragement, and a much-needed push at 
key points in the process of completing this project.
I want to close by recognizing those individuals who provide support outside of the workplace. Avizia and I have a lot in common in this regard. We 
both have parents who pushed us to succeed, married into great families and 
have supportive in-laws, have husbands who give us the space to work hard 
and the support to enjoy doing it, and we have a good network of friends and 
family who keep us a bit more balanced than we would otherwise be. We close 
with a list of people whose support we wish to recognize: Rick Baumgarner 
III, Eileen Geeslin, William Geeslin, Elizabeth Yim Long, William E. Long Jr., 
Clifford McGuire, Patricia McGuire, Sean McGuire, and Melissa Snodgrass.
Section I
Principles of Sociolinguistic Variation 
and Second Language Acquisition
This page intentionally left blank
1
What Sociolinguistics Means 
for the Second Language Learner
As we set out to examine the importance of sociolinguistics or of social factors 
more broadly, for the language learner, we must immediately recognize that 
to do so requires background knowledge in several different fields of inquiry. 
Minimally, one must be aware of certain basic facts about the acquisition of 
languages beyond the first, have an understanding of how social factors influence language and the methods through which these factors are studied, and 
also have current knowledge of research findings on effective methods for 
classroom instruction. To be clear, few are the experts in all three of these areas 
and, thus, we begin with the assumption that the readers of this volume possess a wide range of backgrounds and, quite frankly, of practical goals and 
expectations for this work. One might even ask how to approach such a diverse 
topic as the sociolinguistic competence of second language learners. It is for 
this reason that we begin this chapter with a discussion of why sociolinguistics 
matters for the second language learner and why we, as researchers and language teachers, should seek to understand the impact of social factors on the 
language learner more fully.
Whether you are preparing to become a language teacher or have been 
in the profession for years, it is reasonable to ask why it matters whether or 
not you know about sociolinguistic variation. Although we will define variation more carefully in the next chapter, let’s take as a working definition that 
sociolinguistic variation refers to the choices a speaker makes when selecting 
the forms necessary to convey a message that is appropriate in a given context. Speakers are not always consciously aware of these choices. For example, 
sociolinguistics involves deciding how to choose among the greetings listed in 
Figure 1.1.
For most speakers, several choices in Figure 1.1 are possible, and the right 
choice depends on our audience and the context in which we are speaking. 
I might choose ‘hello’ for my elderly neighbor when I pass by his house and 
4 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
‘hey’ for my husband when I come in from work. I don’t think I would ever 
say ‘S’up’, but I bet I say ‘wassup?’ sometimes when greeting close friends, even 
though I am thinking ‘what’s up?’. I’m sure that I don’t use ‘howdy’ or ‘hiya’ 
at all. As you read the list of greetings, you most likely had reactions yourself 
as to which ones you would use often, which ones you would use only in certain contexts, and which greetings you never say. The more we know about 
sociolinguistics, the better we understand the choices we make every time we 
produce an utterance.
Now imagine that same list of greetings in Figure 1.1 as it is produced and 
understood by a second language learner of English. Do you think that second language learners have strong intuitions about when to use each greeting 
and when such a greeting would be inappropriate? Do you think second language learners know so many choices exist? What are the consequences for the 
learner if he or she fails to select an appropriate greeting? As (socio)linguists 
we seek to understand the constraints on use of these forms and the ways in 
which factors such as the characteristics of the speaker, hearer, and the speech 
context impact these choices. As language teachers, our understanding of these 
issues will influence the explanations we offer, the instructional materials we 
select, the activities we design, and nearly every other aspect of the instruction 
we provide. As second language learners ourselves, we understand how important it is to be able to identify these differences and interpret the meaning 
behind the choices speakers make. In this first chapter, we explore the connection between sociolinguistics and language learning, beginning with the development of definitions of different types of language competence that include 
these abilities and continuing with a brief review of the basic tenets of second 
FIGURE 1.1 Examples of greetings in American English
Sample greetings in American English:
Hello
Hi
Hey
Hiya
How’s it goin’?
S’up?
Howdy
SOCIOLINGUISTICS FOR THE L2 LEARNERg
language acquisition upon which one’s understanding of sociolinguistics in 
second languages should be based.
DEFINITIONS OF COMMUNICATIVE COMPETENCE
The theoretical connection between sociolinguistics and communicative language teaching has existed for decades. In fact, knowledge of sociolinguistic 
variation has long been recognized as an integral part of learning to communicate in a second language. As is widely understood, the goal of communicative 
teaching methodologies is to create an environment in which learners develop 
the ability to exchange meaning effectively in a second language (Dörnyei, 
2013; Spada, 2007). In fact, we know that such interaction is essential to language development as a whole (Gass, 1997). The ability to communicate effectively is generally referred to as communicative competence. One of the bestknown discussions of communicative competence and its connection to the 
second language classroom is found in the classic article by Michael Canale 
and Merrill Swain (1980). In that article, they assess the existing models of 
communicative competence and provide a unified model of their own. Their 
model shows communicative competence as comprised of three different 
types of abilities: grammatical competence, sociolinguistic competence, and 
strategic competence. Grammatical competence refers to a learner’s ability 
to use the lexical items, as well as the rules constraining morphology, sentence 
structure, and the sound system. Canale and Swain note that there are many 
linguistic theories that may do the job of describing this system of rules, and 
their definition does not hinge on a single theoretical approach. The second 
type of competence, sociolinguistic competence, refers to a learner’s ability 
to interpret an utterance for its social meaning. In other words, learners must 
be able to glean information about the appropriateness of an utterance and 
the intended meaning of the speaker, especially when the intended meaning 
is not identical to the literal one. Finally, communicative competence includes 
an ability called strategic competence, which refers to the ways that learners 
compensate when there are breakdowns in communication. This last ability is 
especially important for beginners, who will need to learn to paraphrase when 
they do not know a form that is needed to express a given meaning (grammatical competence) and who will also need to learn how to interpret the social 
situation in order to use language appropriately (sociolinguistic competence). 
Table 1.1 provides a summary of the skills included in each of these domains 
and gives an example of the type of function each serves.
In reflecting on the detailed definition of communicative competence provided by Canale and Swain (1980), it is clear why meaningful communication 
and interaction are complex and have been the object of extensive research. In 
fact, this early work by Canale and Swain has been elaborated and modified 
6 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
TABLE 1.1
Summary of communicative competence as described by 
Canale & Swain (1980)
Type of 
competence
What basic abilities are 
included?
What is interpreted?
Grammatical Morphology (e.g., 
verb forms, rules for 
pluralization)
Syntax (e.g., sentence 
structure, word order)
Phonology (e.g., rules of 
pronunciation)
Sample utterance: 
‘The mail came at three’
Example of grammatical 
information to be interpreted: 
‘came’ is the past tense form of 
the verb ‘to come’; this event 
has already happened
Sociolinguistic Rules of use: deciding 
what is appropriate 
based on factors 
such as the topic of 
conversation, the 
context in which the 
conversation takes place, 
rules of politeness and 
formality, etc.
Rules of discourse: 
organization of 
sentences into discourse 
that meets a given 
communicative function 
or goal (e.g., putting the 
appropriate language 
together to relay a story 
that includes an indirect 
request)
Sample utterance: 
‘The mail done come at three’ 
(The mail came at three)
Example of sociolinguistic 
information to be interpreted: 
This speaker is telling me 
(informally and indirectly) 
that I won’t be able to get this 
letter out today because the 
mail carrier has already come. 
It would be appropriate for 
me to say ‘Okay’ to show I 
understand. From the sentence, 
I can also tell something about 
the individual characteristics 
of the speaker (e.g., regional 
background, level of education, 
etc.).
Strategic Mechanisms for coping 
with breakdowns 
in communication 
that may result 
from situational or 
proficiency-related 
factors
Sample utterance: 
‘The mail came at three’
Example of use of strategic 
competence in a follow-up 
question:
‘The mail comes again 
tomorrow?’
SOCIOLINGUISTICS FOR THE L2 LEARNERg
since that time and there are several competing definitions of communicative competence today. For example, Bachman (1990) provided a model of 
language competence that distinguishes organizational from pragmatic competence. The former includes both grammatical and textual competence (i.e., 
the ability to create a cohesive and rhetorically appropriate text), whereas the 
latter includes sociolinguistic as well as illocutionary competence (i.e., the ability to perform functions with language). The purpose of this discussion is not 
to provide a comprehensive list of definitions for communicative competence. 
In fact, nearly thirty years ago Bachman and Savignon (1986, p. 381) noted 
that the term “communicative competence” had already been used in so many 
ways that it has essentially become a term to denote all that language researchers believed to be “good” or “right” in language use (see Dewaele [2010] for 
a recent discussion of communicative competence). Instead, the important 
insight for our purposes is that no subsequent definition has argued against 
the importance of sociolinguistic competence. In fact, a quick search of recent 
research monographs will identify several that explore sociolinguistic competence alone (e.g., Regan, Howard, & Lemée, 2009). Thus, regardless of how it has 
been named or subdivided, we see that sociolinguistic competence is widely 
viewed as an essential component of communicative competence.
From a language instruction perspective we see that fostering the development of communicative competence includes, minimally, providing sufficient 
input to cover a range of types of interaction and giving students sufficient 
opportunities for meaningful interaction. What is likely also clear, however, 
is that the first type of competence, grammatical competence, usually receives 
the bulk of our attention in the language classroom and in second language 
acquisition research in general. To be sure, no one will deny the importance of 
grammatical competence. A learner without grammatical competence cannot 
interpret or produce an utterance in any social context. Nevertheless, it is also 
clear that sociolinguistic competence is essential for effective communication. 
For this reason, it is imperative that second language acquisition researchers continue to investigate the cross-section of sociolinguistics and language 
acquisition and that language instructors bring these findings into their own 
language classrooms. What follows is a closer look at how sociolinguistic 
knowledge directly impacts comprehension, production, and expression of 
identity for second language learners.
SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION
Perhaps the greatest challenge to the second language learner in the face of 
sociolinguistic variation is that of comprehension. It is intuitive that a clear 
and constant signal will be easier to perceive and interpret than one that 
changes according to social and linguistic factors. Along these lines, one type 
8 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
of variation that receives a lot of attention is geographic variation. For example, we know that certain geographic areas are associated with different pronunciations and word choices, and sometimes even different verb forms or 
sentence structures. To make matters more complex, some of these features 
are actually present to varying degrees across varieties, rather than contrasting 
simply through their presence or absence. Consider the examples in Figure 1.2 
and think about the place of residence of each speaker.
If you are not familiar with US English, it may be hard to even make sense 
of a few of these utterances, but if you have lived in the US for an extended 
period of time, you likely associate each sentence with a different geographic 
region fairly easily. In some cases, the “clue” was the pronunciation of a certain sound, in others it was a choice of lexical item, and in still others it was 
the use of a syntactic construction that doesn’t exist in all varieties of English. 
For example, words like ‘y’all’ and ‘reckon’ tend to be most frequent in the 
southern US, while ‘pop’ appears in the Midwest and northern US, and in the 
Northeast the word ‘bag’ would be used instead of ‘sack’. The pronunciation 
called “r-dropping” (as in ‘pahk ya kah’) is associated with the northeastern 
US, specifically cities like Boston, Massachusetts. Constructions like ‘wanna’ 
(want to) and ‘shoulda’ (should have) exist in all varieties of US English, at 
least in informal settings. You might have also noticed through this exercise, 
however, that geography doesn’t tell us the whole story. In example (a) we 
may think of the southern US in particular, but there are plenty of southerners who don’t speak that way at all. In fact, there are likely additional relevant 
considerations like the age, level of education, and socioeconomic status of the 
speaker. It will also be important to consider the level of formality of the interaction/setting, and the characteristics of the person decoding the message (i.e., 
our interlocutor or audience), something called “style”, which we will discuss 
in future chapters. Additionally, whether language is transmitted through spoken 
means or written measures will have an effect on the linguistic forms chosen by a speaker/writer. Likewise, expressions like ‘I reckon’ may be associated 
FIGURE 1.2 Examples of geographic variation in US English
a. Y’all come back now, ya hear?
b. Pahk ya kah in Havahd yahd.
c. Wanna pop?
d. Dude, that wave was totally rad!
e. I reckon he shoulda pu dat in a sack.
SOCIOLINGUISTICS FOR THE L2 LEARNERg
TABLE 1.2
Examples of variable forms from several languages
Language Variable forms Characteristics associated with the 
choice between forms
English Bag vs. sack Varies regionally across the 
United States; ‘sack’ is not used in 
the northeastern region
French J’parle-tu francais vs. J’parle 
francais (both mean ‘Do I 
speak French?’)
The former (with interrogative tu
for yes/no questions) is associated 
with Quebec French
Korean aigo vs. aigoo (both mean 
‘ah!’ or ‘Oh my!’)
The latter (characterized by final 
/o/-raising) is associated with 
young females from Seoul
Greek pame stin agora vs. pame sto 
pazari (both mean ‘let’s go 
to the marketplace’)
These are used in distinct regions 
(city vs. rural) of Greece and 
associated with different levels of 
socioeconomic status
Spanish tienes vs. tieneh (two 
pronunciations of ‘you have’)
The latter is associated with 
southern Spain and the Caribbean
German gehsteig vs. buergersteig
(both mean ‘sidewalk’)
The former is used in Austria 
and the latter in Germany
with older speakers and those from lower income brackets. Certainly we don’t 
expect former US presidents Clinton and Carter to say ‘I reckon we otta go to 
war’ simply because they come from an area where this expression exists. What 
these examples quickly illustrate is that the simple act of decoding a message 
is actually quite complex and can be a particular challenge for the second language learner. Although the examples in Figure 1.2 are taken from US English, 
they illustrate facts that are true for any language. Simply put, both spoken and 
written speech contain variation that reflects facts about the origin and personal characteristics of the speaker (as well as the standards for language use 
particular to each speech community, region, etc.). Furthermore, the choices 
one makes when speaking any language can affect any feature of the grammar. To give a sense of the fact that this is, indeed, a characteristic of natural 
languages, Table 1.2 provides some examples taken from other languages. The 
first row of this table includes one of the examples from US English for the 
sake of comparison.
It becomes clear that the challenge of decoding the basic linguistic elements 
of an utterance is not trivial. In fact, this can prove challenging even for native 
10 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
speakers of a language. For example, less than half of the native speakers of 
Spanish from dialect regions that do not produce aspirated ‘s’ (see the examples for tienes vs. tieneh in Table 1.2) perceive [h] as the phoneme /s/ (12/27), 
whereas nearly all of the native speakers from aspirating regions (17/20) did 
(Schmidt, 2011). What is more, beyond decoding a message, the learner must 
further interpret and understand the social information that is concomitantly 
conveyed. For example, each choice of form, whether at the level of the sound 
system, the lexicon, or other areas of the grammar, also conveys details about 
the speaker’s place of residence (or sometimes place of origin), gender, age, 
income, and level of education. Although native speakers of a language may 
not be able to articulate the differences between forms and list all of their 
associated characteristics, we do know enough about sociolinguistic variation 
to react on a subconscious level to the information contained in these details. 
This knowledge allows us to comprehend nonlinguistic messages as well. One 
might argue that being able to discern the geographic origin of a speaker is 
not a necessity for a second language learner still struggling to understand the 
basic elements of an utterance. Nevertheless, it is easy to appreciate the importance of comprehending how the forms used to express a given utterance tell 
us whether the speaker is attempting to indicate familiarity or to establish distance. These examples demonstrate that sociolinguistic variation has an effect 
on comprehension in second languages both at the linguistic level, in terms of 
one’s ability to decipher the linguistic elements of a message, as well as beyond 
the level of the grammar, in terms of one’s ability to also comprehend the 
added social meaning conveyed with each utterance.
SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND LANGUAGE PRODUCTION
As stated in the previous section, it is likely that linguistic variation has the 
greatest impact, at least for beginning learners, on the ability to comprehend a 
given utterance. Nevertheless, the influence of sociolinguistic variation is also 
important for second language production. One important function of varying one’s speech is to convey nonlinguistic information along with the linguistic information. For example, one might wish to establish a connection with 
a classmate. From a conversational point of view, such a connection might be 
essential to continuing the interaction. From an interpersonal perspective, we 
note that the second language learner who is able to establish connections is 
more likely to be successful in the target culture and more likely to be motivated to continue living in that environment and/or acquiring the language. 
From a basic, acquisitional point of view, a speaker who cannot make connections and foster interactions will not receive the necessary input to continue 
on the path to acquiring the second language. This single function demonstrates that the ability to vary one’s speech in a second language is not trivial.
SOCIOLINGUISTICS FOR THE L2 LEARNERg
There are other ways in which a lack of understanding of linguistic variation 
might influence language production and have tremendous consequences. For 
example, immigrant second language learners will find limited access to certain employment opportunities if they are unable to demonstrate formality 
and politeness at the appropriate moments, either on the job or simply during 
the initial interview. In an interesting study of Thai and Vietnamese speakers learning English, Adamson and Regan (1991) found that second language 
learners of English differed by gender and, in particular, the male learners used 
the informal variant –in (vs. –ing) with greater frequency than native Englishspeaking males did, even in careful speech styles. Although on its own, one 
might not see the consequences of this hyper-informality, a combination of 
informal features might lead these speakers to give the impression that they 
were less suited for certain types of work, were taking their coursework less seriously than other students, or were less intelligent, less educated, and so on. Even 
though as linguists we know that “g-dropping” (i.e. ‘runnin’ vs. ‘running’)
is not associated with intelligence, the choice of a given form, particularly in 
a formal context such as a job interview, could have negative consequences 
for the speaker’s perceived characteristics and qualifications. The underlying 
issue is that second language learners need to be able to comprehend varying 
forms in a second language, but in addition, they must understand the social 
correlates of these forms in order to properly interpret what they read and hear 
and also to produce language that is situationally appropriate. In sum, sociolinguistic competence is not limited to language comprehension but rather must 
also be acquired for effective production and interaction in a second language.
SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND LEARNER IDENTITIES
The brief discussion of the effects of language variation on second language 
production in the previous section mentioned some of the potential challenges 
a learner faces in producing situationally appropriate utterances. Beyond demonstrating classroom seriousness, employment promise, and so on, we also 
use language to provide information about who we are, the social groups with 
whom we identify, and the kinds of people we would like to get to know. In 
later chapters we will see examples of individuals who were less successful second language learners because they were unable “to be themselves” in a second 
language (e.g., Lybeck, 2002; Norton Peirce, 1995). Beyond conveying basic 
information, second language learners oftentimes need to fulfill other functions in the target language, such as establishing friendships, building community ties, and participating in recreational or leisure activities. In short, the 
ability to “live” in a second language rests on the acquisition of sociolinguistic competence, which allows us to have and express an identity in a second 
language. In later chapters we will see that this particular ability is linked to 
12 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
our motivation to learn more and to our attitudes toward the target culture 
and language, and that these are in turn linked to our ultimate success in the 
acquisition process. Finally, as has been stated already, all theories of second 
language acquisition afford a role to input in the target language, and one’s 
ability to create opportunities for increased input is most certainly worthy of 
further study.
CENTRAL ISSUES IN SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
In order to fully appreciate the influence of sociolinguistics on second language learning and second language use, it is important to establish common 
ground in the field of second language acquisition as a point of departure. 
To be sure, the field of second language acquisition can be characterized by 
its rapid development and its multiple perspectives. It is certainly accurate 
to claim that there are many competing theories that describe the process of 
acquiring a second language, the types of knowledge that learning a second 
language entails, and the degree to which this knowledge is influenced by factors external to the second language grammar. Despite this apparent discord, 
there are several issues that arise across theories, and these will need to be considered before we explore theories that address social factors in later chapters. 
The remainder of this chapter is dedicated to describing these issues in order 
to contextualize the discussion in later chapters about the place of each theory 
and its overall contribution to the field.
What Is Input and What Does It Do?
In the middle of the last century, it was believed that the environment was 
primarily responsible for human behavior. This theory, called Behaviorism, 
explained that learning (and all other behavior) took place as a child responded 
to stimuli in the environment. When children responded appropriately to such 
stimuli, positive associations were made and habits were formed. According to 
Skinner (1957), language learning took place through imitation. An accurate 
imitation of adult speech was rewarded by a positive response and an association was developed and strengthened. In the second language classroom, the 
Audiolingual Method of instruction was developed to provide appropriate 
stimuli for learners to imitate and a context that fostered association formation. Learner errors were corrected immediately so as to prevent the formation 
of bad habits. Second language instruction was designed to mirror the process 
of association strengthening, or habit formation, believed to take place in first 
language acquisition.
In response to the view of environment as the determining factor in language acquisition, Chomsky (1959) proposed that learners were capable of 
SOCIOLINGUISTICS FOR THE L2 LEARNERg
creating language and that the knowledge needed to do so came from the 
learner’s own mind, not the environment. Chomsky pointed out that children 
said things that no adult had said (e.g., ‘goed’ instead of ‘went’). In addition, 
he noted that acquisition proceeds so quickly and so effectively for all 
normally developing children that learners must have access to a set of guiding 
internal principles for the acquisition and use of language. Chomsky argued 
that this provided evidence that linguistic information was contained within 
the human mind at birth. He referred to these internal grammars as Generative grammars because they allow speakers to generate an infinite number of 
original, yet grammatical, sentences. This theoretical shift away from the view 
that the environment was the primary determining factor in language acquisition led second language acquisition researchers to explore the innate knowledge second language learners might have. Such inquiries remain important 
today.
In contemporary discussions of (second) language acquisition, the ‘environment’ in the descriptions of Behaviorism and Generative Theory is called 
input, and this term is used to refer to all language, written or spoken, to which 
a learner is exposed. The degree to which input may be taken to include other, 
nonlinguistic elements may vary from one theory to another and so, too, does 
the degree to which input is seen as the explanatory element in language acquisition. For some, such as those working under the contemporary Generative 
framework, input may serve as a trigger for innate grammatical information, 
which largely determines the path of acquisition and the knowledge a learner 
stores. In contrast, other theoretical approaches, such as Connectionism (to 
be discussed at length in Chapter Five), afford a greater role for input, and 
a lesser role for innate, language-specific information, in establishing connections between linguistic form(s) and meaning(s). For the purpose of this 
volume, the reader should know that no theory claims that second language 
acquisition proceeds in the absence of input, and the key point of comparison 
will therefore be the degree to which input is viewed as containing purely linguistic information, rather than a combination of linguistic, social, or other 
information, as well as the actual role that such input is believed to play as 
communicative competence develops.
How Can Learner Grammars Be Characterized?
The shift toward viewing second language acquisition as an internal cognitive 
phenomenon, rather than an environmental phenomenon, led Corder (1967) 
to propose that learner errors could provide clues regarding the rules contained in a second language grammar at a particular point in the acquisitional 
sequence. He argued that errors provided researchers with evidence of the 
rules used to form an utterance and claimed that an analysis of learner errors 
14 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
would allow a researcher to identify the process through which a structure was 
acquired and should, therefore, be the primary focus of research on language 
acquisition. Additionally, Corder described developing learner language as 
having different grammars at different points in time. In other words, a learner 
grammar is viewed as constantly changing as it approaches target norms. This 
changing grammar was described by Nemser (1971) as an approximative 
system, which changed as it became more and more like the system it was 
designed to resemble. The following year, Selinker (1972) described the system 
of learner language as interlanguage, and the term is still used today. This 
nomenclature captures the relationship of learner language to both the first 
and second language, since it is believed to be somewhere between the two.
As the name implies, interlanguage is learner language that contains influences from the first language, as well as examples of target-like features. Nevertheless, it is important to remember that these are not the only two factors that 
influence learner grammars. It has been argued that certain universal principles, those that are true for all natural languages, are also true for interlanguages (Adjemian, 1976). As such, no interlanguage will violate the constraints 
that are obeyed by existing natural languages. In addition, those who follow 
Chomsky contend that interlanguage may also contain the innate knowledge 
with which each child is born. Such knowledge guides the possible forms that 
interlanguage grammars might take. Consequently, interlanguages are independent, such that they may contain properties that do not belong to the first 
language or the second language. Regardless of the approach taken to investigate the process of acquisition, it is generally agreed that learner grammars are 
indeed well described as approximative systems that change as new aspects of 
the target language are acquired and learner grammars are restructured. The 
various cognitive approaches that are prevalent in second language acquisition research today can be addressed in terms of their relationship to interlanguage. For example, some approaches seek to describe the components that 
influence interlanguage (e.g., universal grammar) while others examine the 
process through which an element becomes part of a learner’s interlanguage 
(e.g., input processing). With clearly defined objectives, these diverse research 
goals and multiple approaches to studying learner language can all contribute 
to a single body of research.
One characteristic of Corder’s description of interlanguage that is especially 
important for those interested in the influence of social factors is that interlanguage is systematic. In short, not only is interlanguage an independent system 
(from the first and second languages), but it is also governed in such a way 
that learner language is not random. This means that when learners make an 
error repeatedly, that error is stemming from a “rule”1
 in the interlanguage. 
For example, in the case of  ‘goed’ rather than ‘went’, we might claim that the 
form stems from a rule that states “form the past tense of a verb by adding –ed” 
SOCIOLINGUISTICS FOR THE L2 LEARNERg
or a connection that links past tense to the form –ed. What is more, when 
two forms are possible in the native grammar, the alternation between the two 
can also be seen as “rule-governed” (or constrained). For example, the earlier 
example of the alternation between –in and –ing in English might contain 
information about the word class (e.g., verb, noun, etc.) as well as the social 
characteristics (e.g., gender, age) that are relevant for the use of each form and 
the identification of the speaker and their social network. The “rule”, or association, would then be something like “use –ing more often with verbs and if 
you are male”. From these two examples we see that under some approaches 
the information contained in such governing rules may be exclusively linguistic, either stemming from universal knowledge or from information available 
in the input, whereas under others the “rule” itself may include the influence 
of social factors. In this sense, the concept of interlanguage remains essential to all approaches to second language acquisition, and what differs across 
approaches are the characteristics of the learner’s system.
How Does Acquisition Proceed?
The influence of Corder’s (1967) focus on errors and Chomsky’s internal 
grammar led to the proposal that all first language learners, having been 
born with the same innate knowledge, should pass through the same stages 
in acquiring a language, and their errors would be an indication of this. The 
studies designed to test this hypothesis are known as the morpheme acquisition studies. This body of research showed that a series of morphemes in 
English (e.g., plural –s, progressive –ing, etc.) were acquired by all children in 
the same order (Brown, 1973). This idea was soon applied to second language 
acquisition (Dulay & Burt, 1974) and it was found that those same English 
morphemes were acquired in the same general order, regardless of a learner’s 
first language. These studies showed early evidence of universal processes of 
acquisition, but the morpheme acquisition studies were criticized because 
they did not provide information regarding the path that learners took on the 
road to acquiring each structure. It was argued that one must study a single 
structure during the process of acquisition, testing a learner at several different 
points so as to gain a more complete picture of the developmental path that 
learners follow. Of the studies designed to respond to this criticism, some of 
the best known are those that focus on the acquisition of negation in English. 
It was found that the stages through which learners pass as they acquire negation in English do not vary widely from one learner to another, regardless 
of learning context or first language (Cancino, Rosansky, & Schumann, 1978; 
Eubank, 1996; Milon, 1974; Schumann, 1979; Stauble, 1978). Thus, transitional stages of development were proposed for this and other structures. 
Rather than refuting the morpheme acquisition studies, these later studies 
16 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
of stages of development refined the hypothesis that learners pass through 
similar stages as they acquire a second language, and provided more detailed 
evidence regarding the path of acquisition. What remains from these studies 
today is the largely held assumption that second language acquisition can be 
described as a series of steps through which learner grammars are modified 
as the grammar moves toward a closer approximation of the target. We will 
see that our understanding of what a grammar is, the types of modifications 
that take place, and the degree to which such modifications are universal varies from one approach to another. What is generally accepted, however, is the 
conceptualization of language acquisition as a gradual process, rather than a 
series of instantaneous changes from non-target-like structures toward targetlike structures and patterns of use.
Thus far we have seen that second language acquisition theories tend to 
recognize that language learning is a process and that input is essential to this 
process. We noted earlier that theories differ in the means through which a 
learner grammar and its development are characterized and also the degree 
to which the steps toward native-like use are common to all learners. Most 
theories recognize second language acquisition as a process, and there have 
been several strands of research that focus on a single part of this process. 
In some ways these strands of research may be seen as more theory-neutral 
because they do not dictate a particular structure for the learner grammar nor 
a specific learning mechanism. For example, if we agree that the learning of 
a second language involves exposure to input that causes some change in the 
linguistic knowledge of the learner, we might be interested in how a learner 
attends to input, regardless of whether we believe that grammatical knowledge 
is innate or experience-based, or how we view linguistic knowledge itself. In his 
important essay on learners’ errors, Corder (1967) distinguished input from 
intake. Whereas input refers to the linguistic data available to a learner, intake 
is the portion of the input that is actually attended to and made available to 
the developing system. An early hypothesis about which linguistic elements 
were first converted into intake claimed that only input that could be comprehended by the learner could be helpful in the acquisition process (Krashen, 
1985). An additional part of this hypothesis, and one that will be relevant later, 
was that learners had an affective filter which was low under optimal conditions but which was raised under time pressure or other stress. It was said that 
acquisition could only take place when the affective filter was sufficiently low, 
or when the social conditions did not prevent acquisition. Since that time, 
the research surrounding the conversion of input into intake has developed 
to recognize other psycholinguistic factors, such as attention2
. The process of 
comprehension does not necessarily require a learner to pay attention to each 
element in an utterance. For example, in the Spanish sentence Veo a la mujer
‘I see the woman’, a learner may well understand the meaning of the utterance 
SOCIOLINGUISTICS FOR THE L2 LEARNERg
without paying any attention to items such as the personal a or the gender of 
the article la ‘the’. Not only does the second language learner not need to connect 
the form a with the meaning (“indicates human object of the verb”) to understand the sentence, but doing so may come at a cost to overall comprehension. 
This is because the act of comprehension can be described as the management 
of several stimuli all competing for the learner’s limited resources. Especially 
at levels where comprehension is still difficult for a learner, learners do not 
have the luxury of attending to every detail in the input. Instead, those elements that are most important for comprehension “steal” attention from those 
elements that are non-essential. This tension between limited resources and 
the attention a learner can pay to each form in the input is described in a series 
of principles, outlined in VanPatten (1996). This line of research is commonly 
referred to as input processing and has received a great deal of attention in 
recent years (Carroll, 2013; Henry, Culman, & VanPatten, 2009; VanPatten & 
Borst, 2012a, 2012b; VanPatten & Jegerski, 2010; VanPatten & Uludag, 2011). 
The principles of input processing describe what happens in phenomenon, such 
as second language comprehension, where resources are limited (due to the 
level of attention required for understanding). These principles have allowed 
researchers to generate hypotheses about why learners make certain types of 
errors, what items in the input most often become intake, and what the effects 
of manipulating a learner’s attention might be. Each of these studies contributes both to the development of the theory of input processing and our knowledge of the acquisition of second languages in general. Because these studies 
are designed to measure the effects of instructional materials created with 
these claims about input processing in mind, this research is also especially 
relevant for classroom learners.
A second strand of research that may be viewed as relatively theory-neutral, 
at least in the sense that it does not a priori require linguistic knowledge or 
learner grammars to take a given form (although some accounts do claim a 
particular view), is the research on input and interaction (Gass, 2008; Gass & 
Mackey, 2007; Long, 1981). As mentioned earlier, no theory of second language 
acquisition claims that input is unnecessary for language learning. Nevertheless, while some approaches support the idea that input alone (in combination with internal grammatical knowledge) is sufficient, others posit that there 
are additional, essential elements. One very productive area of research along 
these lines is that which claims that interaction is a second, required ingredient 
for successful language learning. It is proposed that learners who are merely 
exposed to the second language and not given the essential opportunities to 
negotiate meaning, check comprehension, or receive negative evidence will fail 
to reach target-like abilities in the second language. In contrast, learners who 
do interact will recognize, for example, when a certain form is not fulfilling 
the function they had intended, and will have the opportunity to modify the 
18 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
form accordingly. Although the word interaction might imply that these are 
social theories of language learning, this is not necessarily the case. In fact, for 
some, interaction serves merely to provide negative evidence against incorrect hypotheses as the internal linguistic grammar develops (e.g., Long, 1981). 
Nevertheless, other theories do indeed explore the characteristics of these 
interactions and how they, in turn, comprise an additional series of factors 
that ought to be considered as part of the learning process. We will see in later 
chapters that not only can “input” be viewed as containing social information, 
but “interactions” can also be described in terms of the additional influence 
that their nature has on the acquisition process.
What Is Linguistic Knowledge and Where Do We Store It?
One of the main research initiatives today is the description of what learners 
know, how this information is structured, and how learning progresses within 
the portion of the mind that controls language. In other words, as we talk 
about the system of interlanguage, what form does that system take and how 
does it change over time? The concept of generative grammars, described in 
the early work of Chomsky (1959), continues to stimulate interesting research 
today and is the dominant paradigm for describing linguistic systems to date. 
Such investigations propose that each language learner has innate linguistic 
knowledge in the form of a universal grammar. Such knowledge provides a 
structural framework that describes all possible human languages (principles) 
and a series of options that describe cross-linguistic differences (parameters). 
The task of first language learners is to find evidence in the language around 
them that allows them to select the appropriate language-specific setting 
of each parameter. Evidence that learners have innate grammatical knowledge is said to come from the fact that all learners pass through similar stages 
when acquiring a language, and that learner language (in this case, language 
acquired as a child) is systematic and rule-governed. Although Generative 
approaches have developed to explore the degree of access second language 
learners have to this information (e.g. White, 2003), as well as the nature and 
structure of this information, these general ideas remain true in contemporary 
inquiry. With the possible exception of the social factor of age, they are also 
characterized by a relative neglect of inquiry into the effects of social factors, 
in large part because it is presupposed that innate grammatical information 
should be the same for all humans.
In contrast to the theory of Universal Grammar, which claims that language 
learning is rule-governed, other theories, such as Connectionism, describe 
language learning in terms of the effects of frequency of exposure to a particular structure. This model of learning claims that linguistic information is 
contained in the mind as a complex cluster of links, or associations between 
SOCIOLINGUISTICS FOR THE L2 LEARNERg
linguistic units and their meanings. For example, a noun would be linked to 
its gender appropriate article, as in el libro ‘the book’. These links are strengthened through activation, and weakened through lack of activation. Consequently, learning is an associative process and is not based on the construction 
of abstract rules. Research on first language acquisition within this paradigm 
has focused on computer models that closely mirror the acquisition process 
of children. For example, Rumelhart and McClelland (1986) showed that a 
computer model learned the irregular past tense in English starting with the 
correct form, moving to the overgeneralized (and incorrect form), and finally 
reaching the correct form again, just as child learners have been shown to do. 
To investigate how the same model can account for second language acquisition, computers must be programmed to account for pre-existing first language knowledge. Connectionism, and other theories like it, demonstrate that 
linguistic “rules” (of the type described in the earlier discussion of interlanguage) may take a different form, such as the form of neural connections. This, 
in turn, leads to different descriptions of how language acquisition progresses, 
even though the notion of stages of development can be maintained.
While the two theoretical models outlined in this section, Universal Grammar and Connectionism, are quite different from each other, both illustrate a 
similar approach to language acquisition. Each addresses the structure of linguistic knowledge and seeks to describe the means through which the human 
mind uses new linguistic information to advance a first or second language 
system. Each model begins when linguistic information enters the linguistic 
system. As we explore social approaches to language learning in subsequent 
chapters, we will see that the way in which linguistic knowledge is characterized may vary, but the inclusion of social influences in a linguistic model does 
not dictate that linguistic knowledge take on a given form. Instead, it merely 
means that a given model recognizes a role for the influence of social information in language acquisition or language use.
What Role Does the First Language Play?
During the same time period that Behaviorism was prevalent, Lado (1957) 
developed the Contrastive Analysis Hypothesis. This hypothesis stated that 
linguists could predict areas of difficulty for second language learners through 
a careful comparison of the first language to the second language. Those areas 
that were different from each other were predicted to pose the greatest difficulty. Relating this hypothesis to Behaviorism, the identified areas of difficulty were those where good habits would be hardest to form because they 
had already been formed differently for the first language. In the language 
classroom, it was suggested that the language teacher could use the method 
of Contrastive Analysis (carefully identifying differences between the first and 
20 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
second language) in order to address those areas of difficulty and avoid errors 
that were likely to be committed. Lado hypothesized that only these areas of 
difference needed to be taught in language classrooms, since grammatical constructs that are the same in both languages would automatically be produced 
correctly.
This approach to second language learning is appealing because the work 
of linguists and language instructors alike is clearly defined. Nevertheless, 
experience showed that the predicted areas of difficulty were not always the 
hardest to acquire, and some areas predicted to be easy to acquire were not 
readily learned (e.g., Eckman, 1987). Consequently, the idea that a close analysis of two paired languages could explain acquisition was not as profitable as 
expected. At the other extreme are approaches that posit that language learning is governed so strongly by innate grammatical information that the first 
language plays a minimal role in the development of the second language. The 
majority of approaches, however, recognize the effects of the first language as 
an influencing factor among several others. This has led to interesting research 
about exactly how the first language influences the second. For example, Kellerman (1977) used the intuitions of Dutch learners to demonstrate that his 
second language learners were able to identify those meanings and functions 
most likely to transfer from one language to another as opposed to those that 
were likely to be language-specific. Likewise, Andersen (1983) proposed the 
Transfer to Somewhere Principle, which states that the influence of a first language will be seen only where the structures of the first and second language 
are parallel, such that there is a “landing spot” in the second language for the 
element from the first. What these studies and the many others show is that 
neither the idea that the first language explains everything about the second 
nor the proposal that the first language has no influence on the second at all 
can be correct. Instead, current theories must view first language influence as 
a potential contributing factor in the process of second language acquisition, 
rather than the defining characteristic of that process. This is true no matter 
the form of the system or the mechanisms one believes are used as acquisition 
of the second language progresses.
Can Metalinguistic Knowledge Help?
Thus far, our discussion has centered on theories of language acquisition 
and how interlanguage might be characterized. Nevertheless, in subsequent 
chapters we will address both how second language systems might incorporate social factors and how language teachers might foster the development 
of communicative competence, and more specifically sociolinguistic competence, among their students. Thus, prior to continuing it is important to 
also establish a baseline of understanding of how formal instruction might 
SOCIOLINGUISTICS FOR THE L2 LEARNERg
influence developing systems. Returning once more to the mid-point of the 
last century, methods of instruction were generally focused on the differences 
between the first and second language and required learners to repeat utterances with the goal of forming good (i.e., native-like) habits. With the shift 
to a cognitive view of language learning and the view of input as a trigger 
for innate linguistic knowledge, teaching methods moved toward provision of 
positive evidence, sometimes in the form of access to native input and other 
times in the form of explanations of native-like rules of grammar. Just as the 
field of second language acquisition is diverse in the theoretical approaches 
it espouses, so too is the field of research on language instruction. There are 
multiple, competing instructional methods, but, as we will see, there is also 
common ground.
It is widely agreed that all instruction is not created equal. Instead, the 
effectiveness of language instruction is mediated by the structure taught, the 
method through which it is taught, and the learner to whom it is taught. For 
example, research has explored whether teaching marked structures might 
lead to the acquisition of unmarked structures (Doughty, 1991; Ellis, 2006) 
and also whether some structures are simply more teachable than others. 
There is also evidence to support the hypothesis that certain structures will not 
be acquired if a learner is not at the appropriate stage of development when 
instruction takes place (Pienemann, 1998, 2005). In other words, teaching a 
structure that is too far beyond the current level of the second language learner 
will not cause a change in the developing interlanguage system. Likewise, it is 
widely agreed that one key goal of language instruction is to develop the ability 
to communicate. This means that methods that do not provide opportunities 
to create original language and negotiate meaning are likely to fail to meet this 
objective.
Leaving differences in linguistic theoretical accounts of language acquisition aside, we can see that instruction might have an impact on development 
in various ways. First, instruction might have an impact on the way in which 
we attend to input. It will be recalled that we might view this type of approach 
as relatively theory-neutral, in the sense that it does not require that linguistic 
information take a given form because the effect of instruction is believed to 
impact processing of information prior to its entry into the developing system. The research by VanPatten and colleagues on input processing and processing instruction is the best known example of this type of instructional 
intervention. Processing instruction has been studied for second language 
English, French, Spanish, and Italian, to name a few, and has been shown to 
foster better conversion of input into intake as well as lasting positive effects 
on development (Benati, 2001, 2004; Cadierno, 1995; Lee, Cadierno, Glass, & 
VanPatten, 1997; Sanz & Morgan-Short, 2004; VanPatten & Cadierno, 1993; 
VanPatten & Oikkenon, 1996; Wong, 2004). This line of research is particularly 
22 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
effective because it systematically demonstrates that enhancing or helping 
learners with the processing of input can positively impact a range of structures in many different second languages. To date, however, this method has 
primarily been used to teach categorical structures, rather than socially variable 
ones; thus, as we explore the instruction of sociolinguistic competence, questions 
are likely to remain.
Other instructional methods that are intended to impact the developing system itself have also been explored. Some are theory internal, such as 
the concept of creating an “input flood” through which sufficient examples 
enter the developing system in order to trigger a change in parameter settings 
(Trahey & White, 1993). Others, especially those that provide metalinguistic 
knowledge (i.e., knowledge about how something works in a language) about 
the use of a given grammatical structure, are less theory dependent and, in 
fact, have led to considerable debate about the relationship between metalinguistic knowledge, or conscious knowledge, and the developing system, which 
is viewed as subconscious. Some accounts claim that metalinguistic knowledge 
is learned, whereas acquisition must take place at the subconscious level and, 
consequently, learned knowledge may only be used when there is sufficient 
time to do so (Krashen, 1982). More recently, however, it has been proposed 
that metalinguistic knowledge might serve additional functions, such as raising the learner’s awareness of a gap in their knowledge or directing his or her 
attention to a given element in the input. This awareness of the gap, in turn, 
might have an impact on the developing system (Gass & Varonis, 1994; Long, 
1996; Philp, 2003; Pica, 1994). Related to these issues are studies of explicit 
and implicit learning and inductive and deductive learning. It is the diversity 
of approaches and methods in this line of work that has led us to recognize 
that we simply cannot assume that “if we teach it, they will learn”. Instead, as 
language instructors we must be mindful of the method employed, the structure taught, the proficiency level of our students, and likely a host of additional 
factors. As we explore how sociolinguistic competence might be developed in 
the classroom, we must continue to remind ourselves of this fact.
Finally, there are some methods of instruction that target the output learners produce. To be fair, many of these approaches argue precisely that the creation of output does, indeed, affect the developing system. Nevertheless, we 
might view these methods as similar to those that focus on input processing in 
the sense that they do not, by definition, dictate the form of the developing 
system. For example, ease in production may be a reflection of strengthening 
connections or of automatization of a rule, depending on the linguistic theory 
upon which the work is based. Notable examples of this type of work have been 
advanced by Merrill Swain (1995, 2000) and, within a processing instruction 
framework, by Drew Farley (2004). The importance of output may be linked 
back to theories of interaction mentioned earlier (e.g., Long, 1981), to the 
SOCIOLINGUISTICS FOR THE L2 LEARNERg
idea of consciousness-raising and noticing (e.g., Leow, 1998, 2002; Robinson, 
1995; Schmidt, 1995; Sharwood Smith, 1993; Tomlin & Villa, 1994; VanPatten, 
1994), or to psycholinguistic approaches that focus on neural connections and 
motor routines employed in production. This last category contains extensive 
work on phonetic training, which seems to be quite effective in the short-term, 
but evidence of lasting effects is scarce (Goto, 1971; Lively, Pisoni, Yamada, 
Tohkura, & Yamada, 1994; but see Bradlow, Pisoni, Akahane-Yamada, & Tohkura, 1997 for an exception). To our knowledge, this work has done very little 
to incorporate social factors into the design or to explore the effects of production practice on the development of sociolinguistic competence. Thus, we will 
return to these issues later in the volume.
SOCIAL FACTORS IN SLA: NOW THAT WE KNOW 
THAT THEY MATTER, WHAT TO DO?
The discussion of the basic principles of second language acquisition, and most 
recently, instruction, show that the field is diverse in its understanding of the 
form that learner language takes, the way linguistic knowledge is stored, how 
such knowledge changes and develops over time, and the degree to which our 
knowledge of language is affected by social factors. Although it is agreed that 
there are common paths that learners follow in acquiring a second language, 
interlanguage also exhibits a great deal of variability. Learner output is not the 
same for all learners, nor are learner grammars employed the same way by a 
single learner in a single interaction. Instead, learners may show unique patterns that are different from learners with similar levels of ability, and they may 
also appear to have acquired a rule at one point and then violate that same rule 
immediately after. Following the lead of sociolinguists, researchers in the field 
of second language acquisition have sought to analyze the contextual variables, 
both linguistic and social, as well as the individual variables that might explain 
these differences within and between learners.
The research documenting the impact of social factors on learner language 
is extensive. Ethnographic studies have focused on speech acts, and the various factors that interact to determine language use (Saville-Troike, 1989). For 
example, the purpose of the speech act, the location in which the speech act 
takes place, and the relationship between the participants in a speech act all influence learner output. One theory that focuses specifically on the participants in 
an interaction proposes that speakers aim to accommodate to their interlocutors and that this can explain variation from one setting to another (Beebe & 
Giles, 1984). Studies of this sort acknowledge that learners are social beings 
and that language use does not entail merely grammatical knowledge. In addition to recognizing that the context of a speech act can influence learner output, 
several studies have investigated the individual characteristics of the language 
24 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
learner and how these might interact with language acquisition. Examples of 
such characteristics are the age of the language learner, the gender of the language learner, a learner’s motivation for acquiring the language, and the strategies that a learner employs in the process of acquisition. It has been found, 
for example, that younger learners are different from older learners (Birdsong, 
1999) and that learners do not all approach the task of second language acquisition with identical strategies (O’Malley & Chamot, 1990). Although there are 
accounts that claim that social factors, and variation in particular, are uninteresting, peripheral, or related only to performance (e.g., Gregg, 1990), at present this extreme position seems to be the minority. Instead, it might be more 
accurate to claim not that social factors have been ignored in second language 
acquisition research, but rather that even though we recognize their importance, we have much ground to cover in terms of integrating these effects into 
our existing models of linguistic knowledge and use.
Despite the aforementioned challenges, second language acquisition re­searchers have succeeded in applying sociolinguistic research methods to 
incorporate individual and contextual variables, such as those mentioned earlier (e.g., age, relationship of participants, etc.), into studies of the acquisition 
of linguistic structures. Such studies also incorporate linguistic variables, such 
as the effect of word order, or syllable boundaries, on the use of a particular 
structure. Thus, a single research design can investigate the effects of the characteristics of the speech act, the characteristics of the individual participants, 
and the linguistic characteristics of the context in which each token appears. 
An example of this type of study showed that Chinese and Czech learners of 
English varied in their use of the English plural morpheme –s according to 
situational context, proficiency in English, semantic, syntactic and phonemic 
environment, and redundancy within the linguistic context (Young, 1991). 
This type of research represents the most productive area of inquiry that 
applies the interests of sociolinguistics to the study of acquiring second languages. The current volume will lay the foundations of sociolinguistic inquiry, 
especially for those readers who have no prior background in that area. The 
middle section of this volume provides an overview of several approaches to 
second language acquisition that incorporate social factors in some way. This 
section of the volume also includes an in-depth account of variationist work 
(i.e., following mainstream sociolinguistic research methods), paying careful 
attention to include examples from multiple second languages and across various learning contexts. The third and final section of this volume explores the 
implications of research on sociolinguistic competence in second languages, 
including discussions of Heritage speakers as well as classroom learners. The 
overarching goal of each of these chapters is to help readers to see the importance of making connections between linguistic variation and social factors, 
second language acquisition and use, and classroom instruction.
SOCIOLINGUISTICS FOR THE L2 LEARNERg
READING BEYOND THE TEXT
a. Andersen, R. (1983). Transfer to somewhere. In S. Gass & L. Selinker (Eds.), 
Language Transfer in Language Learning (pp. 177–201). Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House.
b. Canale, M., & Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative 
approaches to second language teaching and testing. Applied Linguistics, 
1(1), 1–47.
c. Corder, P. (1967). The significance of learners’ errors. International Review 
of Applied Linguistics, 5(4), 161–170.
d. Mitchell, R., Myles, F., & Marsden, E. (2013). Second language learning theories [Chapter 2, pp. 29–51]. Third Edition. New York: Routledge.
e. VanPatten, B. (2007). Input processing in adult SLA. In B. VanPatten & 
J. Williams (Eds.), Theories in Second Language Acquisition: An Introduction (pp. 115–135). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Publishers.
COMPREHENSION AND APPLICATION
A. Comprehension
1. What is sociolinguistic variation?
2. According to Canale and Swain (1980), what are the three types of 
abilities that form communicative competence?
3. What is geographic variation?
4. What sort of social information about the speaker is conveyed in his/
her message?
5. What central ideas are associated with Behaviorism? How are these 
seen in the Audiolingual Method?
6. How does Generative theory differ from Behaviorism?
7. What is input? What is the role of input in acquiring a second language?
8. What is interlanguage? What are some characteristics of interlanguages?
9. How does input differ from intake?
10. What does Connectionism claim?
11. What does the Contrastive Analysis Hypothesis predict?
B. Application
1. Although sociolinguistic variation is not limited to greetings and leave 
taking, those are good ways to start thinking about all of the choices 
that you make when you speak. How many different ways to say ‘goodbye’ can you list in your native language? Would you use all of them? 
Are there some that you would only use under certain circumstances?
26 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
2. Are all three types of communicative competence necessary for 
successful performance in the second language classroom? What types 
of classroom activities might teachers include to encourage the development of skills in certain areas? Is it possible to focus only on one 
competence at a time, or are all three connected?
3. How should second language speakers use sociolinguistic information 
in their own speech? Should they use forms that are associated only 
with a particular geographic area? Is it important for them to reflect 
their own age, gender, and level of education appropriately? Does it 
matter if second language speakers know how to use informal language?
4. In your own teaching experience, can you think of times when you 
were caught off guard by a question related to sociolinguistic variation? What types of information would have been helpful to know? 
How might you handle the situation differently now?
5. In your own experience as a teacher or language learner, what evidence 
have you seen that learner language is systematic? What have you said 
or heard in a second language that shows evidence of having rules in 
place, even if they are not target-like?
NOTES
1. For now we use the word “rule” in quotes to acknowledge that the notion of rule is 
generally associated with innatist approaches, whereas constraints in general might 
be better called patterns or tendencies under other theoretical approaches.
2. Attention itself has been defined in a variety of ways and also constitutes a related 
and productive branch of second language research (Leow, 1998, 2001, 2002; Robinson, 1995; Schmidt, 1993, 1995; Tomlin & Villa, 1994).
2
Introduction to Sociolinguistic 
Variation
In Chapter One the importance of sociolinguistic variation for second language learners was explored, and it was seen that the ability to vary one’s speech 
from one situation to another and to properly interpret the subtle linguistic 
cues present in the language produced by others is an essential part of being 
a competent language user. We further explored the basic components of second language acquisition theory and established the foundation for integrating social variation into our understanding of the process of acquiring a new 
language. In that chapter, we took as a working definition of sociolinguistic 
variation “the choices a speaker makes when selecting the forms necessary to 
convey a message that is appropriate in a given context.” The goal of the present chapter is to explore this definition in greater depth by providing an overview of the most important principles of sociolinguistics as well as the recent 
developments in that field that have had a significant impact on research on 
variation in second languages.
WHAT IS SOCIOLINGUISTIC VARIATION?
When we study sociolinguistic variation, we seek to understand the correlation between a range of social factors and the linguistic forms used in a given 
context. In other words, we identify two or more forms that are used in the 
same context and set out to identify those factors—linguistic, social, or individual—that correspond to a given pattern of use. Each member of this group 
of two or more forms is called a variant. For example, we might notice that 
there are two variants of word final –ing. Sometimes a speaker may produce 
words with an –ing ending as ‘–in’ (e.g., ‘swimmin’’) and sometimes as ‘–ing’ 
(e.g., ‘swimming’). In this case ‘–in’ and ‘–ing’ are variants of the sociolinguistic variable –ing. After a careful analysis we might discover that the variant ‘–in’ 
is more likely to occur in verbs, is more frequent in male speech, and is more 
28 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
likely to be associated with informal speech contexts (e.g., Trudgill, 1974). 
Thus, sociolinguistics is the study of language in its social context. Social context can be understood to encompass factors related to the speaker, the hearer, 
the sociopolitical context, the historical context, factors of the immediate situation, and so on. A careful study of the sociolinguistic variable –ing requires 
an evaluation of the patterns of use of the variants ‘–in’ and ‘–ing’ as they relate 
(or do not relate) to factors of social context across all of these dimensions. In 
sum, the study of sociolinguistic variation requires a careful examination of 
patterns of language use as well as an interpretation that involves connecting 
these patterns to factors in the social context.
When people think of the differences that arise across speakers of the same 
language, geographic variation is often the first type of variation or difference 
that comes to mind. Along these lines we might say that speakers from a given 
region speak a certain dialect of a language. Nevertheless, the term “dialect” often 
carries negative associations in its common use and is sometimes used to refer 
to speakers who do not speak a standard variety of the language (see Chapter 
Nine for more on norms and standards). Linguists, however, are interested 
in variation across all speakers and do not associate variation with an evaluation of the quality of a particular manner of language use. In fact, through 
the study of sociolinguistic variation we become aware that all speakers vary 
from one situation to another and that it is as important to manage informal 
language as it is to manage formal language. In contemporary research, we 
use the term variety to refer to the language spoken by a particular group of 
speakers. That group of speakers may be defined by level of education, gender, 
or ethnicity, among other factors, as well as by geographic region. Building on 
our definition of sociolinguistic variation, a variety is simply the manner in 
which language is used within a particular social group. The reader will note 
that the term “variety” does not carry the potential negative connotations that 
the term “dialect” does; in addition, a social group may be defined along any 
of the dimensions mentioned in our earlier description.
As is clear from the range of factors that constitute social context, the 
work of sociolinguists can help us to understand how a given individual or 
group of speakers uses a variant and how this might change from one situation to another, one speaker to another, one geographic region to another, and 
so on. One additional contribution of sociolinguistic research is that it helps 
us to see how these patterns change over time. Most language speakers are 
aware that language changes over time, at least to the extent that we know 
that something happened to move us from Latin to Spanish or French, for 
example. What is less commonly recognized, however, is that language is constantly changing. In fact, for many speakers, the list of “pet peeves” with today’s 
grammar can often be traced to language change. Consider the sentences in 
Example 2.1:
INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLINGUISTIC VARIATIONg
Example 2.1 contains a list of sentences that may sound perfectly fine to some 
readers and wholly unacceptable to others. For most, however, they likely fall 
somewhere in the middle as things we know we say (or some speakers say) in 
casual contexts but do not include in formal writing. Each is, in fact, a good 
example of a form that is currently undergoing change and for which the 
newer variant still does not enjoy the same level of prestige as the older variant. 
Sociolinguistic research that uncovers patterns of use that connect variants 
such as ‘was/were’ in Example 2.1b (to factors such as age, level of education, 
gender, and others) helps us to understand how use of these forms changes 
over time. In sum, a sociolinguist seeks to understand which factors are connected to the use or non-use (or change in frequency of use) of a given form. 
The careful study of variation helps us to understand the patterns of use for a 
given set of forms as well as the way those patterns change over time.
KEY CONCEPTS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS
Using the definitions of sociolinguistic “variation”, “variant”, and “variety” from 
the preceding section, there is one additional concept that has been mentioned but deserves further attention. This is the sociolinguistic variable. A 
sociolinguistic variable is precisely the structure that demonstrates variation. 
That is, it is the structure for which more than one variant is available. Many 
of the most important concepts in sociolinguistics have to do with how a 
sociolinguistic variable is identified and described, how the context in which 
it occurs is evaluated, and the research methods that have been developed 
to study such variation. In the section that follows we explore these ideas 
in greater depth, establishing some of the necessary foundations for understanding the research examples provided later in the chapter and for applying 
these concepts to the study of the acquisition and use of a second language.
Ways to Think About Variation
It is not surprising that one of the primary interests of sociolinguists in general 
is to find ways to describe and explain variation. It was mentioned earlier that 
a sociolinguistic analysis involves the careful study of the factors—individual, 
EXAMPLE 2.1. Language changes in progress
a. Who are you talking to?
b. I wish I was rich!
c. Where are you at?
30 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
group, situational, and so forth—that correspond to the use or non-use of a 
given variant. In order to unify the findings across studies, early sociolinguists 
developed a mechanism called the variable rule (Labov, 1969). Labov (1969), 
for example, first introduced the idea of the variable rule in his discussion of 
the contraction and deletion of the English copula (i.e., be) in Standard English and what would today be called African American Vernacular English. 
These rules were developed to describe the contexts in which each variant 
occurred, and the rules sounded something like “variant A occurs when 
context Y is present, whereas variant B occurs in context Z.” For example, 
Labov (1969) described that contraction of the copula was favored in contexts 
with a following vowel and a preceding pronoun. The function of this type of 
rule was to connect contemporary linguistic theory, which described syntactic 
transformations using similar notation, to language variation and to provide 
a principled manner in which to describe not only categorical rules of use 
but also those that determined the constraints on forms that were sociolinguistically variable. To be sure, the number of theories that now attempt to 
account for variation as well as the mechanisms for noting constraints on use 
of variable forms are increasingly numerous and diverse. For example, many 
theories now include features, such as lexical frequency, and their approaches 
stem from a range of psychological and linguistic theories of language. The 
approaches to this issue that are most relevant for second languages will be 
dealt with in considerable depth in Section Two of this volume. For the present, 
however, the reader need only recognize that sociolinguists have long sought 
to demonstrate that variation is rule-driven (i.e., constrained) and that this 
variation can be described effectively following a careful analysis of language 
use by a given speech group. While the form of the variable rule has evolved, 
sociolinguists continue to view sociolinguistic variation as something that is 
governed by factors related to individual characteristics, group characteristics, 
and characteristics of the interaction itself.
Another feature of early work on sociolinguistic variation was that the variables studied (i.e., the structures that varied) were generally found at the level 
of the sound system. In fact, the definition of ‘sociolinguistic variable’ held 
that a variable was comprised of two or more forms that expressed equivalent 
meaning. In our earlier example of the possible realizations of ‘swimming’, 
where the final ‘g’ can be reduced in certain social and linguistic contexts, it 
is easy to accept that ‘swimming’ means ‘swimming’, regardless of how it is 
pronounced. Nevertheless, in the examples that appear later in the current 
chapter, we can see that variation can occur at many levels of the grammar, not 
just in the sound system. For example, I might vary in my use of who/whom, 
as in ‘who did you hear?’ and ‘whom did you hear?’ and, while we recognize 
that these two forms are filling the same “spot”, we also see that there may be 
subtle meaning differences between the two. Likewise, my choice between ‘I’m 
INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLINGUISTIC VARIATIONg
going to swim’ and ‘I will swim’ may be constrained by social and linguistic factors, but these two variants may also communicate subtle differences in 
meaning. The evolution from same-meaning variants at the level of the sound 
system to same-function variants (but perhaps slight meaning differences) for 
other variable structures has led to extensive debate in the field of sociolinguistics (e.g., Lavandera, 1978; Romaine, 1984). Fortunately, these disagreements 
have also led to very productive developments in our view of a sociolinguistic 
variable. At present, sociolinguistic variables beyond the level of the sound 
system abound and are important to the field of sociolinguistics in general. 
Additionally, work by researchers like Schwenter and Torres-Cacoullos (2008) 
and Aaron (2010) has pushed the field to view sociolinguistic variants as forms 
that fulfill a common function, rather than limiting research to only those that 
express identical meaning. In fact, Schwenter and Torres-Cacoullos (2008) 
argue that all of the forms that fulfill a given function at a particular point 
in time for an entire speech community must be considered, even in cases 
where individuals do not employ that full range of forms. This move beyond 
meaning equivalence has been described in Tagliamonte’s recent work as a sort 
of weak complementarity in which we find that in a given context one form 
occurs with greater frequency and another occurs with lesser frequency (see 
Tagliamonte [2012] for a good discussion of this issue). What is most important for the reader of the current volume is an appreciation for the evolving 
definition of the sociolinguistic variable as well as the validity of the study of 
variation beyond the sound system, both in first and second languages.
A final area of great interest for second language researchers that has seen 
important theoretical development over time in the field of sociolinguistics 
is the concept of the envelope of variation (Labov, 1972a). The envelope of 
variation is one of a handful of terms coined over the years to describe the context in which variation occurs. In order to adequately describe sociolinguistic 
variation, we must have an understanding of where such variation occurs. This 
“where”, or the context of potential variation, is likely best described as a combination of linguistic, social, and individual factors. One widely studied example of sociolinguistic variation in Spanish (and other languages) is that of the 
alternation between overt and null subject pronouns, as in yo hablo español as 
compared to hablo español. Both are grammatical, and the presence or absence 
of the overt form may be a function of a host of factors, including the country 
of origin of the speaker; the age, gender, and level of education of the speaker; 
the type of verb used; the extent to which the referent has been mentioned 
previously; the tense and aspect of the verb form; the formality of the context; 
and so on (Cameron, 1992; Otheguy, Zentella, & Livert, 2007). Nevertheless, 
the most powerful analysis of this alternation will focus exclusively on contexts where variation might actually occur. This means, for example, that contexts like relative clauses, where an overt form is ungrammatical, should not 
32 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
be included in the analysis. Oftentimes, the best way to find out where variation might occur is to identify those contexts in which it cannot occur and 
then proceed with an analysis of the contexts that remain. The upshot from 
the discussions regarding the envelope of variation (or other similar terms) is 
that “context” is not a monolithic concept. Instead, we must view context as a 
“place” that can only be described in terms of multiple factors, each of which 
might exert an influence on language use. As we explore sociolinguistic variation, it is helpful to remember that context cannot be a function of an individual lexical item or syntactic structure but, rather, should be viewed more 
holistically as the cross-section of a series of social, individual, and linguistic 
factors.
Ways to Study Variation
As we consider the view of variation described above, particularly the role that 
social factors and context of interaction play in language use, it becomes clear 
that investigations of language use must be carefully planned. This is because 
the mere presence of a researcher will, in fact, influence the language used in a 
given situation. Much of the early work on sociolinguistics discussed the role 
of vernacular speech (i.e., casual, informal speech) in revealing the true nature 
of language variation (Labov, 1972a). In fact, this informal language was identified as the true object of study for sociolinguists because more formal speech 
would represent a greater level of awareness of formality and diminished use 
of any forms that were stigmatized or associated with marginalized social 
groups. The contrast between the sociolinguist’s objective of studying vernacular, unmonitored speech and the fact that the mere presence of a researcher 
would make this impossible is known as the Observer’s Paradox. In short, 
what we hope to observe will not occur if we are there to observe it! This has 
led to careful thought on how best to approximate vernacular speech as well as 
informal speech settings in order to overcome the paradox.
In thinking of how one might study informal language, it is possible, of 
course, to record speech without the knowledge of the speaker. At the time 
when sociolinguistic research methods were in their infancy, doing so required 
intentional deceit and was considered to be unethical by most. In countries like 
the United States, many forms of such recording were also illegal (although 
laws varied from one state to another). Thus, researchers sought to find ways 
to attain speech samples that were good examples of informal speech and, at 
the same time, were not collected without the knowledge of the speaker. Some 
researchers made good use of a method called participant observation, which 
entails getting to know a certain speech community, participating in activities there, and then, after time, analyzing samples of speech collected through 
such participation. A favorite professor of mine played basketball with a group 
INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLINGUISTIC VARIATIONg
of young men several times a week in order to become part of their speech 
community. He was able to find an activity that he genuinely enjoyed and 
a positive means for gaining access to the group. Another good example of 
methodological creativity, which is now quite famous, is William Labov’s 
study of /r/ production in New York City (1972b). Labov conducted his 
research in department stores with differing price points (taken as an indicator 
of social class) and rode in the elevators, asking directions to certain departments. For example, he asked ‘where are the women’s shoes?’ and the desired 
response was ‘fourth floor’. This response gave him two tokens of the /r/ he 
sought to study and, by asking for a repetition, he could elicit a second production, which differed in attention to speech from the first. In that study, Labov 
gained access to the speech of numerous strangers from a variety of social 
backgrounds in a context that was not overly formal. Methods such as participant observation or Labov’s more specialized use of random sampling are good 
examples of attempts to get at casual speech and minimize the influence of 
the researcher.
Perhaps the best-known example of sociolinguistic research methodology, also made famous by Labov, is the sociolinguistic interview. This interview, unlike other types of interviews, manages the topics of conversation in 
order to gain access to less formal and less monitored speech. To conduct a 
sociolinguistic interview, a researcher begins by chatting with the participant 
about current topics and personal background. From there, the interviewer 
can introduce topics that bring speakers into a conversation in which they 
are thinking more about what they are saying than how they are saying it. For 
example, participants might be asked about a time when they were in great 
danger or nearly died or a time when they were particularly happy or sad. The 
intent behind the questions is to help the speaker get lost in the event itself and 
“forget” about the presence of the researcher. Depending on the speech community, this topic may vary quite a bit, and generally researchers benefit from 
knowing about the community before beginning the interviews themselves. 
In my own dissertation research with second language speakers, I found that 
questions about the upcoming prom, which is the biggest social event of the 
year for many American teens, often led participants to lose themselves in the 
details of planning for the event. What remains constant across studies using 
this method is that they seek to elicit casual speech that is meaning-focused, 
rather than producing careful speech in which speakers are more mindful of 
the form of their speech.
A final area of research that is of central importance for understanding 
sociolinguistic variation, but requires an entirely different methodological 
approach, is research on language attitudes. In the case of this area, researchers 
must not limit themselves to knowing what a speaker says they do, regardless of the context in which this is asked. This is because there can be stigma 
34 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
associated with holding negative attitudes and, as humans, we often feel pressure to present ourselves in a positive light. What is more, sometimes we are 
quite unaware of the associations we hold, particularly when it comes to our 
reaction to features of language. Thus, we may know that if we hear the word 
‘ain’t’, many listeners will have a negative impression of the speaker, but, for 
example, how many times might a speaker produce ‘swimmin’ instead of 
‘swimming’ before we associate him or her with a lower social class or lower 
level of education? These are questions that generally cannot be answered 
consciously, even with a good deal of introspection. That said, there are ways 
to investigate implicit individual attitudes toward a given variant. One excellent example is the matched guise test. Tests of this sort ask participants to 
respond in some way to a speaker who uses different variants, while holding 
the physical appearance, voice, and other characteristics constant. So, a participant might listen to an utterance or a few sentences and then be asked to 
evaluate that speaker in some way, such as by asking what type of employment 
the speaker might be qualified to do or how friendly they sound. A task of this 
sort will include several examples of a variant and contrast those examples 
with additional items that do not contain that variant but are otherwise equal. 
A statistical analysis of the differences in the evaluation awarded to speakers 
who do or do not use a given variant tells us a great deal about the attitudes 
that participants hold toward that variant, even when these attitudes are subconscious and hard to articulate. Understanding how speakers evaluate a given 
variant goes a long way toward adequately describing the use of a given form 
as well as the change in the use of that form (see Chapter Three for more about 
the role of prestige in language change).
A final aspect of research methodology in sociolinguistics that is important 
to understand is the use of quantitative analysis to identify patterns in the data. 
Such methods can work with a range of elicitation techniques, including those 
mentioned here. Thus, we mean to address ways to analyze the data once they 
have been collected, rather than a competing means of elicitation. Once the 
data have been collected, sociolinguists take each instance of the variable structure under consideration (i.e., all variants that are produced to fulfill the function of the sociolinguistic variable) and assess the relevant linguistic and social 
factors for that instance. This means that for every instance of ‘–in’ or ‘–ing’, 
the researcher also codes the occurrence for the word class in which the token 
occurred, the topic of conversation, the gender of the speaker who produced 
it, and so on. Each factor is an independent variable that can be assessed 
for influence on the variants produced. These variants can also be referred to 
as categories of the dependent variable, just as the varying conditions for the 
influencing factors (e.g., male or female speaker) can be referred to as categories 
of the independent variables. Coding a variable effectively entails understanding the correlates of such use identified in previous literature and, at times, 
INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLINGUISTIC VARIATIONg
identifying new, relevant features through this coding process. For example, 
the utterance in Example 2.2 comes from data examined for Spanish subject 
pronoun expression in Geeslin and Gudmestad (2008b) and was uttered by a 
native speaker of Spanish. Each of the three instances of the dependent variable 
subject (non)expression can be coded for the independent variables switch reference, tense/mood/aspect of the verb, and the person/number of the reference.
The coding of the three utterances is presented in Table 2.1.
Once each token is coded for all of the independent variables believed 
to be related to the use of the forms of the dependent variable, they can be 
entered into a statistical analysis. One of the most common forms of analysis 
is a regression analysis, which can simultaneously consider the effect of several 
independent variables on the dependent variable. Sociolinguists often conduct 
these analyses using a program called Goldvarb (e.g., Sankoff, Tagliamonte, 
& Smith, 2005; earlier versions were referred to as Varbrul). This program 
identifies the independent variables that are important in predicting the use 
of a given variant, and they also provide a factor weight. The factor weight 
tells the researcher quite a bit about the magnitude of the influence of a given 
independent variable on the dependent variable and also about the direction 
of that effect. One additional benefit of this and related statistical analyses is 
that it provides a model that can be compared across studies, across speech 
communities, across elicitation tasks, and so on. We will see in Section Two 
EXAMPLE 2.2. Subject expression in Geeslin & Gudmestad (2008b)
Mi padre ha llegado . . . ¿Cuándo ha llegado? . . . Ha llegado el sábado.
My father arrived . . . When did (he) arrive? . . . (He) arrived on Saturday.
TABLE 2.1
Summary of coding scheme for Example 2.2
Null/
overt
Switch/same 
reference
Tense, mood, 
and aspect
Person/
number
Mi padre ha 
llegado
Overt Switch (based on 
previous context)
Present perfect 3rd 
singular
¿Cuándo ha 
llegado?
Null Same (same referent 
as previous verb)
Present perfect 3rd 
singular
Ha llegado 
el sábado
Null Same Present perfect 3rd 
singular
36 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
of this volume that the use of this type of analysis has been applied to second 
language research with equally informative results.
SUMMARY
Thus far we have come to appreciate the sociolinguist’s view of linguistic variation as well as some of the tools used to investigate this variation. We know 
now that sociolinguists view variation as something that is rule-governed in 
the sense that it is constrained by multiple linguistic, social, individual, and 
situational factors. It is clear that methodological concerns present interesting 
challenges, and, in response to these challenges, sociolinguists have developed 
creative methods for attaining the data that best serves their research goals. 
Finally, the research questions asked by sociolinguists require methods of analysis that allow us to examine the influence of many factors on a single variable 
at the same time, and this need has led to the development of sophisticated 
statistical tools. With these basic concepts in mind, the remainder of the chapter is dedicated to exploring some of the ways in which language varies with a 
particular focus on the range of variants that exist, from the sound system and 
beyond, to every other level of the grammar.
HOW DO LANGUAGES VARY?
Although the earliest work in sociolinguistic variation dealt primarily with 
features of the sound system that varied across social settings or across speech 
communities, languages vary at all levels of the grammar. This includes variation in verb forms, in word choice, in terms of politeness, in sentence structure, 
and so on. As was discussed previously, the inclusion of additional cases of 
variation has led to modifications in how we identify sociolinguistic variables 
and the contexts in which they vary. The remainder of this chapter is dedicated 
to the exploration of several examples of language variation. Each was selected 
to provide a clear example of language variation at differing levels of the grammar. Through each example we can also see the many social correlates that 
explain this variation as well as the methods that were used to investigate each 
case. Clearly this handful of cases does not represent the wealth of research 
currently available on each variant, each language, or each speech community. 
Nevertheless, they allow us to put the previous concepts into practice and to 
see how languages vary across groups of speakers.
Case 1. Phonological Variation in the Arabic of Saudi Arabia
Among the many great examples of research on phonological variation is a 
study of Najdi Arabic by Al-Rojaie (2013). This variety of Arabic is spoken 
INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLINGUISTIC VARIATIONg
in the Qas˙
¯ım province of Saudi Arabia, and the investigation examines the 
phoneme /k/ and the process of affrication in lexical stems (e.g., [ats῀il] 
‘food’ or [barkih] ‘cistern’) and/or in the suffix form of the second-person 
feminine singular object [–ki]. In the variety examined by Al-Rojaie, the 
phoneme /k/ can be realized as [ts῀] or [k]. The data analyzed come from 
sociolinguistic interviews, of the type described earlier, completed by 72 
speakers of Arabic from this region. To ensure that only potentially variable contexts were included, tokens that occurred in borrowed words, from 
Modern Arabic or from other European languages, were excluded. This 
yielded a total of 2,396 tokens. In order to learn more about the patterns 
of use of these two variants of /k/, several different independent variables 
were examined to determine their relationship to use. Looking at the linguistic context, each token was analyzed for the phonological environment 
and coded for factors such as whether there was an adjacent front vowel. 
Additionally, Al-Rojaie analyzed several speaker characteristics, including 
age, gender, and level of education.
An analysis using the statistical program Goldvarb, which conducts a specific type of regression analysis also known as a variable rule analysis, identified several constraints on the use of the two variants of /k/. For example, 
the variant [ts῀] was most frequent when adjacent to high front vowels, followed by adjacency to low front vowels, and then by contexts that contained 
no front vowel. The weights produced by the Goldvarb program assigned a 
weight of 0.92 to the first condition, 0.62 to the second, and 0.09 to the third. 
Thus, we can see that the first two conditions favor affrication and the last 
strongly disfavors it. There were also significant effects for age, gender, and 
level of education. The analysis showed that older speakers were most likely 
to produce [ts῀] and the younger speakers were least likely. Additionally, men 
favored affrication more than women. Finally, affrication was most likely 
to occur in the speech of speakers with lower levels of education and least 
likely with college-educated speakers. Despite the variation in /k/ in lexical 
stems, when this segment was part of the feminine suffix for second-person 
singular objects or possessives, it was realized as [ts῀] all of the time. In other 
words, this context is not part of the envelope of variation for this sociolinguistic variable. Although we will touch on these issues in greater depth in 
the next chapter, this study shows that for this dialect of Arabic, educated 
younger women appear to be leading a change in the direction of deaffrication of /k/.
This study demonstrates some of the methodological practices described 
earlier in this chapter, such as the sociolinguistic interview and the use of 
Goldvarb for data analysis, and provides a nice example of sociolinguistic 
variation at the level of phonology. The details of this study are summarized in 
Table 2.2.
38 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
Case 2. Morphological Variation in Spanish
As mentioned previously, the debate surrounding meaning equivalence and 
the phonological variable soon led to investigations of sociolinguistic variables beyond the level of the sound system. Our second example comes from 
a research investigation by Barnes (2012) on variation in the second-person 
singular preterit form (i.e., past time reference with perfective aspect) in Spanish. Whereas most second-person forms in Spanish end in the morpheme –s
(e.g., comes ‘you eat’, comías ‘you ate’ (imperfect) and comerás ‘you will eat’ 
for the verb comer ‘to eat’), the preterit form does not contain an ‘s’ at the end 
(i.e., comiste ‘you ate’) in formal varieties of Spanish. Nevertheless, forms with 
an –s ending are produced in some speech communities and can be considered a variant of this sociolinguistic variable. The data analyzed by Barnes 
TABLE 2.2
Summary of details of Al-Rojaie (2013)
Key features Summary
The sociolinguistic 
variable
/k/ in Arabic spoken in Qas.ı¯m province of Saudi 
Arabia
The variants [ts῀] and [k]
The envelope of 
variation
All words that are NOT borrowings and contain 
/k/
Independent factors Phonological environment (adjacent vowel), age, 
gender, level of education
Data elicitation method Sociolinguistic interview
Method of analysis Goldvarb (regression analysis)
Summary of findings Affrication (i.e., [ts῀] rather than [k]) is more 
common adjacent to high front vowels in lexical 
stems for speakers who are older, male, and have 
lower levels of education
Connections to issues in 
sociolinguistics
We see a typical pattern of language change in 
these results in that for this variety of Arabic, 
there is a change toward deaffrication (i.e., 
production of [k]) led by younger, female, 
educated speakers
INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLINGUISTIC VARIATIONg
come from three different corpora, together containing interviews and other 
speech samples from several different geographic regions where Spanish is 
spoken. For the purpose of her analysis, Barnes was able to extract sufficient 
tokens from the Spanish of Venezuela and from Spain; other dialects were 
grouped together in order to provide sufficient tokens for analysis. Only some 
of the verbs exhibited variation between the two forms (with and without 
final –s), and this led Barnes to exclude 37 verbs from the analysis, along with 
instances of formulaic utterances and metalinguistic comments, all of which 
fall outside the envelope of variation. Even with this approach, Barnes was 
able to extract 854 tokens of second-person preterit forms from the three 
corpora.
The focus of Barnes’ (2012) analysis was on the relationship between the 
linguistic contextual factors and the use of final –s on second-person preterit forms. To this end, she coded each token for several independent factors, 
including the presence of a pronominal subject, the specificity of the subject, 
the semantic class of the verb, the conjugation class of the verb, the frequency 
of the preterit form of each verb and the following phonological context. 
Additionally, she indicated the regional variety of the speaker who produced 
each form. Her analysis of the distribution of the forms showed that for both 
Spain and Venezuela, about 13% of the tokens were marked with final –s. For 
the remaining varieties, the figure was slightly higher (16%). Barnes then conducted a Goldvarb analysis, which showed that, of all the factors included in 
the analysis, the frequency of the verb form and the following phonological 
context were the two that significantly constrained variation. An examination 
of these factors showed that –s marking is favored in low frequency verbs and 
when the verb form is followed by a vowel. The details of this research project 
are summarized in Table 2.3.
The investigation by Barnes (2012) is a good example of the extension of a variationist sociolinguistic analysis to a morphological phenomenon. Additionally, the study has important implications for usage-based 
approaches, such as that of lexical diffusion (Bybee, 2002), which affords an 
important role for lexical frequency. This model will be discussed in greater 
detail in Chapter Five, but for the purpose of the current discussion, it is 
sufficient to recognize that the process of analogy employed when final –s
marking is extended to preterit forms in the second-person singular shows 
the strongest early effect with low-frequency forms. For researchers working on Spanish in particular, this study also provides an interesting counter 
example to the wealth of studies that demonstrate /s/-weakening in other 
contexts. Finally, this research shows that no single variety of Spanish is 
characterized by this phenomenon; rather, it is present in several regional 
varieties of Spanish.
40 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
TABLE 2.3
Summary of details of Barnes (2012)
Key features Summary
The sociolinguistic 
variable
The second-person singular preterit
The variants Preterit forms with and without final –s (e.g., dijiste and 
dijistes)
The envelope of 
variation
All instances of second-person singular preterit with 
verbs that exhibited variation (i.e., for which there was 
at least one token of each variant)
Independent 
factors
Presence of pronominal subject, subject specificity, 
semantic class of the verb, type of conjugation (-aste or
-iste), frequency of the preterit form (using Corpus de 
Referencia del Español Actual, or CREA, values), regional 
variety (Spain, Venezuela, other), and following 
phonological context (i.e., vowel, consonant, or pause)
Data elicitation 
method
Three Corpora: CREA (spoken Spanish), Davies 
Corpus, and Habla Popular Mexican Spanish corpus
Method of analysis Goldvarb (regression analysis)
Summary of 
findings
(1) Frequency: –s marking favored in low-frequency 
forms and disfavored with high-frequency forms
(2) Following phonological context: –s marking favored 
with a following vowel, disfavored with a following 
consonant or pause
Connections 
to issues in 
sociolinguistics
Bybee’s lexical diffusion model: the analogical change of 
adding –s affects least frequent verbs first
Counter to multiple examples of /s/-weakening
Analogy not limited to a single variety of Spanish 
(geographically)
Case 3. Syntactic Variation in Chinese
Moving from morphology to sociolinguistic variation in syntax, one of the 
most prominent examples of variation of this type is in the expression of subject forms across several different languages. Research on this topic in Spanish, 
for example, is extensive and is the focus of numerous research articles and 
edited volumes (e.g., Carvalho, Orozco, & Shin, in press). Some languages, for 
example Mandarin Chinese and American Sign Language, have just begun to 
INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLINGUISTIC VARIATIONg
see investigations into null and overt subject forms. The third case we examine 
in this chapter is a study of the expression of subjects in Mandarin Chinese by 
Li, Chen, and Chen (2012), and it is the first of its type to examine this phenomenon in a non-inflectional language. The data analyzed by Li, Chen, and 
Chen came from 20 speakers of Mandarin produced in sociolinguistic interviews, a story-telling activity, and in classroom discourse. The speakers ranged 
in age from 18 to 65, and there were 12 females and 8 males. The story-telling 
activity is another popular elicitation method that uses a video or a wordless 
storybook to enable each participant to narrate the same story. In the case of 
this study, the popular Pear Story video (Chafe, 1980) was used to provide the 
basis for narration. These three tasks together provided the researchers with 
8,507 tokens of subject forms in variable contexts.
The analysis of the distribution of forms produced by the Mandarin speakers in Li, Chen, and Chen (2012) showed that 47.2% of the tokens included an 
overt pronominal form, and the others were null. Each token was also coded 
for a series of independent linguistic factors, such as person and number of the 
verb form and specificity of the referent, as well as social factors, such as age, 
gender, and occupation. One additional contribution of this study is that it 
includes an analysis of differences related to discourse style as indicated by the 
three tasks used to elicit the speech from the participants. Each of these factors was included in a Varbrul analysis to determine the degree to which they 
predicted the realization of overt subject forms. The results showed that several of the linguistic factors, including switch reference, person, number, and 
specificity of the referent, were related to subject form expression. Likewise, 
Li, Chen, and Chen found that older speakers and female speakers were more 
likely to express overt subject forms. Additionally, the analyses showed that the 
predictive factors differed somewhat for students as compared to teachers. The 
details of this research study are summarized in Table 2.4.
As mentioned earlier, one of the important contributions of the research 
by Li, Chen, and Chen (2012) is that it extends a vibrant strand of research 
on subject form expression to a non-inflecting language. What is more, the 
analysis shows that similar factors are at work in constraining the use of subject forms in Mandarin Chinese as those that constrain other, more widely 
researched, languages, such as Spanish. Likewise, it appears that linguistic factors play the greatest role in influencing use of this variable structure. Another 
interesting connection is that the authors link the differences between teachers 
and students to the differing purposes for which they use language and the 
types of language produced to fulfill those purposes. For example, teachers 
may use shorter utterances in an effort to elicit greater production from learners, and learners may, in turn, produce longer narratives. We will see that the 
features of the elicitation tasks themselves are an important factor for understanding variation in second languages as well.
42 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
TABLE 2.4
Summary of details of Li, Chen, & Chen (2012)
Key features Summary
The sociolinguistic 
variable
Subject forms in Mandarin Chinese
The variants Null and overt pronouns
The envelope of 
variation
Contexts where both null and overt subject pronouns 
are possible
Independent 
factors
Linguistic: Person and number, coreference (i.e., 
switch reference), specificity of referent, sentence type 
(statements, questions, and imperatives)
Social: Age (five groups: 20 and below, 21–30, 31–40, 
41–50, above 50), occupation (student or teacher), 
gender, formality/discourse context (classroom speech, 
information conversation, or retelling of Pear Story)
Data elicitation 
method
Sociolinguistic interviews, a story-telling activity, and 
classroom speech
Method of analysis Varbrul (multivariate analysis)
Summary of 
findings
Linguistic factors (differed somewhat between students 
and teachers): null is favored by same reference, plural, 
and inanimate referents and imperatives
Social factors: null is favored by younger speakers 
(under 40) and males
Connections 
to issues in 
sociolinguistics
Subject expression in Mandarin generally constrained 
by the same factors as in other languages/studies
Linguistic factors account for much of the variation
Differences between students and teachers related to 
their different roles and the types (and purposes) of 
the discourse they produce
Case 4. Pragmatic Variation in Spanish
Another level of the grammar, and one that is often treated separately from 
other levels, is pragmatics. The basic unit of analysis in pragmatics is the 
speech act. In this sense all of the various linguistic tools that are used to complete a given act are examined. Examples of speech acts include requests, invitations, refusals, and compliments. In the case of all of these speech acts, there 
INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLINGUISTIC VARIATIONg
are several possible ways to express the intended meaning, and speakers vary 
their lexical items, verb forms, word order, address forms, and so on in order 
to achieve their communicative goals in an appropriate and contextually sensitive way. One good example of this type of research is a study of compliments 
in Mexican Spanish conducted by Nelson and Hall (1999). Their analysis of 
how speakers compliment others was based on interview responses from 80 
native speakers of Mexican Spanish, divided nearly evenly between males and 
females and ranging in age from 16 to 30 years old. In total they collected 
240 compliments, and they analyzed these according to which attributes were 
praised, what the form of the compliment was (e.g., adjective-based vs. nounbased), what the genders of the giver and recipient were, and what the relationship between the giver and recipient was.
Throughout the analysis, Nelson and Hall (1999) compared the percentage of compliments that corresponded to each category of each independent 
variable. They found that three of the most common attributes complimented 
were overall appearance, appearance enhancers (e.g., clothes or jewelry), and 
natural appearance (e.g., hair, eyes). Their analysis of the types of expressions used to form a compliment revealed a number of strategies, including 
adjective-based compliments (e.g., ¡Que bonito vestido! ‘how pretty your/the 
dress’) and noun-based compliments (e.g., Eres un angel ‘you are an angel’), 
and also that the adjective-based compliments constituted a full 73% of all 
compliments. The researchers further examined each type, seeking to determine, for example, what types of items were modified by an adjective in the 
adjective-based compliments. They identified several different syntactic structures within each category of compliment. Looking at the results for gender 
of the giver and recipient of the compliment, they showed that men strongly 
favored complimenting women (84% of the time) over complimenting other 
men (16% of the time), whereas women complimented men and other women 
at equal rates. Finally, they showed that the greatest number of compliments 
was directed at acquaintances, with strangers and those they knew closely 
receiving fewer compliments. The findings of this study are summarized in 
Table 2.5.
One important result of research of this type is that we can see the relationship between forms of giving a compliment and linguistic as well as social 
factors. In this way, it is perfectly reasonable to view pragmatic variation as 
another case of sociolinguistic variation. The study by Nelson and Hall (1999) 
further demonstrates that a careful analysis of a given speech act can provide 
essential information about the target language for second language acquirers 
as well as identify the various factors that must be manipulated in order to use 
that speech act in a native-like way. The findings from this study in particular 
also indicate that a closer examination of the differences between men and 
women is warranted and of interest to the field at large.
44 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
TABLE 2.5
Summary of details of Nelson & Hall (1999)
Key features Summary
The 
sociolinguistic 
variable
Compliments in Mexican Spanish
The variants A range of syntactic structures
The envelope 
of variation
Any attempt to praise an attribute of another
Independent 
factors
Linguistic: compliment base (e.g., adjective, noun, etc.) 
and syntactic structure (e.g., verb phrase + adjective 
(noun) as in tienes bonitos ojos ‘you have pretty eyes’)
Social: gender of giver, gender of receiver, degree of 
intimacy between giver and receiver
Data elicitation 
method
Sociolinguistic interviews, including questions about 
compliments
Method of 
analysis
Analysis of the distribution of types across a sample of 
240 compliments produced by 80 speakers
Summary of 
findings
Adjective-based compliments constituted nearly 3/4 of 
the sample and were formed using 6 different syntactic 
structures; men complimented women with dramatically 
greater frequency than other men (86% vs. 16%), 
whereas women complimented men and other women 
at equal rates; compliments were given with greatest 
frequency to acquaintances (vs. intimates or strangers)
Connections 
to issues in 
sociolinguistics
Variation at the level of pragmatics is a function of 
linguistic and social factors; in this particular case, gender 
seems to play an interesting role
Case 5. Lexical Variation in American English
Some of the earliest examples of research on linguistic variation take into 
account the differences we find in the lexical items used to denote certain 
objects or concepts. As second language learners we are quickly aware of these 
differences. For example, in Spanish, we learn that there are two ways to say 
‘peach’: durazno and melocotón. Both are acceptable and their distribution is 
largely a function of geography. There are, of course, excellent studies of the 
type mentioned above that take into account the variation in lexical terms that 
INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLINGUISTIC VARIATIONg
 is constrained by social factors such as age, gender, or ethnicity. Nevertheless, 
the most predominant examples are studies of geographic variation, and the 
results of the fi ndings are reported in the form of language maps. Such maps 
 were the mainstay of classic dialectology and continue to be the focus of lin -
 guistic atlases. Additionally, they oft en capture public interest and appear in 
newspaper articles and on various social media sites. Th us, instead of includ -
 ing an example of a typical sociolinguistic research study here, we have opted 
to include a sample map from research by Joshua Katz, a statistician at North 
Carolina State University. At the time this chapter was written, his maps were 
included in articles ranging from the Boston Globe (Hartnett, 2013) to the 
Huffi ngton Post (Kleinman, 2013), and the full collection was available on his 
own web site (Katz, n.d.). Figure 2.1 shows Katz’s map for the distribution of 
words for carbonated beverages in the United States (taken from http://spark.
rstudio.com/jkatz/SurveyMaps/ ). 
 CONCLUSION 
 Th e second half of Chapter Two has been devoted to the exploration of several 
diff erent examples of research on sociolinguistic variation. Th e overarching 
goal of this approach was to illustrate several of the concepts introduced in 
What is your generic term for a sweetened carbonated beverage?
Soda
Pop
Coke
Other
Source: Joshua Katz, Dept. of Statistics, NC State University
 FIGURE 2.1 Distribution of the words for carbonated beverages in the United States 
46 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
the early part of the chapter while at the same time demonstrating variation 
across levels of the grammar. We have seen cases of variation in the sound 
system, in verbal morphology, in subject expression, in compliment strategies, 
and in word choice. In every case the research presented here has explored the 
linguistic and social constraints that influence speaker choices of these variants. What is more, these studies provide examples of the common methods 
of elicitation and analysis used in contemporary sociolinguistic research. In 
Chapter Three we will explore the social correlates of this variation in greater 
depth, and in the remainder of this volume we will see that these same methods can be (and have been) applied to second language learners.
READING BEYOND THE TEXT
a. Dodsworth, R., & Kohn, M. (2012). Urban rejection of the vernacular: The 
SVS undone. Language Variation and Change, 24, 221–245.
b. Huback, A. (2011). Irregular plurals in Brazilian Portuguese: An exemplar 
model approach. Language Variation and Change, 23(2), 1–12.
c. Kretzschmar, W., McDavid, V., Lerud, T., & Johnson, E. (1993). Handbook of 
the linguistic atlas of the Middle and South Atlantic States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
d. McKee, R., Schembri, A., & Johnston, T. (2011). Variable “subject” presence 
in Australian sign language and New Zealand sign language. Language Variation and Change, 23, 375–398.
e. Van Compernolle, R.A. (2008). Morphosyntactic and phonological constraints on negative particle variation in French-language chat discourse. 
Language Variation and Change, 20, 317–339.
COMPREHENSION AND APPLICATION
A. Comprehension
1. What are variants and sociolinguistic variables?
2. What is a variety?
3. How do variable rules work?
4. What is an envelope of variation?
5. What is the Observer’s Paradox?
6. Describe Labov’s study of /r/ production in New York City.
7. What do matched-guise tests require of participants?
8. How do dependent and independent variables differ?
9. In Barnes (2012), what two factors significantly favored preterit –s
marking in Spanish?
10. In Li, Chen, and Chen (2012), what linguistic and sociolinguistic factors significantly affected subject form expression in Chinese?
INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLINGUISTIC VARIATIONg
11. In Nelson and Hall (1999), what were the most common compliment 
strategies in Spanish? Which gender gave more compliments? Which 
gender received more compliments? Who received more compliments: 
friends, acquaintances, or strangers?
B. Application
1. You have read that word final –ing is sometimes reduced in English. 
Tomorrow take note of every word that you hear that ends in –ing and 
write down whether the person produced the –g on the end or not. 
Also, take note of what part of speech the word was and if you think 
the word is common. You should also write down the speaker’s sex, age, 
estimated socioeconomic level, as well as the situation in which and to 
whom he or she is speaking. At the end of the day, see if you notice any 
patterns in your data.
2. As you have probably begun to notice, there are many sociolinguistic variables in the world. Think about the words you use for various 
household items. Do you know of any other words that exist for certain 
items? Who uses those words? Does that person differ from you by 
age? Geographic origin? Sex? Socioeconomic level? Think of as many 
examples as you can and what social variables correspond with different responses.
3. What variety do you speak? Is that the most common variety at your 
university? What other varieties do you hear there? Are you aware of 
language attitudes (positive or negative) toward any of the varieties? 
What are they? What sorts of features do people make comments about 
with respect to your variety or other varieties?
4. Think of a time when you were interviewed. What was the setting? 
Class project? Newspaper article? Doctor’s visit? A study? How did you 
feel while you were being interviewed? How do you think your language differed in that moment compared to how you would normally 
speak with your friends?
5. You read about the study performed by Barnes (2012) where speakers 
extended the use of –s to mark second-person singular forms on past 
tense verb endings in Spanish. In English, do you ever hear anyone say 
anything that differs from what you would read in a grammar book? 
What does the person say? What does the grammar book say? Do you 
see evidence of a “rule” in that person’s head that caused them to produce that form? Can you think of examples from music, television, or 
movies?
3
The Role of Social Characteristics 
in Language Variation
In the previous chapter we saw that languages vary at all levels of the grammar, 
and we explored examples, ranging from variation in the sound system to variation at the level of pragmatics. In each case, we noted that there were features 
in the linguistic context, or linguistic factors, which could be used to describe 
and predict the use of a given variant. In several of the studies we also saw that 
characteristics of individual speakers or a group of speakers could be related 
to linguistic variation. The goal of the current chapter is to explore in greater 
depth these personal or group characteristics that are linked to variation. The 
motivation for doing so, of course, is to better understand not only what must 
vary in language in order to communicate effectively but also what such variation says about the speaker, as an individual and as a member of a group.
WHAT IS INDIVIDUAL VARIATION?
For second language speakers and native speakers alike, the way we say things 
(or write things) gives hints about who we are (whether we intend to do so or 
not). We reveal characteristics of our age, gender, social class, ethnicity, and so 
on, each time we produce language. In turn, each of these reflects certain cultural and sociohistoric characteristics of the societies, regions, and time periods that have shaped our identities. What is more, we understand these things 
in the language we comprehend as well. In some cases we are aware of the 
clues that let us know about a speaker, but in others, our judgments are subconscious (but no less powerful). It is important to state from the outset that 
these individual characteristics have to do more with the group with which 
a speaker identifies than with biological facts. For example, some men may 
appropriate female speech and some women may appropriate male speech for 
a variety of reasons, including sexual orientation, workplace norms, and social 
connections. Likewise, we may know speakers who appropriate the language 
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
of a younger social group than their chronological, biological age would indicate. In each of these cases, the upshot is that as language users, we provide 
information about our position in society and about the groups with which 
we have contact in our daily interactions.
We have also described in earlier chapters that the way we speak may indicate our geographic background. The way we use particular linguistic variants across all levels of the grammar provides information about where we 
have lived, worked, and spent time. We are likely able to quickly point to differences in vocabulary across geographic regions where the same language is 
spoken (see Chapter One for a list of examples and Chapter Two for links to 
dialect maps in the US), but it is actually the case that variation at all levels 
of the grammar can be influenced by geography. Taking this in concert with 
the characteristics mentioned above, we can see that the language we produce 
identifies the groups with whom we identify and have contact as well as our 
geographic past. Once again, we all know speakers who wish to cease using a 
regional, home variant (at least in certain contexts such as a job interview or 
academic paper) and have done so; thus, regional variants reflect speaker identity as much as historical facts. With all of these types of variation in mind, we 
can see that individual variation, simply put, is the way that a single speaker 
uses language to reflect a range of characteristics. When we refer to the way 
a single person produces and interprets language, the term used to describe 
this variety of language is idiolect. An idiolect is the variety spoken by a single 
individual.
HOW DO WE STUDY VARIATION IN GROUPS OF SPEAKERS?
It can be interesting to determine how a given individual uses language, and it 
is certainly important to understand how the language of an individual reflects 
that speaker’s own identity. Nevertheless, classic research in sociolinguistics is 
generally interested in the “social” aspect of language (e.g., Labov, 1972a)—in 
other words, the general tendencies of multiple individuals in a given society or 
place. Likewise, second language acquisition researchers and language instructors are interested in helping learners use language that reflects the tendencies 
of a target group, not a particular individual. Thus, both lines of inquiry tend to 
focus on groups of speakers, rather than individuals. Perhaps one of the most 
widely discussed concepts in sociolinguistics is precisely what this reference 
group might be called, how it can be identified, and how its influence might 
be studied. In fact, our view of social groups has been said to evolve in “waves”. 
During the first wave of sociolinguistic research, the primary preoccupation 
was to describe how linguistic and macro-level social factors described the use 
of a given linguistic variant (Tagliamonte, 2012). For example, we might have 
examined how social class influenced the variable production of /r/ in New 
50 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
York City English (Labov, 1972b). In order to carry out this type of investigation, a sociolinguist might have studied a relatively large group in which 
individuals were sub-categorized by social group. In other words, the group 
might be divided into several subgroups that include members over 60 years 
of age (group 1), those ranging in age from 40–60 (group 2), others from 
20–40 (group 3), and those under 20 years of age (group 4). This type of subcategorization could be applied to social class, to age, to gender, to ethnicity, 
and so on. By comparing the patterns of use across these subgroups, linguists 
were able to identify differences according to social factors and describe these 
differences accordingly. This led to important work identifying language 
change in progress as well as theories about which groups lead in language 
change and which groups lag behind (see later sections in this chapter for more 
detail). Early sociolinguists, such as Labov (1972b) and Gumperz (1968) identified the groups of speakers to be included in this type of study as those constituting a speech community. Members of a speech community are said to 
share the same norms of communication. To be clear, this should not be taken 
to mean that all speakers in the group use linguistic forms in the same way. 
Instead, the idea was that members of a speech community shared the same 
norms for evaluating the use of these forms (or that the use of each form was 
clearly associated with a specific subgroup within the speech community). In 
other words, all members of a speech community shared the same definition 
of prestige, or positive evaluation of a given form, even though some speakers 
used these positively evaluated forms more frequently than others. Over time, 
the concept of shared norms as well as the very definition of speech community has evolved. Nevertheless, even in recent work the notion of a unified 
set of sociolinguistic norms remains central (Labov, 2007, p. 347). Although 
the definition of speech community has evolved over time, the approach to 
studying variation across categories of social variables of this type remains 
important today, and corpora continue to be built and studied using these 
traditional social categories (e.g., Bentivoglio & Sedano, 1987).
Despite their continued importance, it was also noted that there are some 
limitations to the traditional approach to speech communities. Perhaps one of 
the most significant confounds is that there seem to be several cases in which 
the notion of a widely agreed-upon evaluation of prestige and, more specifically, the idea that social class determines prestige, does not hold (e.g., Le 
Page & Keller, 1985; Lippi-Green, 1989; Rickford, 1986). Complications of this 
sort led to a shift in focus from macro-level social characteristics to the type 
and strength of connections an individual holds within a community. These 
connections, or ties, are known as social networks, and the researchers most 
closely associated with this concept are Jim and Leslie Milroy. The Milroys 
sought to connect theories in anthropology and sociology to the study of language use and language change. One fundamental difference in their approach 
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
was the belief that multiple norms of use could coexist in a single community such that a single variable, such as prestige, was insufficient to explain 
the complexity of the interaction between social ties and language variation 
(see Milroy [1987], Milroy & Gordon [2003], or Milroy & Milroy [1985] for 
details). In other words, the focus of their study was not comparisons among 
groups of speakers but rather the relationships, or social ties, of individual 
speakers to other members of a community. To this end, researchers working within a social network framework often come up with detailed accounts 
of the types of interactions an individual may have and the strength of connections between a given individual and subgroups within a community. 
The stronger the tie, the more likely a speaker is to reflect the norms of that 
group, regardless of whether that group’s patterns of use are consistent with 
external prestige norms. Among the many examples of research in which the 
social networks approach has been employed is Lippi-Green’s (1989) research 
on Grossdorf, an Austrian village in the Alps with only 800 inhabitants. Her 
investigation yielded a complex scale based on 16 different indicators of community involvement, accounting for facts such as connections through the 
workplace and with outside communities. Using this metric she was able to 
show that through this complex approach, one could identify certain genderspecific trajectories that would not have otherwise been apparent. In other 
words, a simple categorization of speakers by age, gender, social class, and the 
like would have failed to identify these patterns of use.
A related strand of research to that which focuses on social networks are the 
studies of smaller groups, known as communities of practice. These groups 
do not include the full range of gender, age, social class, and ethnic categories 
that a speech community does. Instead, they are smaller groups that come 
together around a particular enterprise (Eckert, 2000, p. 35). The community 
of practice is the site of the interaction where social meaning is indexed by 
linguistic elements and social meaning is co-constructed by the members of 
each group. Some of the most famous research on communities of practice 
has been carried out by Eckert (2000) and focuses on teenagers in Detroit 
at a suburban high school. The well-known communities of practice among 
these teens are the jocks and the burnouts, with the former group appropriating suburban norms and the latter appropriating urban norms to a greater 
degree. What makes this research unique is that it connects linguistic variation 
to other social behavior, or practices, such as participation in school activities, 
smoking, fashion choices, achievement of popularity, academic success, and 
the like. In other words, this research demonstrates how the use of a range 
of linguistic variants is one piece of an individual’s identity and can be best 
understood in the context of additional practices that mark that identity (see 
also work by Fought [1999] and Mendoza-Denton [2008] on gang membership, for good examples). Together with the research on social networks, this 
52 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
body of work constitutes a shift in sociolinguistic research because of its focus 
on speaker-defined categories (e.g., female nerd) as opposed to macro-level 
social groups (e.g., upper-class males).
A related strand of sociolinguistic research, which represents a further shift 
toward the individual, focuses on the behavior speakers use to mark identity 
or construct personality. Of interest in this third wave is any linguistic behavior that serves a social purpose, rather than examining language change or 
regional variation. This approach further views styles of speech as directly connected to individual identities and is concerned with how speakers go about 
constructing their own personalities. Examples of this research include studies 
of linguistic behavior of gays in California (Podesva, 2011) and “yuppies” in 
Beijing (Zhang, 2005), among many others. What is clear from simply naming the groups under focus is that the identity constructed is specific to gender, geography, and also additional categories that depart from the traditional 
sociolinguistic variables but are equally important in constructing identity.
What makes the development of how groups are viewed over time somewhat different from other issues in the fields of linguistic inquiry is that the 
analysis of speech communities, of communities of practice, and of individuals 
as identity makers are all still productive approaches to sociolinguistic variation. In many ways, they simply represent an increasingly evolved focus on 
different aspects of language use and language change. In this sense we can see 
how age-old concepts such as covert prestige (Trudgill, 1977), or the positive 
evaluation some speakers afford to non-prestige varieties of a language, is quite 
consistent with an examination of social ties to social groups that are not associated with the mainstream, such as the burnouts in Detroit. Likewise, we can 
see how a focus on individual identity construction or on social ties to a given 
professional network is consistent with concepts such as the linguistic market, 
which was identified to study the way in which a given speaker’s profession 
influences his or her speech (Sankoff & Laberge, 1978). For the purposes of 
second language acquisition research, the key insight to be gleaned from this 
discussion as a whole is that there are likely many factors that will influence 
language use, and these include macro-level social characteristics, the full range 
of social connections a language learner has, and also characteristics of that 
individual speaker’s identity. Thus, we must be mindful of the fact that social 
factors may come to bear on language use in second languages in a variety of 
ways. What is more, it is quite possible that identities and social networks are 
quite different for second language speakers, and, thus, we cannot expect to 
find identical access to prestige and non-prestige norms, nor can we anticipate 
that learners will reflect these norms in the same way that native speakers do. 
As we move toward a discussion of models of language acquisition that incorporate social factors in the upcoming chapters, we will see that a variety of 
models have been developed to incorporate this range of insights.
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICS IN LANGUAGE CHANGE
As has been mentioned many times thus far, sociolinguists seek to analyze not 
only language variation, but also language change. To that end, there have been 
detailed accounts of the role of social characteristics, such as age, social class, 
or gender, in the process of language change. Language change can be seen 
through the adoption of a new form or the loss of an existing one. Additionally, we might see change in the range of contexts in which an existing form 
is used or a modification of the meaning associated with a given form. These 
changes can occur at all levels of the grammar.
Although changes may be led by different social groups, proceed at differing rates, and have linguistic or social motivations, they have been broadly 
divided into two categories (e.g., Labov, 1994). Change from below refers to 
change that originates from within the linguistic system itself. In other words, 
this type of change is often said to have linguistic motivations, and it represents a change that is spontaneous and unconscious, at least in the beginning 
stages. It may include processes such as generalization, extension, or analogy. 
Once the change takes hold it may begin to have social motivations as well, 
but the initial stages are said to have system-internal causes. An example of 
change from below is the vowel change in American English often described 
as the Northern cities vowel shift (Labov, Yaeger, & Steiner, 1972), in which the 
raising and tensing of /æ/ set off a chain shift in the articulation of vowels in 
Great Lakes region. In contrast, change from above is said to involve the adoption of features that originate outside the speech community (and outside the 
linguistic system of that speech community). As a result, speakers are aware 
of these changes and they are socially motivated (see Tagliamonte [2012] for 
additional discussion). These changes are most often led by the highest status 
group, as well as females and highly educated speakers. These “innovative” (or 
newly incorporated) variants are often found in formal styles and are used 
most often by young adults because they are in positions of employment that 
demand greater sensitivity to prestige variants. Labov’s (1972b) description 
of /r/ in New York City (described in the previous chapter) is an example of 
a change from above. The variant [ ] was reintroduced into the speech first 
among speakers determined to be of higher social status (according to the 
department store in which they were shopping), whereas speakers from lower 
socioeconomic classes continued to omit the consonantal [ ] sound in words 
like “fourth”. In sum, the type of change in progress is directly linked to certain 
social groups within a speech community (or certain types of social ties within 
a social network).
Not only is there a connection between social factors and the type of change 
in progress, the path of this change and current state of variation are also 
linked to social factors (including sociopolitical, sociohistorical, and migratory 
r
r
54 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
patterns of a community). For example, a change in progress is generally characterized by greater frequency of use among women. In the case of change 
from below, this means that women use innovative forms at higher rates than 
men and in the case of change from above, this is indicated by a higher rate of 
adoption of diffusing forms. In both cases, women are said to lead the change. 
In contrast, in cases where variation is already present among the different 
groups in a speech community but there is less use of a stigmatized variant 
by women overall, we might conclude that this is a case of stable variation. To 
be sure, the role of women in language change has met with several counterexamples, and, what is more, it should be viewed as one of many factors that 
interact to determine the path of language change. For example, any account 
in present-day sociolinguistics of language change would be remiss to ignore 
the roles of social class and age, along with gender. Thus, the important point 
for our purposes is not to see gender as the defining characteristic of all language change but rather to recognize the importance of the influence of a 
host of social factors on language change. We will see when we turn to the 
context of second language acquisition in later chapters that these factors may 
be equally relevant but may pattern in entirely different ways.
HOW ARE SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICS REFLECTED 
IN LANGUAGE VARIATION?
We have seen thus far that language varies across levels of the grammar and 
that it also varies as a function of several different social characteristics. Each 
characteristic with which a speaker or group of speakers identifies is reflected 
in the language produced. As was the case in the previous chapter, we have 
selected a handful of examples of this type of research to examine in greater 
detail. Each was selected because it demonstrates variation that is conditioned 
by one of the social or identity factors we have explored in this chapter. It is 
worth repeating that this is an active and growing area of research, and our 
examples do not illustrate the breadth or depth of this field of inquiry. Instead, 
we hope they provide models for understanding related research as we move 
forward in our discussion of second language learners in later chapters.
Case 1. The Role of Gender in Language Variation
Over time, sociolinguists have built a corpus of studies that demonstrate that 
men tend to use a greater number of nonstandard variants than women. In 
other words, women use prestigious or standard forms more frequently than 
men. This was seen in early work by Trudgill (1972), for example, who showed 
this to be the case for speakers of British English in urban areas of Norwich, 
regarding their use of a handful of phonological and phonetic variables. The 
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
differences between men and women have also been linked to linguistic change. 
For example, as early as 1905, Gauchet suggested that women were initiators of 
sound changes, and since that time careful work has been done to document 
the role of men and women in the process of incorporating new forms into 
speech (see Labov [2001] for a discussion). Women may, in fact, lead changes 
from both above and below the level of consciousness. As noted earlier in the 
context of assessing social networks, the predicted role of women is not always 
borne out in the data, and, thus, as we continue to talk about gender as an 
influencing factor, it is important to remember that there are no absolute rules 
when it comes to the influence gender may or may not have on language use. 
One important connection between gender and language change may be the 
interaction of gender with age, such that we see the greatest segregation of 
genders in early adolescence, but these differences, although lessened to some 
extent, proceed into the adult workplace (Cameron, 2011). Thus, in addition 
to being mindful of counterexamples to the role of gender in language use 
and language change, it is also important to remember that this single factor 
should not be viewed in isolation but rather as part of the multiple influences 
present in a single context of language use. With these two notes of caution in 
mind, we provide an example of a case where the role of gender was found to 
be important in explaining language use.
Lauwereyns’ (2002) study on the use of hedges in Japanese analyzes biological gender in addition to other social factors. The study also examines the role 
of the age of the speaker and the context of speech, distinguishing between 
casual speech produced in a conversation between participants matched for 
age and gender and more formal speech produced in a conversation with 
the investigator. The participants in the study are 40 native speakers of Japanese from Tokyo, each categorized by age and gender. The hedges, or constructions used to lessen the strength behind an utterance, examined are 26 
words and phrases that express vagueness. The results of Lauwereyns’ analysis 
showed that two expressions, toka ‘or something’ and nanka ‘like’, were especially frequent in the dataset, whereas the other expressions were more evenly 
distributed. A comparison of the rates of use of hedges demonstrated that 
younger speakers used hedges twice as often as older speakers, and that women 
used hedges significantly more than men. One interesting result is that the 
researcher found more hedges in the interview task, which was counter to the 
prediction that hedging would be more frequent in informal contexts. Finally, 
Lauwereyns found an interaction between gender and age such that younger 
female speakers were significantly different from all other groups. The details 
of this research are summarized in Table 3.1.
The research conducted by Lauwereyns (2002) on hedges in the Japanese 
spoken in Tokyo demonstrates that previous assertions that younger female 
speakers are freer to break standard norms (e.g., Yonekawa, 1998) find support 
56 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
TABLE 3.1
Summary of details of Lauwereyns (2002)
Key features Summary
The sociolinguistic 
variable
Hedges in the Japanese of Tokyo
The variants Presence and relative frequency of 26 expressions that 
denote vagueness
The envelope of 
variation
Any instance in oral speech
Independent 
factors
Sex, age (Group I: 17–18; Group II: 50–69), formality
Data elicitation 
method
Recordings of conversations (between participants) 
and interviews (with the researcher)
Method of analysis Identification of each instance of 26 different hedges; 
statistical differences assessed for each independent factor
Summary of 
findings
Two expressions, toka ‘or something’ and nanka
‘like’, were the most frequent (1,385 of 3,802 tokens); 
younger speakers used hedges twice as much; women 
used hedges more than men; more hedges in interview 
than in chats; the effects of each social variable varied 
across hedge types; when all factors were considered 
in interaction with one another, young females were 
different from young males, older males and older 
females; these results were consistent with and without 
inclusion of the two most frequently used hedges
Connections 
to issues in 
sociolinguistics
Results show that the unique role of younger speakers 
and of gender differences is confirmed; hedges can be 
seen to indicate politeness or indirectness; finally, the 
differences between conversation types are complex 
and may be linked to additional characteristics of the 
task, such as quality of information exchanged, rather 
than just the formality of the context
in this analysis. In general, although counterexamples abound, it does appear 
that biological gender is a factor worthy of consideration. The interaction with 
age, however, further shows that the effects of gender on language use, and 
language change can only be properly understood when considered in conjunction with other factors, such as age. Likewise, the result for task formality, 
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
which is different from the direction predicted by the author, is worthy of 
further examination. The author proposes that this might have to do with the 
nature of the tasks, in that the interview required a greater amount of “information exchange”. We will see in our discussion of the discourse context in a 
later case that multiple studies have shown that a division of tasks into “formal” and “informal” rarely captures the complexity of task-based differences 
(see Geeslin [2011b] for discussion). What is immediately clear from this first 
case is that when examining the social correlates of language use, there are 
likely multiple factors worthy of study, including age, which is the focus of the 
second example included in the current chapter.
Case 2. The Role of Age in Language Variation
As was the case for gender, the influence of speaker age on language use and 
language change has been the focus of extensive research. One basic finding 
about age, which is likely already clear from the discussion of gender above, is 
that if younger speakers are the innovators of sound changes, older speakers 
will show the least innovative speech, either through the lack of use of given 
form or a lower frequency of its use. This means that we might expect that 
any comparison of older speakers to younger speakers would tell us something about language change, with younger speakers showing where language 
is going and older speakers showing where it has been (Labov, 2001), at least in 
the case of ongoing change. In other words, the systematic observation of different age cohorts allows us to infer facts about language variation and change, 
ultimately determining whether a given variant is stable or not in a specific 
speech community (Cameron, 2011). In fact, this type of comparison is called 
an apparent time comparison, and it has often been used instead of or in addition to longitudinal work in documenting language change.
In addition to all of the cases where, in fact, older speakers do show more 
conservative speech, there are several other ways in which age might interact 
with language use or language change. For example, age differences can also 
indicate patterns of stable variation, whereby use of certain forms is simply 
associated with older speakers. In other words, those same speakers would not 
have used those forms at earlier stages of their lives. The opposite might also 
be true, where younger speakers use a given form and then this use diminishes over time. In cases where there is stable variation but we find differences 
according to the age of the speaker, we might suspect that there is age grading. 
This phenomenon refers precisely to the changing patterns of use of a given 
variant in the same speaker over his or her lifespan. We can see that using an 
apparent time research design might make it difficult to distinguish between 
age grading and a change in progress. Eckert (1984) refers to issues of this 
sort as the “ambiguity of age effects” where, using only apparent time data, we 
58 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
cannot distinguish a change in progress from stable variation by looking only 
at age comparisons of this sort.
In fact, there is a long history of accounts of the ways in which age may 
interact with language, including classic discussions such as that by Birren and 
Renner (1977), in which several types of age are identified and distinguished 
(e.g., biological, psychological, functional, and social). All of these types or 
operationalizations of age are said to mediate one’s relationship to the larger 
social order. Even in contemporary work, we continue to see the complexity of 
age as a variable. For example, in Otheguy, Zentella, and Livert (2007), a study 
of subject form expression in the Spanish of New York City, we see that the age 
of arrival of the immigrant participants is an important predictor of rates of 
subject form use. Age of arrival, however, likely interacts with the age of the 
speaker (i.e., the older you are, the longer you are likely to have been in the 
US, and the older you will be upon initial exposure to the Spanish community 
in NYC, and possibly the older you are for the onset of acquisition of English). These potential interactions require a careful analysis so that incorrect 
inferences are not made and so that the effect of age is not reduced to a single 
explanatory factor. Along these lines, Cameron (2011) distinguishes aging from 
age and concludes that the effect of age is best studied at the intersection of its 
interaction with other social factors, such as gender, ethnicity, class, social network, religion, or other community-specific categories. Thus, as we continue 
the discussion of age as a social variable, two important caveats must be kept in 
mind. First, age may have several different relationships to language use and 
language change depending on the phenomena studied and how we define age; 
second, like gender, age is likely to interact with other social categories in such 
a way that no explanation based exclusively on age will fully capture the patterns of use or change associated with a given language or group of speakers.
The case selected for our purpose of highlighting the importance of age 
in language use and language change was designed to tease apart the effects 
of age in stable variation and age in language change. Specifically, Wagner 
and Sankoff (2011) sought to examine the patterns of use of the periphrastic 
future form and the inflected future form in the French spoken in Quebec and 
how these patterns had changed over time. Their data come from interviews 
conducted in 1971 with 59 speakers (Sankoff-Cedergren corpus of Montreal 
French [Sankoff & Cedergren, 1971]), who were then interviewed a second 
time in 1984 (Thibault & Vincent, 1990). These two sets of interviews yielded 
3,658 tokens of contexts with unambiguous future reference. The data were 
coded for a range of linguistic and social variables and analyzed using a multivariate analysis in Goldvarb X. The type of subject (i.e., grouping nous ‘we’, vous
‘you all’, and nominal to compare against others) was shown to be related to 
the verb form produced, and the authors interpreted this as stylistic difference 
because, for example, nous and vous are used in more formal speech and, thus, 
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
were more likely to occur with the inflected form. Additionally, in the presence of quand (‘when’) contexts, the inflected future form occurred at a rate of 
five times more than the rate for other types of contexts. It was further shown 
that the rate of use of the inflected form increased over time between interviews and that the older speakers were actually more likely to use the inflected 
form than the younger speakers. A careful analysis of inter-speaker differences 
showed that the number of categorical users of the periphrastic form dropped 
from 20 down to 4 in the time between interviews and that the percentage of 
the tokens predicted by the age factor alone decreased from 28% down to 11% 
between interviews. By looking at these effects in conjunction with the socioprofessional status of the speakers, the analysis showed that in the earlier corpus, the effects for age held across social class, such that the use of the inflected 
form was associated with middle-aged and older speakers, perhaps as a marker 
of adulthood. In the second series of interviews, when all of the speakers had 
reached adulthood, the effect for age was lessened and, instead, socioprofessional status was a better predictor of the trajectory of inflection form use over 
time. Specifically, those in the upper socioprofessional status group showed 
a sharper increase in the use of the inflected form. What is especially interesting about these findings is that despite the overall historical trend toward 
greater use of the periphrastic form, Wagner and Sankoff (2011) showed an 
age-grading effect in the opposite direction, such that individual speakers 
increase their use of the inflected form over their own lifespans. The details of 
this study are summarized in Table 3.2.
As mentioned previously, the research by Wagner and Sankoff (2011) is 
an important measure of the differences between apparent time trends and 
TABLE 3.2
Summary of details of Wagner & Sankoff (2011)
Key features Summary
The 
sociolinguistic 
variable
Future time reference
The variants Periphrastic and inflected (morphological) 
future (IF) forms
The envelope of 
variation
Unambiguous future contexts (excluded: gnomic and 
volitional futures and negative contexts, which were 
almost categorically IF)
(Continued)
60 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
the effects of age due to other factors in relation to speakers’ lives. Only 
through an analysis of this sort is it possible to determine that although use of 
the inflected form is decreasing over time (i.e., a change in progress), the 
inflected form also appears to be a marker of adulthood, particularly for those 
in higher socioprofessional jobs. In this sense, the authors note that age grading may actually operate as a brake on language change because speakers revert 
to the more conservative pattern as they age. Another interesting finding is 
that adult speakers are shown to make changes in their own patterns of use 
during adulthood. This can be taken as an especially encouraging finding, 
given that second language learners must undergo a similar process if they 
Key features Summary
Independent 
factors
Linguistic variables: temporal distance, imminence 
(impending vs. non-impending event), adverbial 
specification (co-occurrence with a temporal adverbial 
phrase), contingency (contingent: apodosis of si; 
contingent: quand/temporal adverbial + token in 
subordinate clause; contingent: quand/temporal 
adverbial + token in main clause; contingent: other; 
independent, noncontingent), grammatical person, 
address pronoun (vouvoiement; tutoiement; uses vous
and tu interchangeably; does not use address pronouns)
Social variables: socioprofessional status, age, speaker sex
Data elicitation 
method
Interviews conducted with 59 speakers in 1971 and 
again in 1984
Method of 
analysis
Multivariate Goldvarb X
Summary of 
findings
Effects found for linguistic factors: subject type (nous, 
vous, and nominals together favor inflected future), 
contingency: five times more IF in quand-related contexts
Effects for social factors: year of recording (increase in 
IF over time), age (older = more IF)
Connections 
to issues in 
sociolinguistics
Apparent time data alone are insufficient and can be 
mediated with experimental or longitudinal elicitation 
tasks; the link between style and subject forms indicates 
an important avenue for future research (on the 
relationship of style to change); speakers do change 
patterns of use across a lifespan
TABLE 3.2 (Continued)
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
are to acquire the norms of sociolinguistic variation in a language acquired in 
adulthood.
Case 3. The Role of Ethnicity in Language Variation
Although it has been mentioned several times in this chapter, the studies 
reviewed thus far have not included ethnicity as a predictive social variable. 
Nevertheless, this factor may be just as important for understanding patterns 
of language use. In order to illustrate this, we turn to the study by Hoffman and 
Walker (2010), which examines the English spoken by Chinese and Italian residents of Toronto. The two variants examined in their study are t/d deletion and 
the Canadian vowel shift. These two variants were selected because the former is 
stable and the latter is a change in progress. Thus, an analysis of both allows for 
an examination of the status of the variant itself as well as the way in which each 
might be tied to social correlates of the speaker, such as ethnic identity. The participants were 60 speakers of English, divided by ethnic origin (Chinese or Italian), immigrant generation (first or second/third), and gender (male or female). 
A group of 20 speakers with British/Irish ethnic origins were also included as 
a comparison group. In addition to completing a sociolinguistic interview, all 
participants also filled out an ethnic orientation questionnaire, geared toward 
assessing features related to ethnic identification, such as language choice, language attitudes, and social ties within and outside of that ethnic group. The analysis of the data gleaned from the ethnic orientation questionnaire showed that 
the Chinese group had a stronger ethnic orientation and that overall, first generation participants had a stronger orientation than second and third generation 
speakers. In looking at the first sociolinguistic variable, the deletion of t/d, there 
was little difference found between the Italian group and the British/Irish group, 
both of whom disfavored deletion. However, the Chinese group favored deletion, with first generation informants showing a much higher favoring effect. 
The linguistic constraints on deletion differed by ethnic group and by generation. The analysis of the vowel shift showed higher rates of shifting (use of innovative forms) for the British/Irish group and the Italian participants and very 
little shifting among the Chinese participants, especially those with the highest 
ethnic orientation scores. The conditioning of this variant based on the linguistic 
factors, however, was similar for all groups. Thus, these findings demonstrate an 
important effect for ethnic orientation and also a role for the status of the change 
under examination. The details of this study are summarized in Table 3.3.
The work conducted by Hoffman and Walker (2010) has several implications 
for the field of sociolinguistics as well as for second language acquisition. First, 
we see that when examining ethnicity, one must assess varying degrees of ethnic 
orientation within a given community or group. As has been the case with other 
variables discussed thus far, we clearly see that ethnicity is not a monolithic 
62 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
TABLE 3.3
Summary of details of Hoffman & Walker (2010)
Key features Summary
The sociolinguistic 
variable
t/d deletion and vowel shift in Canadian English 
in Toronto
The variants t/d deletion = presence/absence
Vowel shift = 3 sound changes known as 
Canadian Vowel Shift
The envelope of 
variation
All contexts in spoken production data
Independent 
factors
Ethnicity (Italian or Chinese), immigrant generation 
(first or second/third), gender
Linguistic factors particular to each of the two 
dependent variables
Data elicitation 
method
Sociolinguistic interview and ethnic orientation 
questionnaire
Method of analysis Analysis of differences between groups as well as 
multivariate analyses for each of the two variants
Summary of 
findings
Ethnic orientation scores are higher for first generation 
and higher for Chinese group
t/d deletion: Chinese group favors deletion at higher 
rates, especially first generation; conditioning factors 
differ across groups by ethnicity and by generation
Vowel shift: higher rates of participation for British/
Irish and Italian groups; same constraining factors 
across groups
Connections 
to issues in 
sociolinguistics
Explanations that consider ethnicity are equally as 
important as those linked to first language transfer or 
incomplete acquisition; within the category “ethnicity” 
the degree of ethnic orientation must be considered; 
the status of the sociolinguistic variable examined 
must be considered as this study shows differing results 
for a stable change vs. one that is in progress
category, and it, too, must be considered in conjunction with other social factors, such as immigrant generation. In the case of the Chinese participants in 
their study, the authors note that their patterns of immigration are more recent, 
and they constitute a more visible ethnic group than the Italian group to which 
they were compared. They further argue that differences between these two 
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
groups cannot be traced to incomplete acquisition or to language transfer, and 
instead it is worthwhile to consider the role of ethnic identity. This argument is 
strengthened by the evidence of generational differences as well as differences 
within these ethnic groups. An explanation that was purely linked to first language would predict similar effects for all speakers within a given ethnic group. 
Consequently, researchers working in the field of second language acquisition 
should anticipate variability within their participant groups, making an examination of individual patterns of language use essential.
Case 4. The Role of Socioeconomic Factors in Language Variation
A fourth social variable, which has already played a role in the analysis of 
some of the sociolinguistic variables explored earlier in the current chapter, is 
that of socioeconomic class. Although social class is often difficult to define, 
it can be taken to be a function of several related characteristics, such as level 
of education, employment, income, neighborhood status, and the like (Ash, 
2013; Labov, 1972c; Trudgill, 1974). One of the most challenging facts about 
social status is that while we understand that it is linked to language attitudes, 
these can be difficult to observe or to study. Thus, the case study selected to 
explore this variable serves an additional function of highlighting innovative 
research methodology that allows us to take important steps toward understanding the link between language attitudes and social status. Squires (2013) 
studied the lack of verbal agreement between ‘singular NP + don’t’ and ‘there’s + 
plural NP’ among English speakers in the United States, where the former is 
relatively infrequent and associated with lower social status, and the latter is 
relatively more frequent and not necessarily stigmatized. The study reports on 
the results of two experiments, one to examine what speakers perceive in oral 
input and the second to investigate how these forms were evaluated.
The first experiment included 40 undergraduate participants who were 
primed with photos of high-status speakers (as indicated by clothing and 
backdrop) in conjunction with standard variants and low-status speakers in 
conjunction with nonstandard variants. Following this priming, participants 
were asked to identify the subject of the verb form they heard when these 
forms were paired with low and high status photos. In both the priming and 
the target conditions the verbal subject was masked by white noise, and participants were asked to choose a photo (singular or plural images) that corresponded to what they had heard. The results showed that participants were 
more likely to interpret targets as ‘there’s + plural’ if they had been exposed 
to these in the priming condition, but no such priming effect was found for 
nonstandard don’t sentences. Thus, this experiment showed that there were no 
effects of social priming. Another interesting result was that the social class of 
the participants (divided into lower class and upper class) mediated this effect 
such that those in the upper class group logged more nonstandard responses.
64 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
The second experiment conducted by Squires (2013) sought to explore 
how the use of these forms was evaluated. Forty-one different undergraduate 
participants, again divided into upper and lower class groups, completed this 
experiment. The methods for the second experiment were similar except that 
the subject of the verb form was not masked, and participants were asked to 
select the picture that corresponded with the speaker most likely to have uttered 
the sentence. Again, the pictures differed according to the professional dress of 
the speaker and the background, showing their home or surroundings. From the 
analysis of the results of this experiment, two interesting patterns emerged. First, 
there was evidence of a strong connection between nonstandard don’t and lower 
status speakers. Likewise, an equally quick and strong connection was shown 
between standard ‘there’s + singular NP’ and higher-class speakers. These findings 
demonstrate that when an association between a form and a particular social 
group is sufficiently robust, there is a strong social cue to perception. Furthermore, it was shown that the social class of the participants also mediated their 
responses. The details for these two experiments are summarized in Table 3.4.
The research conducted by Squires (2013) illustrates the importance of 
innovation in research methodology as a tool for examining language attitudes. 
What is more, the structural priming methods used in that project allowed 
Squires to demonstrate the complex relationship between certain standard 
TABLE 3.4
Summary of details of Squires (2013)
Key features Summary
The sociolinguistic 
variable
NP + don’t; there’s + NP
The variants Standard vs. nonstandard (singular NP + don’t and 
there’s + plural NP)
The envelope of 
variation
N/A; experimental task
Independent factors Experiment 1: social class of participant; priming 
condition (standard vs. nonstandard with photos)
Experiment 2: social class of participant; standard or 
nonstandard variant
Data elicitation 
method
Priming tasks: Experiment 1 tests the effect of social 
priming on perception of (non)standard forms, and 
Experiment 2 tests the effect of (non)standard forms 
on evaluation of speaker
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
Key features Summary
Method of analysis Statistical analysis of varying conditions
Summary of findings Responses are mediated by social class of participant; 
social priming only exists when the association is 
sufficiently strong between social class and a given 
(non)standard form; there is an association between 
nonstandard don’t and lower social class and standard 
there’s and higher social class
Connections to issues 
in sociolinguistics
Experimental research methods are essential for 
research on language attitudes; structural priming 
research can be extended to socially variable 
grammatical forms
or nonstandard forms and social class, both of the speaker and the evaluator 
(or participant). What is abundantly clear is that social class does not have a 
single, monolithic role in predicting language use (or perception or evaluation). Instead, we see that its effects differ from one structure to another and 
are mediated by other social factors. In keeping with the findings of the studies 
reviewed earlier, each set of findings attests to the importance of examining 
multiple social and linguistic factors and to assessing the manner in which 
these factors interact to influence language use and perception.
Case 5. The Role of Level of Education in Language Variation
It was stated immediately prior to the example of research on social class that 
this construct is often difficult to define and that level of education can be 
considered to be a part of the social class measure. Nevertheless, there are also 
several examples of research studies that examine the effect of level of education separate from social class. One excellent example of this type of research 
comes from Campbell-Kibler (2009), who uses an open-ended interview and a 
matched-guise test to examine the perceived level of education of speakers as a 
function of the degree to which their production of English –ing is variable. In 
Chapter One we referred to this example as the alternation between ‘–ing’ and 
‘–in’, but the current study explores three variants (listed below), giving two 
options for the form that results from the reduction of word final –g. The study 
reports on the comments and evaluations made during interviews conducted 
with 55 participants in groups ranging from one to six people, as well as answers 
to questions about eight speakers from the southern and western US completed by a 
different group of 124 speakers after listening to a speech sample from each of 
66 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
the eight speakers. The speech samples in this second task were manipulated 
according to the presence or reduction of ‘–ing’ in 2–6 tokens embedded in 
the speech sample, and participants were asked to evaluate characteristics such 
as perceived masculinity, outgoingness, level of education, and intelligence. In 
both the qualitative and quantitative analyses, there was an association between 
less frequent use of ‘–ing’ and lower levels of education, with one important 
caveat: this was only true when the speakers were not believed to be from the 
South or of the working class. In the case of those two factors, lower rates of use 
of ‘–ing’ were not taken to indicate lower intelligence or lesser education of the 
speaker. The details of this study are summarized in Table 3.5.
TABLE 3.5
Summary of details of Campbell-Kibler (2009)
Key features Summary
The sociolinguistic 
variable
English variable –ing
The variants Word final [ın] or [әn] and [iη]
The envelope of 
variation
N/A—experimental task with manipulated stimuli
Independent 
factors and 
dependent 
variables
Factors:
Geographic origin; social class
Dependent variables:
Qualitative—open-ended responses to interview questions; 
quantitative—ratings on several speaker characteristics
Data elicitation 
method
Group interviews and matched-guise task
Method of 
analysis
Quantitative data analyzed using linear mixed-effects 
models for the ratings variables and generalized linear 
mixed effects models for the binary checkbox variables
Summary of 
findings
Less frequent use of –ing is associated with lower levels 
of intelligence and education only when speakers are 
believed to be a-geographic (i.e., not identified as being 
from the south) or of the working class
Connections 
to issues in 
sociolinguistics
The evaluation of level of education, often thought to 
be an indicator of social class, actually interacts with 
social class such that perceived levels of education 
differ based on whether or not a speaker is believed 
to be part of the working class; likewise, geographic 
variation mediates the perception of level of education
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
The research by Campbell-Kibler (2009) is another good example of the use 
of experimental methods in the study of language attitudes. As a result, like 
the research by Squires (2013), we see that the question of the link between 
social characteristics and use of a given form is approached from the opposite 
direction: using the presence or absence of a variant to determine the degree 
to which such a feature indicates an association with a given social factor, such 
as social class or level of education. More specifically, Campbell-Kibler’s work 
explores how listeners incorporate social information into their perception of 
speaker characteristics. What makes this all the more interesting is that these 
perceptions vary based on the presence or absence of a single sociolinguistic 
variable in a very short speech sample. Thus, we have good indications that the 
associations between social characteristics and linguistic forms are quite powerful. Another important result of this study is the finding that these evaluations are context dependent, such that knowledge of another characteristic 
of the speaker, such as geographic origin or social class, mediates the evaluation of the level of education or intelligence of that speaker. Thus, we add this 
example to our growing cohort of studies demonstrating the importance of 
the relationship not only of social factors to linguistic forms but also the interrelationship of these social factors themselves.
Case 6. The Role of Discourse Context in Language Variation
The final case to be considered in this chapter is somewhat different from the 
earlier ones, which all investigate the effects of the characteristics of people. The 
variable explored in this final case is genre, a characteristic of the discourse context, rather than the speaker. More broadly, we can imagine factors such as where 
an interaction takes place, what the topic of discussion is, and the like, all having 
important effects on the language produced. We have seen in earlier cases that 
the dichotomy between formal and informal contexts does not fully explain the 
multifaceted nature of the discourse context, nor does it account for the many 
variables that may influence language use within a single context. Most recently 
these factors have been investigated under the construct of style (Bell, 1984; 
Coupland, 2007; Eckert & Rickford, 2001; Schilling-Estes, 2004), but research 
on single factors within the context of speech also abound. It is fitting that we 
began our sample cases with Lauwereyns (2002), an investigation of hedges in 
Japanese, which documented the fact that predictions of formal and casual contexts are not always borne out, and that we end here with our final sample study, 
which takes a closer look at some of the differences between conversations and 
narratives without identifying one as more “formal” than the other.
The research conducted by Travis (2007) focuses on the use of overt and 
null subject forms in first-person singular contexts in two different tasks: 
spontaneous narratives and sociolinguistic interviews. Thus, genre in Travis’ 
work refers to the type of discourse produced. Her data come from a corpus of 
68 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
recorded interviews from New Mexico, from which she selected 11 for analysis, and a corpus of spontaneous conversations recorded in Colombia, from 
which she selected 15 conversations involving 22 speakers. The variable use 
of subject forms in Spanish is a widely studied sociolinguistic variable, and 
the constraints on use are well known. Although these two forms of speech 
production occurred with speakers from different countries of origin, Travis 
claims that the fact that there is no loss of pragmatic constraints for the USbased group and that the linguistic constraints on rates of use are the same 
for both groups are sufficient evidence to dismiss geographic variation as a 
source of differences in these two datasets. The linguistic variable under focus 
in Travis’ analysis is that of linguistic priming, or the tendency for the presence of one element to prime the use of that same element again in a subsequent utterance. Travis found that there was a higher rate of use of null subject 
forms in the conversation data even though the linguistic variables in the study 
showed the same constraints on patterns of use for both datasets. When looking specifically at priming effects, Travis showed that the effects of priming 
held across a greater number of intervening clauses in the interviews as compared to the conversations, where the effect was prevalent only with one or no 
intervening clauses between a form and its preceding co-referential subject 
pronoun. Finally, whereas the interview data showed priming effects only for 
null forms, the conversation data showed priming effects for both null and 
overt forms. The details of this study are summarized in Table 3.6.
TABLE 3.6
Summary of details of Travis (2007)
Key features Summary
The sociolinguistic 
variable
Subject pronoun forms: null or overt
The variants yo ‘I’ vs. null
The envelope of 
variation
All finite verbs with first-person singular subjects 
(New Mexico = 1,210; Colombia = 1,182)
Independent factors Linguistic variables: semantic class of the verb; tense, 
mood, and aspect of the verb form; distance from 
previous mention (up to 10 clauses); realization 
of previous mention (expressed or unexpressed); 
clause type (main or subordinate); relationship with 
previous tense, mood, aspect (TMA) (same or different); 
position in the turn (initial or medial)
Additional factor: genre (conversation vs. interview)
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
Key features Summary
Data elicitation 
method
Interviews: 11 interviews (6 females, 5 males all over 
the age of 48 from northern New Mexico, all native 
Spanish speakers), New Mexico Colorado Spanish 
Survey (1992–1995)
Spontaneous conversations: 15 conversations that 
involve 22 speakers (14 women, 8 men; all middle 
class, ranging in age from 2060) from recorded 
conversations collected in Cali, Colombia (1997)
Method of analysis Multivariate analysis with Goldvarb
Summary of 
findings
Overt pronouns were more frequent in conversation 
data; both data sets are influenced in the same 
manner by verb class, distance from previous 
mention, realization of previous mention, and 
TMA; priming effects were evident in both data 
sets (preceding co-referential null form favored a 
subsequent null form; likewise overt forms tended to 
prime subsequent overt forms); priming effect was 
maintained over a greater number of intervening 
clauses in interviews, whereas conversations showed 
this effect only with adjacent or a single intervening 
clause; in the conversations, both null and overt forms 
show priming, whereas in the interviews, the priming 
effect applied only to null forms
Connections 
to issues in 
sociolinguistics
The role of genre in sociolinguistic variation is worthy 
of consideration; the effects of linguistic variables are 
mediated by discourse type
This last profiled study demonstrates the importance of examining the linguistic constraints on a sociolinguistic variant in the context of the effects of 
discourse type. The careful comparison of the manner in which a single variable, linguistic priming, operates across two types of discourse demonstrates 
that the effects may be differential across categories of the dependent variable (i.e., the variants of the sociolinguistic variable) and may be mediated by 
other linguistic constraints, such as the distance between co-referential subject 
forms. These differing effects can then be explained in light of the characteristics of the particular genre examined. For example, Travis (2007) claims 
that the greater priming effects for null forms in the narratives, as compared 
to overt subject pronouns, may be the result of the higher level of subject 
70 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
continuity found in narratives in general. This type of explanation allows for a 
greater degree of precision than a contrast based on formality alone, for example. 
Thus, in connecting this case to the others reviewed in this chapter, we see that 
not only must each individual social characteristic of the speaker be interpreted in relationship to other social factors, but also that we can anticipate 
important relationships between the context of the discourse, the type of discourse, and the linguistic constraints on use. In sum, we continue to see that 
sociolinguistic variation is a complex, multifaceted phenomenon that requires 
sophisticated research methods and analytical tools in order to fully appreciate 
the multiple influences on the language we produce and perceive.
HOW DOES SOCIAL VARIATION RELATE TO 
COMMUNICATIVE COMPETENCE?
Throughout this chapter we have explored the many ways in which extralinguistic factors, such as characteristics of a speaker, a listener, or a speech context can influence the language we perceive and produce. Some of the most 
widely researched social variables, such as age and gender, have been illustrated 
through case studies, and we have seen how these speaker characteristics have 
been linked to language variation and change. Perhaps the most important 
insight from this chapter is that the way individuals identify themselves and 
the groups with which they have contact influence their patterns of language 
use. What is more, we see that no single factor explains these patterns. Instead, 
we know that a careful analysis of several social and situational variables, both 
in terms of the effect each has on language use as well as the manner in which 
these factors interact to influence patterns of use, will be the most profitable. 
As we turn our attention back to second language learners for the remainder 
of this volume, we conclude this chapter with a brief discussion of what these 
sociolinguistic findings mean for second language acquisition.
In Chapter One we saw that many decades ago the term “communicative
competence” was coined to describe all of the types of knowledge, or all of the 
abilities, a learner must have in order to be a competent user of a given language. The definitions of this term have evolved over time, but one ability that 
remains central to nearly every account is the ability to vary language according to a host of factors, including the characteristics of the speaker, the hearer 
and the interactional context. From the examples of research on sociolinguistics we see that very subtle details in the language around us convey social facts 
about our own identities and the company we keep. For the second language 
learner one important challenge will be to reflect the appropriate social information in their own production as well as to develop sensitivity to this information in the language to which he or she is exposed. Thus, we now move from 
a discussion of how these characteristics are reflected in the language of native 
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
speakers to how learners develop the ability to incorporate social information 
into their own comprehension and production. We will see that the degree to 
which social information is believed to interact with and influence developing 
grammars will vary considerably, as will the manner in which this information 
is represented and believed to develop. What will remain constant, however, is 
our goal of understanding how learners come to develop this particular aspect 
of their own interactional competence.
READING BEYOND THE TEXT
a. Holmquist, J. (2008). Gender in context: Features and factors in men’s and 
women’s speech in rural Puerto Rico. In M. Westmoreland & J.A. Thomas 
(Eds.), Selected Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Spanish Sociolinguistics
(pp. 17–35). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
b. Labov, W. (1972b). The social stratification of (r) in New York City department stores. In W. Labov (Ed.), Sociolinguistic Patterns (pp. 43–69). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
c. Mendoza-Denton, N. (2008). Variation in a community of practice. In N. 
Mendoza-Denton (Ed.), Homegirls: Language and Cultural Practice Among 
Latina Youth Gangs (pp. 230–264). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
d. Otheguy, R., Zentella, A.C., & Livert, D. (2007). Language and dialect contact in Spanish in New York: Towards the formation of a speech community. Language, 83, 770–802.
e. Upadhyay, S.R. (2009). The sociolinguistic variation of grammatical gender agreement in Nepali. Journal of Pragmatics, 41, 564–585.
COMPREHENSION AND APPLICATION
A. Comprehension
1. What is an idiolect?
2. What do members of a speech community share?
3. What contribution did the Milroys make to the study of social networks?
4. How do communities of practice differ from speech communities?
5. What is covert prestige?
6. How do change from below and change from above differ?
7. According to numerous studies, which gender uses more nonstandard 
variants?
8. In Lauwereyns (2002), which three independent factors were significant? What effect did they have?
9. What is an apparent time comparison? What would age-grading show 
in such a comparison?
72 SECTION I: PRINCIPLES
10. According to Wagner and Sankoff (2011), what was the effect of socioprofessional status at the second time of data collection?
11. What role did ethnic orientation have in Hoffman and Walker (2010)?
12. What differences did Travis (2007) note with respect to the effect of 
discourse context on subject pronoun expression in Spanish?
B. Application
1. You have read about studies that have shown significant effects of gender on language, including Lauwereyns (2002). Think about when your 
mother asks you to do something (i.e., makes a request) versus when 
your father does. Does the language they use when they make requests 
differ? Write down your intuitions about what differences may or may 
not exist. Then, during your next telephone conversation with them, 
make note of something that they ask you to do and how they make 
that request linguistically. Did you notice any differences? Any similarities? Were the results similar to your intuitions?
2. You have also read that speakers often pattern together based on gender identity. What possible effects are there when a man’s speech has 
feminine traits? When a woman’s has male traits? Think of a character 
from a movie or television whose speech you would associate more 
with the opposite sex. How is that character perceived by others in his/
her scenes? Do other characters seem aware of connections between 
gender and speech patterns?
3. In this chapter, the concept of covert prestige was introduced. Why do 
you think that speakers would choose to give prestige to a form that 
other members of society stigmatize? Can you think of examples from 
the world around you in which a linguistic form that some people 
actively avoid becomes popular for others?
4. Jennifer and Monica both work at the same clothing store and both 
live in the same city. When they speak, however, they “sound” very different. Based on what you have learned in this chapter, hypothesize as 
to what other social factors might affect them linguistically and cause 
them to use different linguistic forms.
5. Think about the first impression that you give off when you meet new 
people. Where do people usually think you are from originally? Are 
they typically correct? What traits in your speech make the person 
think that? Do you produce certain vowels or consonants in a specific 
way? Do you use certain lexical items (i.e., vocabulary) that “give you 
away”? Are there other aspects of your speech that people associate 
with a particular region? If people do not associate you with a particular region, think of someone you’ve met (or someone famous) whom 
you instantly knew was from a certain area.
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICSg
6. Read the following two sentences: (1) “There’s two boxes of cereal in 
the pantry”. (2) “He don’t care if you go or not”. If you had to rate these 
sentences, would you say that they sound the same? Does one sound 
“better” to you? Does one sound “worse”? Ask a couple of your friends. 
Do you all agree? What is different about the two sentences? After 
answering this, can you think of other sentence pairs that differ (or 
do not differ) in degree of acceptability? If you were to follow Squires 
(2013) do you think a study of those sentences would demonstrate 
similar findings? If not, how would your findings differ?
This page intentionally left blank
Section II
Approaches to the Study 
of Sociolinguistics and Second 
Language Acquisition
This page intentionally left blank
4
Social Approaches to Second 
Language Acquisition
The first chapter of this book provided an introduction to communicative 
competence and the concept of sociolinguistic competence. We saw that to be 
fully competent users of a language we must be able to properly interpret and 
produce the elements in language that vary from one speaker to another, one 
context to another, and one geographic region to another. Likewise, Chapters 
Two and Three provided an overview of the field of sociolinguistics and the 
types of inquiry undertaken in that field. We saw that languages vary at all 
levels of the grammar and that the manner in which we produce language is 
influenced by a host of individual and group factors. In fact, the very group 
with whom we identify and how this group is defined has been the focus of 
extensive research and theory building. What is clear from work conducted in 
the field of sociolinguistics is the unifying focus on social aspects of language. 
In other words, sociolinguistics views language use as a social activity that 
allows speakers to relate to one another in a variety of ways and accomplish 
a range of communicative tasks. For the remainder of this volume we turn 
our attention back to second language learners and the many ways in which 
knowledge of sociolinguistics may improve our understanding of second language acquisition.
WHAT IS A SOCIAL APPROACH TO SECOND 
LANGUAGE ACQUISITION?
What may not have been clear from the introductory chapters is that despite 
the widely recognized multifaceted nature of communicative competence and 
the focus on social elements in sociolinguistics, the dominant tradition in 
research on second language acquisition has tended to focus on the linguistic 
elements of mental grammars. Such approaches are generally known as cognitive approaches to language acquisition, as a result of their focus on cognition 
78 SECTION II: APPROACHES
and mental structures (Atkinson, 2011a). Specifically, cognitive approaches 
focus on linguistic knowledge as an independent system, generally believed 
to contain innate linguistic information, and on the internal, mental processes of language acquisition, which are ultimately understood to be a product of human cognition. These approaches are often contrasted with social 
approaches, which might be broadly understood to include any approach that 
incorporates social factors in its account of linguistic knowledge and language 
acquisition. Nevertheless, we use the term “social approaches” in the current 
chapter to denote those approaches that place social elements of language 
learning and language use at the forefront and prioritize the examination of 
the influence of social context on language.
Despite the abundance of research mentioned in Chapter One that points to 
the importance of social factors in influencing second language acquisition and 
use, studies that focus on the connection between models of learner language, 
acquisition, and use, on the one hand, and the effects of various social factors, 
on the other hand, are quite scarce. In fact, in their 1997 seminal article, Firth 
and Wagner noted that the predominance of cognitive-oriented perspectives 
in second language acquisition research has led to bias or “imbalance” in the 
application and development of theoretical frameworks and methodologies in 
the field. Their claim was that social factors had been neglected, and their work 
served to foster additional research on the social aspects of language learning. 
Their paper met with a wealth of response, some sympathetic and some contrary, but all of which led to insightful expansions of what may now be known 
as the cognitive-social debate, or more dramatically, the cognitive-social divide 
(e.g., Block, 2003; Gass, 1998; Hall, 1997; Kasper, 1997; Long, 1997). Perhaps the 
most important result of their work, however, was that it led to greater interest in the many ways in which social contexts and social characteristics may 
influence language learning and language use. Ten years later, a special volume 
of the Modern Language Journal (2007) was published to assess the degree to 
which the state of research on social approaches to second language acquisition 
had changed. Authors in this volume note several important accomplishments, 
such as the prioritization of sociocultural and contextual factors in many 
studies (Swain & Deters, 2007), a growing body of empirical evidence on the 
relationship between social context and second language use and acquisition 
(Tarone, 2007), and a reconceptualization of the learner as a legitimate user 
of the target language (Mori, 2007). Nevertheless, there were still many who 
voiced concern at the lack of change in certain areas, including the integration 
of social approaches into the second language classroom (Lantolf & Johnson, 
2007) and the surface-level conceptualization of learner identity (Block, 2007).
It is clear that while sociolinguists share a common set of goals in exploring 
language use, second language acquisition researchers have multiple goals, and 
these can, at times, appear to be in conflict. The goal of the current chapter 
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
is neither to provide an in-depth account of any single social approach nor 
to weigh in on the debate about the social-cognitive divide. Instead, we seek 
to examine the scope of social theories of second language acquisition, their 
contribution to our knowledge of language learning in general, and the shared 
characteristics of these approaches as a whole. Finally, it is important to point 
out that the range of social theories included is quite broad and these theories 
are not necessarily limited in scope to the acquisition of sociolinguistic competence or of sociolinguistic variation.
EXAMPLES OF SOCIAL APPROACHES TO SECOND 
LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
As stated previously, the current chapter highlights models or approaches that 
place social influences on language learning at the forefront. In some cases, the 
examples selected are viewed as classic cases that serve as the foundation for 
current research, and in other cases they remain highly productive strands of 
research. For each approach, we provide an overview, identifying the ways in 
which that model accounts for the impact of social factors and the claims made 
under each framework regarding the role of social (in addition to other) factors in learning a second language. Next, we provide a snapshot of the manner 
in which research on second language acquisition was conducted under each 
approach. The review concludes with a critical evaluation of these models.
The Acculturation Model
Long before Firth and Wagner’s (1997) call for more research investigating 
the social dimensions of second language acquisition and use, some researchers were already turning to the “social side” in search of more comprehensive explanations of differential success among learners. For example, John 
Schumann’s work led him to develop the Acculturation or Pidginization 
Model of second language acquisition (1978a, 1978b). Schumann (1978a) 
observed that over the course of 10 months, one untutored Spanish-speaking 
learner demonstrated minimal success in the development of the English negative, wh-questions, inversion of yes-no questions, inflectional morphology, 
and auxiliaries of differing functions (e.g., do-support, progressive, perfect, 
modal). This learner, Alberto, became the focus of an extensive case study 
carried out by Schumann (1978a) to examine both the linguistic and the 
extralinguistic aspects of Alberto’s acquisition of English. From the linguistic analysis, Schumann showed how Alberto’s simplified and reduced English 
shared several features with pidgin languages. One example was the tendency 
for Alberto to use no to create negative utterances. Another was the lack 
of inflectional morphology. This type of cross-linguistic comparative analysis 
80 SECTION II: APPROACHES
led Schumann to conclude that Alberto spoke a pidginized English, but the 
question remained as to why Alberto’s English was simplified and reduced.
Drawing on Smith’s (1972) work related to pidginization and language 
socialization, Schumann (1978a) proposed that Alberto’s use of English was 
“restricted” to the fulfillment of basic communicative functions, and this led 
to the development of a simplified and reduced variety of English. Schumann 
further pinpointed the origin of this “functional restriction” as Alberto’s social 
and psychological distance from speakers of the target language community. 
In other words, Alberto’s lack of acculturation to the target language group 
served as the reason why his English showed minimal development. Schumann 
(1986) defined acculturation as “. . . the social and psychological integration 
of the learner with the target language group” (p. 379). In his model, social 
and psychological factors have the potential to influence contact between the 
learner and speakers of the target language group. What is more, the integration of both sets of factors is essential for acquisition of the target language. In 
other words, successful acquisition is dependent on acculturation to the target 
group both socially and psychologically.
One essential element of Schumann’s model is how he characterized this 
social and psychological distance. The factors related to social distance in the 
model have their origins in the field of sociolinguistics as well as work related to 
bilingualism and ethnic relations (cf. Schermerhorn, 1970). Schumann (1978a, 
1986) identified several constructs, such as patterns of social dominance, as factors that could potentially influence the degree of contact between the learner 
and members of the target language group. The full list of factors included in 
his model is summarized in Table 4.1, along with a definition of each.
Schumann (1986) generated hypotheses for second language learning 
based on each of the factors summarized in Table 4.1. For example, Schumann 
(1986) hypothesized that the tighter the cohesion of a learner group, the less 
likely learners within that group would be to mingle with speakers of the target language group. Opportunities for contact with the target language group 
would be minimized, which in turn would limit interaction with speakers 
of the target language and ultimately impact the extent of acquisition of the 
second language. It is important to note that these factors do not necessarily operate in isolation from each other, nor are they absolute. Instead, each 
lies on a continuum, for example, from more to less dominant or subordinate 
(in the case of patterns of social dominance) or from having a more positive 
to a more negative attitude toward the target language group. These factors 
collectively determine the degree of social distance between the learner and 
members of the target language group.
Among the psychological factors Schumann (1986) proposed were language shock, culture shock, motivation, and ego permeability, all of which have 
the potential to influence contact between the learner and the target language 
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
TABLE 4.1
Factors believed to impact social distance 
(based on Schumann, 1986)
Patterns of social 
dominance
How the learner and target language groups are 
positioned politically, culturally, and economically in 
relation to each other
Integration 
strategies
Include assimilation (i.e., adoption of the lifestyle and 
values of the target language group), preservation 
(i.e., rejection of the lifestyle and values of the target 
language group in favor of one’s own), and adaptation 
(i.e., simultaneous adjustment to the lifestyle and 
values of the target language group and maintenance of 
within-group lifestyle and values)
Enclosure The extent to which social institutions (e.g., schools, 
churches) and professions are shared by the learner and 
members of the target language group
Cohesiveness How close-knit the learner is with other learners in his 
or her group
Size The size of the learner group in relation to the target 
language group, which affects how often members of 
the learner group are in contact
Congruence How similar the culture of the learner is to that of the 
target language group
Attitude Measured by Likert-type questionnaire items such as I 
think American people are friendly/unfriendly, smart/
stupid, etc. or How much do you like American people? 
(Schumann, 1978a, pp. 179, 181)
Intended length 
of residence
How long the learner intends to live in the area of the 
target language group
group. This, in turn, could influence the acquisition of the second language. 
Ego permeability is similar to the notion of an affective filter as proposed by 
Krashen (1982; see also Chapter One), and the term captures the idea that 
inhibitions about aspects of the second language may lower one’s “openness” 
to available input, which affects one’s ability to acquire the language.1
 Like 
social distance, psychological distance lies along a continuum, and the relevant 
factors taken together determine the degree of distance that exists between the 
learner and members of the target language community.
82 SECTION II: APPROACHES
Returning to the Acculturation Model as a whole, we recall that the integration of the social and the psychological, each containing their own “cluster” or 
set of factors, is essential for acquisition. Schumann (1986) envisioned the 
outcome of second language learning in a naturalistic context as the result of 
the extent of acculturation to a target language group. In essence, acculturation influences both the quality and quantity of input and interaction available, 
and this, in turn, influences language learning. Thus, the Acculturation Model 
affords an essential role to social factors in the process of second language 
acquisition.
Research Methods and the Acculturation Model
To account for development in the linguistic structures of interest, researchers who had adopted this model employed a mixed elicitation methodology. 
More controlled elicitation tasks such as imitation and the Bilingual Syntax 
Measure (Burt, Dulay, & Hernandez-Chavez, 1975) were used, in addition 
to less controlled elicitation methods, such as spontaneous conversations. 
Schumann’s (1978a) seminal study also included preplanned sociolinguistic 
interactions. During these preplanned interactions, Schumann accompanied 
Alberto to a variety of social encounters, such as ordering food at a restaurant, 
and observed his use of the grammatical structures under study. In addition to 
collecting examples of speech produced under varying conditions, the social 
and psychological factors of interest were measured as well. Generally, a combination of fieldwork observations and results from detailed questionnaires 
completed by each participant were examined. Questionnaires were often specifically aimed to gauge learners’ attitudes toward members and practices of 
the target language community as well as their motivation for learning the 
language.
One key challenge for researchers interested in acculturation was determining how to assess the factors proposed to influence psychological distance 
between the learner and the target language group. Schumann (1986) pointed 
out that creating measures for notions such as language or culture shock 
and ego permeability presented a major obstacle for researchers attempting to characterize these factors empirically. Masgoret and Gardner (1999) 
detail an attempt to measure “acculturative stress”, or the degree of difficulty 
immigrants in Canada experienced as a result of their move from their home 
country (Spain). This measure, assessed via a written questionnaire using 19 
Likert-type statements, showed that only length of residence correlated with 
acculturative stress: Those who had been living in Canada longer had lower 
levels of acculturative stress. Acculturative stress was not reported to correlate with other variables, such as self-reported and objective measures of language proficiency, assimilation, or integration. This study therefore offered 
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
evidence that, contrary to Schumann’s model, stress associated with acculturation to the target language community does not appear to relate directly 
to language contact and, subsequently, to language acquisition. In response 
to Schuman’s hypothesis, a wealth of studies were conducted, some lending 
support (e.g., Kitch, 1982; Maple, 1982) and others providing counterevidence 
to the hypothesis (England, 1982; Kelley, 1982; Schmidt, 1983; Stauble, 1981). 
Although this hypothesis is not generally used in contemporary research, it did 
provide the foundation for investigations modeling the relationship between 
cultural identification and development of second language pronunciation 
(Lybeck, 2002) as well as the characterization of intercultural interaction and 
its relationship to attitudes toward the second language among sojourners or 
temporary residents (Culhane, 2004).
Accommodation Theory
Like the Acculturation Model, Speech Accommodation Theory attempts to 
account for the ultimate success that second language learners demonstrate 
in the acquisition process. More generally, Speech Accommodation Theory is a 
sociolinguistic theory that explores why individuals adjust their speech during social interaction. As described in earlier chapters of the current volume, 
speakers modify the language they produce according to, among other factors, 
the characteristics of the person to whom they are speaking. For example, most 
people would not talk to their grandmother the same way they would speak 
with a sibling. Proponents of Speech Accommodation Theory add an additional 
layer of complexity. That is, speakers also adjust speech (or not) to that of their 
interlocutors in response to a wide range of contextual and/or psychological 
variables. For example, a graduate student instructor may adjust aspects of his 
or her speech to distance or dissociate him or herself from a student he or she 
is speaking to. In Speech Accommodation Theory, this type of communicative 
strategy is called divergence. Alternatively, the same graduate student instructor may adapt or accommodate aspects of his or her speech to be more similar 
to that of the student, in which case he or she is said to display convergence. 
Convergence and divergence may also be characterized by nonverbal behavior 
(e.g., nodding, smiling), although the bulk of previous research on this theory 
has focused on linguistic speech accommodation.
Speech Accommodation Theory has its origins in the field of social psychology, most notably in the work of Howard Giles. It is important to note that language is studied as an interpersonal phenomenon by social psychologists. This 
means that the focus is on how the linguistic behavior of one individual influences that of his or her interlocutor, and vice versa. This is a different perspective of language study from what has been adopted by most sociolinguists, who 
study language as an intrapersonal phenomenon, or how the linguistic behavior 
84 SECTION II: APPROACHES
of one or a group of individuals is influenced by characteristics or aspects of 
the linguistic environment of the utterance itself.2
 In one of his earliest studies, 
Giles (1973) had naïve listeners rate how different speakers’ accents and grammar changed in interviews conducted with a speaker of the standard British 
variety (i.e., Received Pronunciation, which has higher social prestige) versus 
with a speaker of a regional variety (Bristol-accented). He found that speakers 
accommodated their speech more during the interview conducted by the standard variety interviewer. This study was pivotal in the development of Speech 
Accommodation Theory (Giles, 1977; Giles & Powesland, 1975; Giles & Smith, 
1979; Giles, Taylor, & Bourhis, 1973), and subsequent research sought to investigate in detail those factors influencing linguistic convergence and divergence.
Giles (1973) originally posited several factors that influenced the degree to 
which an interlocutor was accommodated by a given speaker. These included 
accent loyalty, social attitudes, and cognitive styles (p. 102). He noted that 
some speakers are just more or less likely to modify aspects of their speech 
in the presence of others whose speech differs in some way, regardless of perceived differences in age, social status, or other attributes of the interlocutor. 
Additionally, social attitudes, defined as the degree of ethnocentrism of an 
individual, may also influence speech accommodation to the extent that an 
individual views him or herself as being part of the same group or linguistic community as his or her interlocutor. The extent of an individual’s perceptual involvement in the social interaction, or field independence, may also 
affect the degree of speech convergence. Convergence has been studied not 
only in terms of adjustment(s) made to speech but also in terms of language 
choice. For example, Giles, Taylor, and Bourhis (1973) found that Montreal 
English speakers were more likely to respond in French upon listening to a 
French speaker providing information in English, and they also considered 
the French speaker to be more “considerate” and willing to “bridge the gap” 
between English and French Canadians. The body of research investigating 
speech accommodation has demonstrated how social factors, particularly 
speakers’ perceptions of both social and linguistic aspects of their interlocutor 
and the surrounding social setting, may influence variability between speakers during social interaction (see also Beebe, 1977; Bourhis & Giles, 1977; and 
Bourhis, Giles, Leyens, & Tajfel, 1979).
Although Speech Accommodation Theory was not initially developed to 
account for language learning, we include it here because of its applications 
to the study of second language acquisition, and particularly to the study of 
variability in second language performance. Its application to second language 
acquisition has been developed empirically and theoretically most notably in 
the work of Jane Zuengler. The basic premise of such research remains the 
same: learners (do not) adjust their speech to that of their native-speaking 
or nonnative-speaking interlocutor to minimize or emphasize differences in 
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
speech during interaction. An important difference, however, is that modifications made to speech are understood as ranging from more accurate or targetlike to less accurate or non-target-like, in response to the degree to which a 
learner desires to accommodate their speech during interaction (e.g., Zuengler, 1982, 1991). Much of the previous work investigating second language 
speech accommodation has focused on ethnic identity as a potential social 
factor affecting variable second language performance. For example, Beebe 
(1981) found that Chinese-speaking child learners of Thai pronounced their 
vowels in a more Thai-like manner when speaking with a Thai interviewer 
than when speaking with a Chinese interviewer. Zuengler (1982) revealed that 
when faced with ethnically threatening statements made by a native Englishspeaking interviewer, second language speakers of English demonstrated 
either convergence in their pronunciation to provide an objective response 
or divergence in their pronunciation to provide a more subjective or personal 
response to the statement. In a study of second language learners of English, 
Young (1988) revealed that ethnicity, along with other attributes of the nativespeaking interlocutor such as age, sex, and occupation, explained speech convergence demonstrated by Chinese-speaking learners of English. Overall the 
application of speech accommodation theory to second language acquisition 
data has highlighted a means for examining the link between social and psychological factors and variable second language accuracy and use.
Research Methods and Accommodation Theory
Studies conducted under the Accommodation Theory approach have used 
interviews as the central means for eliciting learner speech. In order to be able 
to measure the convergence and divergence in linguistic behavior occurring 
between the learner and his or her interlocutor, the learner generally played the 
role of interviewee and the native or more skilled user of the second language 
played the role of interviewer. This interview design facilitated the examination 
of not only how linguistic aspects of the interviewer’s speech influenced convergence or divergence by the learner but also how extralinguistic aspects such 
as age, sex, and perceived ethnic identity were related to patterns in language 
produced by the learner. The methods of data analysis are consistent with those 
in mainstream sociolinguistics (see Chapters Two and Three) where social factors can be assessed as individual influencing variables on language use.
Sociocultural Theory
One of the best-known social approaches to language learning is Sociocultural Theory. What makes this a social theory is the manner in which cognitive 
processes and language are viewed. Under this framework, human thinking 
86 SECTION II: APPROACHES
or mental activity is seen as having an external or social origin, and language 
is viewed as a tool that is used for social purposes. The Soviet developmental psychologist, Lev Vygotsky, whose translated works provided the guiding 
principles underlying this theory, observed that, in early stages, children must 
rely on interpersonal interaction with their caregiver(s) to solve problems and 
carry out tasks or activities because they lack the internal strategic resources 
necessary to do so alone (cf. Wertsch, 1980). The process of relying on a caregiver or a generally more skilled individual to carry out a task or activity is 
called other-regulation. A key feature of other-regulation is the use of language to mediate what is going on in one’s thinking (i.e., internal or cognitive 
processes) with what is going on in the outside environment (i.e., external or 
social processes). Under this view, language is a symbolic tool used in the process of mediation and also in a supportive capacity to direct attention to key 
features of the social context. This attention direction is called scaffolding. As 
part of the scaffolding process, the caregiver or skilled individual determines 
the potential developmental level of the child via collaborative talk. The distance between the child’s actual level of development and his or her potential 
level of development is called the zone of proximal development. Eventually children learn how to complete tasks or activities on their own, by taking 
into their own consciousness the knowledge and skills acquired during social 
interaction. This process of internalizing information gained through social 
interaction is called appropriation. Appropriated knowledge and skills allow 
individuals to control their own mental activity which, in turn, allows them to 
complete tasks or activities by themselves. The ability to complete tasks alone 
is known as self-regulation. An important point to bear in mind is that even 
skilled individuals are not solely guided by self-regulation. On the contrary, 
when faced with a cognitively difficult task or activity, skilled individuals may 
rely on other individuals or objects in the surrounding environment (i.e., 
object-regulation) to guide their mental activity. The reliance on individuals or objects for assistance in completing difficult tasks is called continuous 
access, and such access serves to aid skilled individuals or adults in regaining 
or reverting back to self-regulation. In general, this theory views learning as 
the process of internalizing information gained through social interactions in 
order to reach a state of self-regulation, and this process can be repeated in any 
context where a difficult task is encountered.
The extension of Sociocultural Theory to second language acquisition 
research, historically credited to James Lantolf, has been expansive. Research 
under this framework is described in numerous edited volumes (e.g., Lantolf, 
2000; Lantolf & Thorne, 2006) and papers describing studies in which theoretical principles are tested with second language learners from a wide variety of first language backgrounds. Work on mediation and self-regulation has 
demonstrated that learners are able to use the second language to control the 
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
task at hand. For example, in a study of 21 intermediate learners of English as 
a second language from a variety of first language backgrounds (Arabic, Chinese, French, Japanese, Spanish, etc.), Frawley and Lantolf (1985) sought to 
examine how learners used second language discourse to gain self-regulation 
in the completion of a story narration task. Attempts to self-regulate were 
observed in the form of naming participants and events in the pictures as well 
as in the use of the progressive aspect.
Two additional concepts that are important in Sociocultural Theory are 
private speech and inner speech. Private speech (Flavell, 1966) refers to the 
external articulation of speech used to complete a task or activity. When children talk aloud to themselves to solve a problem, this is understood to be a 
form of self-regulation. Similarly, second language learners may talk aloud to 
themselves to control or regulate their completion of a task or activity. Talking 
aloud represents an externalization of inner forms, and this strategy is used 
to control or regulate a difficult task. Eventually children and second language 
learners are able to self-regulate without the external articulation of speech. 
This self-regulation is called inner speech and represents a more autonomous 
phase of thinking. Similar to the notion of continuous access, adults and second language learners may return to using private speech when completing a 
difficult task or activity to maintain self-regulation.
Returning to the concept of mediation, previous research suggests that 
learners may not always develop the ability to use the second language to 
mediate thinking. For example, Darhower (2004) showed that the use of native 
language dialogue journals served to mediate English-speaking learners’ use of 
second language Spanish target structures and also to express their experiences 
related to Spanish language learning. This expression of language learning 
related experiences allowed Darhower to highlight the learners’ active role in 
the learning process. The study as a whole provides a good example of objectregulation—in this case, the use of native language dialogue journals to guide 
thinking in a second language. Related work on private speech in second languages has been conducted with classroom learners (e.g., Centeno-Cortés & 
Jiménez-Jiménez, 2004; Frawley & Lantolf, 1985; Lantolf & Yáñez-Prieto, 2003; 
McCafferty, 1992; Ohta, 2001) and with naturalistic learners (e.g., Anton & 
DiCamilla, 1998; Itoh, 1973). Overall, the findings of this research tend to 
demonstrate learners’ use of private speech to gain and/or maintain control of 
a task at hand. Additionally, these studies show increased use of private speech 
alongside increased task difficulty. Finally, the use of the first language in private speech has also been shown to facilitate task completion.
A second strand of research conducted within this framework explores 
the zone of proximal development in second language learning. For example, 
Aljaafreh and Lantolf (1994) studied three ESL learners from distinct first 
language backgrounds (Japanese, Spanish, and Portuguese) during tutorial 
88 SECTION II: APPROACHES
sessions. Learners wrote an in-class essay (originally a course assignment) 
and then met with a tutor to review it. Reviewing the essay included a multistep process representative of scaffolding. First, before beginning the tutorial 
session, the tutor read the essay without providing any corrective feedback. 
Next, the learner was instructed to read the essay privately and to underline 
and/or make any corrections. Finally, the learner and tutor reviewed the essay 
sentence by sentence together, at which point the instructor drew the learners’ attention to errors not caught by the learner. Drawing attention to the 
errors was a gradual process. The tutor started broadly by asking the learner 
if he or she noticed anything wrong in the entire text. Later, if necessary, the 
tutor directed the learner’s attention to the incorrect form and/or provided 
hints as to how to correct the errors. This study showed that the quantity and 
quality (i.e., implicit or explicit feedback) of mediation varied by individual 
learner. In addition, it was claimed that development could be characterized 
by a shift from a more explicit to a more implicit form of mediation (Lantolf, 
2011). Nassaji and Swain (2000) note that research into mediation should 
take into account the individual learner’s needs and his or her zone of proximal development.
Research aiming to examine development within the zone of proximal 
development is generally subsumed under work on dynamic assessment, 
motivated by the work of Poehner (2005, 2008). Dynamic assessment is a 
form of integrated instruction and assessment that allows us to determine 
what learners can do with the second language alone and with mediation. 
Poehner (2008) found that, over four months, advanced learners of French 
demonstrated variable rates of development in their ability to describe movie 
scenes of increasing complexity. Importantly, learners were able to use appropriated means gained from mediated interaction during less complex narratives and apply them to more complex narratives. Research on dynamic 
assessment has focused on the development of listening comprehension (e.g., 
Ableeva, 2010), morphosyntax (e.g., Lantolf & Poehner, 2011), and placement testing (e.g., Antón, 2009). Although the individual focus of each of 
these studies differs, all support the observation that dynamic assessment aids 
learners in second language development. Likewise, they demonstrate that 
second language development through mediation varies across individual 
learners.
Research Methods and Sociocultural Theory
Research on mediation, regulation, and second language development in 
the zone of proximal development necessitates a methodology that provides 
opportunities to observe learners using the second language to complete tasks 
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
and solve problems. For mediation and regulation in particular, researchers often 
present learners with a task that is just beyond their current level of development 
so that their behavior during the problem-solving activity can be directly observed. 
The focus on the examination of processes while they are occurring is called the 
genetic method (Vygotsky, 1978). With regard to length of study, research designs 
may employ a one-time task and compare the activity across learners, or they 
may employ several tasks and compare a single learner or smaller group of learners across tasks that are organized by level of difficulty. Regarding the study of 
development in the zone of proximal development in particular, learners’ use of 
the second language during a given activity type might be examined over several 
meetings or extend for several months (e.g., Poehner, 2005, 2008). Regardless of 
the elicitation methodology employed, this body of research seeks to observe the 
behaviors believed to be central to the process of development, such as the use of 
inner speech or object-regulation, while they are occurring in real time.
Identity Approach
The Identity Approach to second language acquisition adopts a distinct perspective on the relationship between the learner and the external, social environment. Under this approach learners are connected to the learning context 
via social identity(ies). The central figure leading theoretical and empirical 
work on the Identity Approach is Bonny Norton (1997; Norton Pierce, 1995), who 
defines identity as “how a person understands his or her relationship to the 
world, how that relationship is constructed across time and space, and how the 
person understands possibilities for the future” (Norton, 2000, p. 5). Two principles are central to this approach: (1) the social identity of language learners 
is complex and dynamic, and (2) socially structured relations of power affect 
learners’ opportunities to interact with speakers of the target language community. Our discussion of this approach will demonstrate how these two principles 
help to develop an account of language learning that takes into consideration 
individual and contextual pressures on access to opportunities for interaction.
Norton’s conceptualization of social identity in second language learning 
comes from Weedon’s (1987) poststructuralist theory of subjectivity. Social 
identity, or subjectivity, is described as multiple, a site of struggle, and something that changes over time (Weedon, 1987). The description of social identity as “multiple” indicates that subjects or individuals are conceptualized as 
dynamic, decentered, and often contradictory beings at the core. They are not 
viewed as fixed, centered beings that can be characterized in a dichotomous 
manner (e.g., motivated/unmotivated, introverted/extroverted). Social identity is also described as a site of struggle because subjectivities are contradictory and dynamic. In other words, the contradictory and ever-changing nature 
90 SECTION II: APPROACHES
of identity means that the process of developing one’s social identity is one of 
struggle, in the sense that it requires continuous reevaluation and development. Subjects are constantly struggling to position and/or reposition themselves in discourse, and this discourse is structured by external relations of 
power. Lastly, because social identity is multiple and contradictory, it changes 
over time. In this sense we see that Identity Theory represents significant development in the degree of complexity with which we view social identities and 
their role in language use and acquisition.
Another important concept in Identity Theory is investment. Investment 
refers to “. . . the socially and historically constructed relationship of learners to 
the target language, and their often ambivalent desire to learn and practice it” 
(Norton & McKinney, 2011, p. 75). Investment is not equivalent to motivation 
(cf. Gardner & Lambert, 1972). Rather than wanting to learn a second language 
to get a better job (i.e., instrumental motivation) or become a member of the target language community (i.e., integrative motivation), identity theorists argue 
that learners invest in the second language to increase the value of their cultural 
capital (e.g., Bourdieu & Passeron, 1977[1970]). Cultural capital is defined as 
“knowledge and modes of thought that characterize different classes and groups 
in relation to specific sets of social forms, with differential exchange values” 
(Norton & McKinney, 2011, p. 75). In other words, learners invest to get a good 
return or to get access to resources that impact the value of their cultural capital. 
When learners do not believe they are getting a good return on their efforts to 
acquire a language, this will impact the investment they make in the process. 
Likewise, learners who view their efforts to interact in the target culture and 
language as profitable will continue to invest energy in doing so in the future.
The relationship between investment and second language learning was 
explored in Norton Peirce’s (1995) seminal study of immigrant women learning English in Canada. In that study, all five of her participants demonstrated 
high motivation for learning English. Even so, in certain social situations they 
expressed discomfort speaking English. For example, Martina—a mother from 
Czechoslovakia—was motivated to learn and practice English in order to take 
on more tasks as the primary caregiver in the family. These tasks often involved 
interacting with members of the surrounding community to accomplish goals 
such as finding schools for her children, and these interactions made Martina 
feel uncomfortable and inferior. Over time Martina sought out more opportunities to practice English, and to learn about Canadian society and how to 
function within it. Martina’s investment in the language, therefore, increased 
over the yearlong study in response to her desire to change her relationship 
with the target community. This changing relationship ultimately had a positive impact on her acquisition of the English language.
Investment has also been researched in the context of classroom learning. In a case study conducted with two Canadian learners of Japanese (one 
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
a Canadian of Japanese descent and the other an Anglophone Canadian), 
Haneda (2005) demonstrated how differing investment in writing in Japanese 
reflected their multiple memberships in different communities and also their 
differing goals. For the Japanese Canadian, Jim, writing in Japanese appeared 
to be influenced by his ties to his heritage community. Jim wanted to become a 
“fuller” member of this community by improving his mastery of the language. 
Jim also saw himself as a good writer in English and hoped to extend that attribute of his identity to his heritage language. This led to a high degree of investment in second language writing. For the Anglophone Canadian, Edward, a 
lesser investment in writing in Japanese was reflected in his desire to become 
a successful businessman. This is because he did not view writing well in his 
second language as an essential skill for meeting his professional goals (relative 
to the importance of speaking and reading in Japanese). Haneda (2005), therefore, showed that investment is linked to self-perception and to the construction of social identity. Her study also demonstrated how real and/or imagined 
membership in the target language community influenced Jim and Edward’s 
approaches to writing in Japanese. We will return to these findings after a brief 
discussion of the concept of imagined communities.
Imagined communities are a central concept in Identity Theory. Norton 
and McKinney (2011) define imagined communities as “groups of people, 
not immediately tangible and accessible, with whom we connect through the 
power of the imagination” (p. 76). Norton extended Wenger’s (1998) proposal 
that participation in communities of practice can occur through engagement 
(i.e., direct involvement) and/or imagination to affect the context of second 
language learning. This extension allowed her to account for instances of nonparticipation and resistance in the classroom. Having a sense of community 
with members of a community not yet met or soon to be met, as well as the 
degree of affiliation with that community, are hypothesized to impact trajectories of language learning. Additionally, they are believed to influence identity (real and imagined) and investment in the second language. Returning 
to Haneda’s (2005) study, the two learners’ participation and membership in 
real and imagined communities influenced their investment in writing. Jim’s 
participation in an academic community of writers as well as in the local Japanese community played a strong role in his investment in writing. Jim wanted 
to write better in Japanese to maintain his sense of identity as a strong writer 
overall. At the same time, he hoped to improve his use of the Japanese language for current and future or imagined participation with family, friends 
at school, and relatives in Japan. Edward’s investment in writing extended 
directly from how he imagined he would communicate with Japanese speakers. As a future businessman, speaking and reading would be more important 
than writing among the professional community in which he envisioned himself participating. Thus, these differing imagined communities and manners of 
92 SECTION II: APPROACHES
(non)participation appeared to influence each learner’s investment in writing 
in the second language.
Overall, the focus on social aspects of language learning of the Identity 
Approach can be seen as an integration of those factors relating to the learner 
(e.g., investment) and those relating to the learning context (e.g., communities, physical and imagined). These concepts are ultimately understood as 
socially constructed, just like language, and reflect relations of power that may 
have an impact on learning. Thus, an Identity Approach to learning a second 
language views learning as a sociocultural practice, specifically “a relational 
activity that occurs between specific speakers situated in specific sociocultural 
contexts” (Norton & McKinney, 2011, p. 79). Development in the second language reflects increasing participation in the target language community, real 
or imagined, and additional experience with the social and cultural practices 
that characterize that community. This process is called legitimate peripheral 
participation, occurring between learners or “newcomers” and established 
members or “old-timers” of the given community. Learning is always situated 
(i.e., occurring in a specific social context), and the degree of periphery to 
or marginalization from the target language community influences participation in associated practices. This participation ultimately has an impact on the 
opportunities for learning to which each individual has access.
Research Methods and the Identity Approach
Because the Identity Approach is concerned with growing participation in a 
target language community, many studies tend to be longitudinal in nature (at 
least one year in length). This longitudinal approach is consonant with studies that attempt to document how identities change over time. Additionally, 
the complexity of individual and social relationships, as well as how power 
is structured in society, makes it important to capture a detailed account of 
the experiences of the participants. For that reason, identity researchers often 
focus on narratives, either by conducting several interviews with participants 
(e.g., McKay & Wong, 1996; Norton, 2000) or examining existing autobiographies and biographies (e.g., Pavlenko, 2001a, 2001b, 2004). Many studies 
employ a mixed-methodology approach, using narratives, questionnaires, diaries, and observations from field notes. Although distinct methods or combinations of methods may be used, they always reflect a qualitative approach to 
the examination of the experiences of learners.
Language Socialization Approach
The Language Socialization Approach to second language acquisition is centrally concerned with learners’ development of linguistic, cultural, and communicative competence (Duff & Talmy, 2011). From the outset we note that 
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
acquiring knowledge of the second language under this approach is seen from 
a much broader perspective, in that acquisition involves knowledge of culture such as “stances of morality or respect” as well as social knowledge, or 
“how certain types of language practices produce and reflect social stratification, hierarchy, and status marking” (Duff & Talmy, 2011, p. 95). Other social 
aspects that are examined by researchers adopting a Language Socialization 
Approach include ideologies, epistemologies, identity, and affect. Thus, social 
aspects related to both the learner and the learning context are investigated 
within this approach.
Looking in greater detail at aspects related to the learner, we see similarities to the Identity Approach in that learners are understood to play an active 
role in their learning of the second language and the second language culture. 
Learners develop their knowledge of the language, culture, and social practices of the second language by being socialized by more knowledgeable or 
proficient users and members of the target language community. Socialization 
involves interaction and exposure to the linguistic and cultural norms of practice, occurring in a variety of contexts, for example at home, in the workplace, 
at school, or even among a group of friends. However, not only are learners 
socialized by members of the target language community, but also members 
themselves are socialized by learners. The latter is unique to the Language 
Socialization Approach, and socialization itself reflects a process that endures 
over a lifetime.
Research on second language socialization reflects the broad range of factors believed to play a role in the learning of a second language. Previous 
studies have investigated how access to the target language community and 
participation within that community directly influence opportunities for 
learning and practicing the second language (e.g., Morita, 2004; Poole, 1992; 
Toohey, 1998). Studies have also examined how learners come to understand 
the complex interplay of sociocultural meanings, language, and language practices (e.g., Friedman, 2001), as well as how socialization relates to pragmatic 
and grammatical development (e.g., Ohta, 1994, 2001; Siegal, 1994, 1996). 
Although studies on second language development in relation to socialization 
exist, the principal focus of this work is on learners’ developing knowledge 
of social practices and associated meanings, rather than on the development 
of specific linguistic forms. Researchers have examined development in this 
manner in both classroom and naturalistic settings, focusing on pragmatic 
development (e.g., requests; Li, 2000) and how learners’ interactions with 
their interlocutors (i.e., others students and instructors) develop over time 
(e.g., Duff, 1995; Duff & Kobayashi, 2010; Kobayashi, 2003, 2004). The work 
of Agnes He, who has studied the socialization of Chinese American children 
into Chinese as a Heritage language represents a notable research contribution 
made under this approach. She has examined the organization and impact of 
teachers’ directives (e.g., He, 2000), the use of subject pronouns and instances 
94 SECTION II: APPROACHES
of repair to construct distinct identities, and the function of codeswitching 
within turn constructions (e.g., He, 2013). Her work has not only adopted 
principles from Language Socialization, but the influence of Identity Theory and Conversation Analysis is also evident in her studies. Thus, through 
the discussion of Language Socialization we see not only that this particular approach views the process of acquiring a second language quite broadly, 
but also that in so doing, it provides important avenues for cross-disciplinary 
research on the topic.
Research Methods and the Language Socialization Approach
Language Socialization researchers generally employ ethnographic methods of 
data collection. This means that researchers spend a significant amount of time 
in the field to acquaint themselves with the norms and practices of the community. Over time, researchers gather data from a variety of sources, including recorded interviews, audio and/or video of a variety of social interactions, 
physical resources related to the study site, and observations recorded in field 
notes. The time spent in the study site is necessary not only for gathering the 
relevant data and better understanding the cultural and social practices of the 
community but also for documenting socialization process(es) over time. Language Socialization studies therefore tend to be longitudinal in nature, with the 
understanding that socialization is a dynamic, lifelong process. The data analysis conducted by second language socialization researchers tends to focus on 
social practices or speech events and often examines the linguistic and cultural 
behaviors observed within those practices or events. This approach applies to 
classroom and naturalistic learners. Thus, linguistic development can serve as 
the focus of a second language socialization study, but it is always viewed in 
relation to the external, social setting.
Conversation-Analytic Approach
Conversation Analysis is a social approach to language acquisition that has 
as its central goal the examination of “the methods ordinary people use to 
participate and make sense in their daily life” (Kasper & Wagner, 2011, p. 117). 
Participation and sense making form the basis of social order, and language 
facilitates participation and sense-making during everyday social interaction. 
One central component of Conversation Analysis is the examination of social 
interaction in daily life. Two key concepts related to social interaction that 
are essential for Conversation Analysis work are the interaction order and 
interactional competence. Interaction order (e.g., Goffman, 1983) refers to 
the orderliness of interaction between participants. In other words, orderliness 
includes the practices participants come to know and systematically use to 
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
engage in and manage social interactions. For example, the practice of ordering a coffee at Starbucks is comprised of a specific set of patterns and behaviors, to the extent that the employee waiting to take my order expects me to 
indicate what size I want—tall, grande, or venti—and assumes that I know to 
provide that information at the same time I indicate my beverage choice. If I 
do not, with a long line of people behind me, my actions may be deemed unacceptable in some way and even signaled as being so (e.g., tone of impatience as 
the employee asks me what size). This example illustrates the notion of moral 
order in social practices, where interruptions in the flow of such practices are 
seen as “violations of moral norms”, and participants must be held accountable for their actions (Kasper & Wagner, 2011, p. 118). Like the previous two 
approaches to language use and language learning, Conversation Analysis 
clearly extends well beyond the linguistic elements of the conversation.
The second important concept mentioned earlier was interactional competence. This construct refers to the group of practices through which individuals 
involved in an interaction produce and understand particular behaviors during 
that interaction. This concept is comprised of both the competence necessary 
to interact effectively and the available competence in a given interaction (e.g., 
Mehan, 1979). Simply put, effective interaction requires competence at the level 
of the individual as well as at the level of all participants involved in the interaction. Returning to the Starbucks example, effective interaction not only requires 
that I know how to interact to carry out my drink order but also that the 
employee assisting me knows. Further, “knowing” how to interact in this situation involves shared assumptions of interaction order. Knowledge of interaction 
of this type at a coffee shop chain may vary from one culture, region, or country 
to another, such that “knowing” how to interact may not necessarily transfer so 
easily from one culture, region, or country to the next. Conversation analysts 
therefore attempt to uncover the linguistic and nonlinguistic aspects underlying 
the everyday social interaction of a particular community of practice.
The Conversation-Analytic Approach to second language acquisition views 
interactional competence as both the means and the ends for learning. Learners learn through interaction but also need to acquire the practices and conduct necessary to participate effectively in their interactions with members of 
the target language community. This process, although nonlinear, may appear 
straightforward; however, knowledge of the practices and conduct necessary 
for learners to participate effectively is greatly hindered by their sometimes 
limited and developing knowledge of the language. Language, from a conversation analytic perspective, includes those linguistic resources used to carry 
out activities and generally interact in a given social environment. Conversation analysts examine the use of these linguistic resources as they are present in 
naturally occurring conversations. More specifically, they investigate how these 
linguistic resources shape and influence social order and social interaction.
96 SECTION II: APPROACHES
An additional point related to the use of linguistic resources in conversational interactions is the idea that different languages have different linguistic 
means of organizing social interaction. Likewise, the Conversation Analysis 
Approach states that grammar organizes social interaction, while at the same 
time social interaction organizes grammar (Ochs, Schegloff, & Thompson, 
1996). For example, English word order consistently follows a subject-verbobject configuration, which facilitates turn-taking in conversation: Once a 
speaker hears the subject of the utterance, he or she knows what type of syntactic element will follow and more generally how the interlocutor’s turn is progressing. This is very different from languages with more flexible word order 
and syntactic elements that are often not realized in speech (e.g., subjects and 
objects). Conversation Analysis researchers investigating Japanese, for example, have uncovered self-initiated repair (Fox, Hayashi, & Jasperson, 1996) and 
collaborative completions (Hayashi, 2004) as two different linguistic means 
speakers use to organize social interaction. These strategies may be understood to reflect elements of the structure of the language in which they occur. 
In fact, Fox, Hayashi, and Jasperson’s (1996) investigation of the relationship 
between syntax and repair in two syntactically distinct languages, Japanese and 
English, demonstrated several differences in the structure of repairs between 
these languages. Among other examples, structural differences in repair were 
found to be linked to cross-linguistic differences in verb morphology marking 
(e.g., instances of repair to verb endings were found in the utterances of Japanese speakers but not English speakers) and the syntactic structure of “filler” 
phrases (e.g., Japanese speakers started with a demonstrative pronoun to hold 
their place in the conversation, whereas English speakers “recycle” portions of 
the previous phrase).
Kasper and Wagner (2011) categorize research adopting a ConversationAnalytic Approach to second language acquisition into two general strands 
of inquiry: (1) those studies investigating language learning as social practice and (2) those investigating the development of interactional competence. 
Studies investigating language learning as social practice focus on how second language users learn as a result of their participation in social interaction 
on a daily basis. This learning via social interaction has been accounted for 
both inside of the classroom (e.g., Markee, 2005) and out (e.g., Theodórsdóttir, 2011a, 2011b, with learners of Icelandic). These studies demonstrate how 
learners create and engage in social interaction for the central purpose of 
learning, whether that involves demonstrating knowledge of turn-taking and 
repair during classroom tasks (e.g., Markee, 1994, 2000) or making an effort to 
use the second language instead of the first to create more opportunities for 
learning and practice in daily life (Theodórsdóttir, 2011a, 2011b).
Within the group of studies that investigate the development of interactional competence, researchers have explored the development of patterns of 
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
participation and use of linguistic resources both in the short-term and over 
time (e.g., Markee, 2000). Short-term developmental studies examine different instances within a given activity while learners complete the activity. For 
example, M. Ishida (2006) traced the use of modal expressions by a learner of 
Japanese over the course of a ten-minute-long task. Studies examining development over time lean heavily toward a longitudinal design (e.g., Brouwer & 
Wagner, 2004; González-Lloret, 2008; Ishida, 2009; Nguyen, 2006, 2008), 
although Kim’s (2009) study of learners’ use of two Korean discourse markers 
adopted a cross-sectional design. Although these studies span a large range of 
interactional contexts, findings always relate learning to social interaction and 
participation in social practices. Learners are shown to expand use of linguistic 
resources to other contexts and to more effectively order talk in social interaction as they develop interactional and linguistic competence.
Research Methods and the Conversation Analysis Approach
As previously mentioned, conversation analysts are interested in ordinary, 
everyday conversations in order to study how individuals participate in and 
make sense of the surrounding social world. Therefore, data are naturally occurring conversations, and analysts employ ethnographic techniques to gather 
these data. Because the interest lies in the everyday and the ordinary, conversation analysts do not establish the topic of investigation beforehand. Instead, 
they examine the naturally occurring practices of interaction that emerge during their analysis of the data, a process called “unmotivated looking” (Mori, 
2004). These practices may be presented as single instances or a collection of 
relevant instances, where the former is intended to reveal practices and the latter attempts to uncover how participants shape knowledge of order in talk.
A distinctive feature of Conversation-Analysis-based methodology is the 
convention for transcribing recorded conversations. The level of detail captured in transcriptions following Conversation Analysis conventions serves to 
provide a descriptive and accurate account of the interaction moment(s) of 
interest to readers, both temporally and spatially. A sample of Conversation 
Analysis transcription conventions is offered in Table 4.2, and Example 4.1 
provides a sample transcription using Conversation Analysis–style conventions. It is important to note that all Conversation Analysis studies may not 
necessarily follow these exact transcription conventions. Some may be taken 
out, added in, or modified according to the specific details of the interaction(s) 
the researcher attempts to highlight for readers.
Researchers working on second language acquisition within a Conversation Analysis Approach are also concerned with making the manner in which 
conversations are “second language” in nature visible to the reader. Thus, one 
methodological challenge faced under this approach is identifying means 
98 SECTION II: APPROACHES
TABLE 4.2
Example of Conversation Analysis transcription conventions 
(based on Markee & Kasper, 2004, pp. 499–500)
Identity of speakers
T: teacher
L1: identified learner
LL: several or all learners talking simultaneously
Simultaneous utterances
[L1: yes 
[L2: yeh
simultaneous, overlapping talk by two speakers
Intervals within and between utterances
(0.3) a pause of 0.3 second
Characteristics of speech delivery
? rising intonation, not necessarily a question
! strong emphasis, with falling intonation
yes. a period indicates falling (final) intonation
so, a comma indicates low-rising intonation 
suggesting continuation
go:::d one or more colons indicate lengthening of the 
preceding sound; each additional colon represents 
a lengthening of one beat
NO capitals indicate increased volume
alright degree sign indicates decreased volume
Commentary in the transcript
((coughs)) verbal description of actions noted in the 
transcript, including nonverbal actions
(radio) single parentheses indicate unclear or probable 
item
through which to indicate foreign accent in transcriptions without compromising the character of the second language learner in some way. In general, 
transcriptions are not modified to reflect foreign accent, particularly if it does 
not influence the interaction in any way. From this description, it is clear that 
the data elicitation method for Conversation Analysis is common to many different approaches, but the means of analysis of that dataset are quite unique.
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
EXAMPLE 4.1. Transcription following Conversation Analysis conventions 
(Ishida, 2009, p. 360)
Excerpt 3, Fred’s host sister (FR5, 3/3/2005, 2’11’’)
Fred (FR) and his friend, Gordon, are in Gordon’s host mother’s (GM) house. 
Gordon’s host mother is talking about Fred’s host brother and sisters based 
on what she has heard from Fred’s host mother. After talking about Fred’s 
host brother, she begins to talk about one of Fred’s host sisters (line 1).
01 GM: oneesan wa suisu ka dokka ni
older sister TP Switzerland or somewhere in
02 iru deshoo.
live I suppose
‘The older sister is in Switzerland or somewhere, isnt she?’
03 (0.7)
04 FR: [un n,
yeah
‘Yeah.’
05 GM: [°musume-san°
daughter
 ‘The daughter of your host mother.’
06 (0.4)
07 FR: soo desu ne
right CP ne
‘That’s right’
08 GM: hnn,
mm
‘Mm.’
09 (0.8)
10 FR: shitte iru
know
‘I know that.’
Sociocognitive Approach
The final social approach to be considered in the present chapter is the Sociocognitive Approach, most often associated with Dwight Atkinson. As the name 
suggests, a Sociocognitive Approach to second language acquisition considers 
both social and cognitive aspects of second language learning. These social and 
100 SECTION II: APPROACHES
cognitive aspects, however, do not exist in isolation from each other. Instead, 
they interact within a dynamic, integrated system comprising the mind, body, 
and world (Atkinson, 2011a). It is because of the connection between the cognitive and the social that this approach is included in the present chapter. 
One distinctive feature of this approach is the embodied, embedded nature 
of cognition (Atkinson, 2010a, 2010b). Embodied cognition means that cognitive activity is “grounded in bodily states and action” (Atkinson, 2010a, 
p. 599). Cognition is adaptive, which means that thinking and thought processes change and evolve to facilitate development and survival in the world. 
Cognition is viewed as embedded in the physical world. Atkinson’s (2011a) 
“cognition-for-driving” example supports this assertion. He claims that we do 
not have to rely on cognition very much to arrive at the nearest supermarket 
because the roads and routes do most of the routing or “thinking” for us. Cognition therefore is “functionally integrated” with the surrounding environment; that is, it exists in the world, rather than exclusively in our own minds 
(Atkinson, 2011a, p. 145).
Under this approach, integration occurs not only between mind and world 
but also between mind and body. Synchronized human behavior (e.g., Atkinson, 2010a, 2011a) and learning through imitation are examples of mind-body 
integration and serve to facilitate adaptation and cooperation in the social 
environment. Additionally, the integration of mind and body at the level of the 
individual is not believed to exist independently from that of other individuals 
during joint social action; rather, individuals align to one another. This alignment is fundamental to the concept of social cognition, which is dynamic and 
sensitive to constant changes in the physical and social environment. Under 
this view social cognition occurs when individuals are aligned to one another 
through interaction. Such alignment is not limited to linguistic aspects of the 
interaction, as it might be under an approach like Accommodation Theory, but 
rather it includes physical behavior, such as posture and gestures.
The conceptualization of language and learning are also distinct under 
this approach. Atkinson describes language as a tool for social action (2011a, 
p. 146). In other words, language is used for (joint) social action and facilitates 
human behavior and interaction with and within the surrounding social environment. Language itself is adaptive and includes both verbal and nonverbal 
elements (e.g., facial expressions, gestures, etc.) of communication. Nonverbal elements have received growing attention in the sociocognitive literature 
(e.g., Kinsbourne & Jordan, 2009; Yu, Ballard, & Aslin, 2005), and associated 
researchers argue that nonverbal activity further facilitates cooperative social 
action. Learning is living and individuals constantly learn simply by participating in life activities. In other words, learning is understood as a natural 
product of interacting in the surrounding social environment. Applying this 
understanding of learning to second language acquisition means that aspects 
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
of language learning cannot be separated from the surrounding environment, be it the physical environment of the target language community or a 
classroom setting. Instead, learners are active participants in the surrounding 
adaptive world, and language learning occurs as a result of participation in 
and alignment with the social environment (human and nonhuman).
The Sociocognitive Approach is the most recent approach among all that 
we have covered, and, unlike others, it can be fairly described as still in its early 
stages of development. Empirical research thus far has focused on alignment 
(Atkinson, Churchill, Nishino, & Okada, 2007; Mori & Hayashi, 2006) and use 
of symbiotic gestures (Churchill, Okada, Nishino, & Atkinson, 2010). In their 
work on alignment, Mori and Hayashi (2006) examined interactions between 
first language and second language speakers of Japanese, specifically extracts 
from a language table meeting representing embodied completion, or the 
use of gestures to complete an utterance left verbally unfinished. Mori and 
Hayashi found that the first language speakers’ use of gestures helped facilitate 
mutual understanding with second language speakers with limited linguistic 
competence in Japanese. Use of gestures then was interpreted as a means of 
adapting to the social environment, in which learning or mutual understanding could then occur. Atkinson, Churchill, Nishino, and Okada’s (2007) study 
provides several examples of the notion of alignment in the Sociocognitive 
Approach. Using videotaped interactions of a tutoring session between Ako, 
then a 14-year-old Japanese-speaking learner of English, and Tomo, aunt and 
tutor to Ako, their analysis demonstrated how Ako coordinated her actions 
(i.e., posture, eye gaze, gesture, verbalizations, etc.) to Tomo and to objects 
in the surrounding environment (Tomo’s dining room) to align herself more 
closely to the physical world. The authors argued that this alignment is essential for developmental activity to occur and, thus, should be understood to 
be essential to human life. The study conducted by Churchill and colleagues 
(2010) is also based on interactions between English learner Ako and her 
aunt and tutor Tomo, but focuses instead on the use of symbiotic gestures by 
Tomo. The researchers based their assertions about symbiotic gestures on the 
work of Goodwin (2003), defining them as “gesture, talk, physical orientation/movement, and the material structures of the environment that are used 
to establish and organize the interlocutor’s domain of scrutiny” (Churchill 
et al., 2010, p. 236). They argued that Tomo used gestures to make grammar 
visible during the selected tutoring sessions they analyzed. Specifically, Tomo 
made a particular gesture (a small circle with her pencil in the air) when offering the correct of two options related to tense in one excerpt, a gesture that 
is repeated with other examples to serve as a cue for Ako. The researchers 
argued that these gestures not only make grammar visible but also connect 
interactions related to the same topic (choice of tense during the grammar 
exercise) to facilitate participation by the learner. From this brief survey of 
102 SECTION II: APPROACHES
recent research conducted under the Sociocognitive Approach, we see that 
it is the proposed connection between the physical world and cognition, in 
this case as related to language use and language acquisition, which makes the 
theory unique.
Research Methods and the Sociocognitive Approach
Because the Sociocognitive Approach is interested in mind, body, and world 
integration, all interactions and relevant tools (physical and symbolic) must 
be included in the research design. The first and leading studies undertaken 
within this framework (e.g., Atkinson et al., 2007; Churchill et al., 2010) 
have used videotaped interactions to capture the level of detail necessary to 
account for alignment and use of symbiotic gestures. As part of the analysis, 
the researchers tend to include video screenshots to accompany prose descriptions. Researchers also examine all of the tools involved in the interactions, 
including worksheets and pencils, as well as how participants interact with and 
use those tools as they complete the tasks or interactions. Because this is a new 
area, it is likely that the research methods employed will continue to develop 
and make use of developing technologies to capture the full range of behaviors 
believed to be related to cognition.
To capture detail in spoken interaction, studies adopting a Sociocognitive Approach also often employ the analytical tools developed in Conversation Analysis. We conclude this section with Example 4.2, which shows the 
first three lines of the first excerpt from the study by Mori and Hayashi (2006, 
pp. 201–202). The example shows the transcription conventions from Conversation Analysis along with indications of the gestures that accompanied the 
linguistic aspects of the interaction.
EXAMPLE 4.2. Excerpt from Mori & Hayashi (2006)
1 Toru: nanode:: (1.0) hurui:: (.) kuruma wa:: (0.2)
so old car TP
2 nedan ga:: [(0.4)
 price SP [
 [((moves open right hand downwards repetitively,
 [while gazing intently at Alan; Fig. 1))
 ‘So::, (1.0) as for o::ld (.) ca::rs, (0.2)
 their pri::ces ((hand gesture follows))’
3 Alan: u::::n ((while nodding several times; David also nods))
‘I:: see:::.’
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
SUMMARY
The goal of the present chapter has been to provide an overview of some of 
the most widely known, most promising, or foundational approaches to language learning as a social phenomenon. What these theories or approaches 
have in common is their view that social factors related to both the learner and 
the learning context play a role in language learning. Specifically, each of the 
theories reviewed here conceptualizes language use and language learning as 
activities that are heavily influenced by the context in which interactions take 
place. Because they share certain assumptions and differ in others, we provide 
a summary of these theories in Table 4.3. The table provides a brief description 
of which social factors are considered under each approach and how these are 
defined, and it also addresses whether (and sometimes how) language learning has been subsumed under that particular approach. Finally, we indicate 
whether there is research to date on the second language acquisition of sociolinguistic competence. Even in the cases where the answer is negative to this 
last question, the approaches have been included because they hold promise 
for expansion into this area in the future.
EVALUATION OF SOCIAL APPROACHES
Table 4.3 identifies the individual contributions of each of the theories reviewed 
in the current chapter. Nevertheless, the first and most important implication 
of this body of work as a whole is that language learning is not limited to the second language grammar or to the linguistic influences on the process of learning 
a second language. Instead, researchers must acknowledge that language use 
happens in a social context, and a host of social and psychological factors come 
to bear on the process of learning a second language. The manner in which 
these factors are characterized varies from one approach to another, but at the 
core of each approach is the role that they afford to the interactional and social 
context in the process of language learning. An important implication of this 
body of work is that research on second language acquisition will benefit from 
a closer look at individuals, rather than an exclusive focus on groups. This is 
because the experiences of individuals differ and any account that recognizes 
the role of context in second language acquisition must have a mechanism for 
evaluating the changing and individualized nature of those contexts.
There are certain characteristics of the research described in the current 
chapter that will not extend to the approaches explored later in this volume. For 
example, these approaches are unique in their focus on practices and behaviors 
(cultural or otherwise) that are related to language use but extend beyond the 
linguistic system. In other approaches, even those that recognize a role for social 
factors in language use and language learning, it is rare to see an account of cultural norms or practices. Another prominent difference, although it applies in 
104 SECTION II: APPROACHES
TA
B
L
E 4.3
Summary of social approaches to language learning
Model/theory/ 
approach
Second language learning “Social” factors considered Sociolinguistic 
competence examined?
Acculturation 
Model
Integration of the social and the 
psychological, which mediate 
acculturation and subsequently 
language learning
Psychological and social factors related 
to the learner;
sociocultural and historical context of 
target language community
Yes
Speech 
Accommodation 
Theory
No account of language learning Social characteristics of learner and his/
her interlocutor;
characteristics of the speaking task
Yes
Sociocultural 
Theory
Not a theory of learning, but increasing 
self-regulation in the second language 
corresponds to development
Individual differences among learners 
(in terms of documenting variable 
speech performance);
characteristics of the speaking task
Yes
Identity 
Approach
Appropriation of sociocultural practices Social characteristics (dynamic) of 
learner and his/her interlocutor;
social, cultural, and historical structure 
of learning context
No relevant research 
to date
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITION 105 Language Socialization Approach Mediated by social agents and characteristics of the learning context; examines linguistic development and other forms of knowledge (culture, ideologies, etc.) Identities and subjectivities of learners; characteristics of community and its members with which learners communicate Yes Conversation- Analytic Approach Emerging participation in interaction using grammatical resources of the second language Learners’ participation in social interaction; identities of learners; characteristics of interactional context Yes Sociocognitive Approach “Natural, adaptive process of ecological alignment” (Atkinson, 2011a, p. 144) Sociocognitive alignment across participants and external affordances of the second language speech event No relevant research to date
106 SECTION II: APPROACHES
varying degrees to the theories described in the current chapter, is the decreased 
attention to the linguistic details of language development relative to the social 
component. For example, the general goal of analysis of the theories reviewed 
here is not to detail the manner in which grammatical rules change over time. 
Instead, development is often viewed holistically, and success might be defined 
in terms of increased effectiveness in interactions or even greater access to 
interactions. Aside from this sort of difference, however, what is more apparent 
is that there is no clear social-cognitive divide. The “social theories” described 
here also deal with elements of language, with mental grammars, with cognition, and so on. In other words, these are not purely “social” theories but rather 
theories that give prominence to the social side of cognition, language use, and 
language learning. As we continue our discussion in Chapter Five we will see 
that the “cognitive” approaches we review were selected precisely because they 
afford some role to the social factors in language use and language learning. We 
will see that the social-cognitive dichotomy does not properly account for the 
range of theoretical approaches to the study of language. In fact, we will ultimately argue that the most effective theories are precisely those that account for 
both cognitive and social aspects of language acquisition.
READING BEYOND THE TEXT
a. Block, D. (2007). The rise of identity in SLA research, post Firth and Wagner (1997). Modern Language Journal, 91, 863–876.
b. Culhane, S. (2004). An intercultural interaction model: Acculturation attitudes in second language acquisition. Electronic Journal of Foreign Language Teaching, 1(1), 50–61.
c. Giles, H., & Ogay, T. (2007). Communication accommodation theory. In 
B.B. Whaley & W. Samter (Eds.), Explaining Communication: Contemporary Theories and Exemplars (pp. 325–344). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
d. Kobayashi, H., & Rinnert, C. (2003). Coping with high imposition requests: 
High vs. low proficiency EFL students in Japan. In A. Martínez, E. Usó 
Juan, & A. Fernández (Eds.), Pragmatic Competence and Foreign Language 
Teaching (pp. 161–184). Castellon, Spain: Servei de Publicacions de la Universitat Jaume I.
e. Norton, B., & Toohey, K. (2001). Changing perspectives on good language 
learners. TESOL Quarterly, 35, 307–322.
COMPREHENSION AND APPLICATION
A. Comprehension
1. What is the focus of cognitive approaches? How do social approaches 
differ?
SOCIAL APPROACHES TO L2 ACQUISITIONg
2. What imbalance did Firth and Wagner (1997) note?
3. In the Acculturation Model, which factors have an impact on social 
distance?
4. What does Speech Accommodation Theory seek to explain?
5. How do divergence and convergence differ?
6. What sort of task is usually used in the Speech Accommodation Theory approach?
7. What changes from earlier theory are evident in Speech Accommodation 
Theory?
8. How does Sociocultural Theory conceptualize mental activity?
9. What is scaffolding?
10. What does dynamic assessment attempt to measure?
11. In its application to second language learning, what is the central 
premise of the Language Socialization Approach?
12. What principles are central to the Identity Approach? What role do 
imagined communities play?
13. Within the Sociocognitive Approach, what is the function of language?
B. Application
1. Now that you have read about approaches to language as a social 
phenomenon, which approach seems most profitable to you? Which 
aspects of it seem most logical to you? What does the approach you 
selected explain that other approaches do not?
2. Identify at least three weaknesses of the Acculturation Model. Next, list 
at least two ways that subsequent approaches have considered additional factors in approaching language as a social phenomenon.
3. Group cohesiveness is one of the factors known to influence social distance. Think about groups of people that you know who have close 
bonds (e.g., a family, a set of friends, a team, coworkers, etc.). Are there 
aspects of their language that are similar among group members? What 
linguistic characteristics have you noticed? Do you see the role of other 
social factors contributing to linguistic similarities? Which other social 
factors stand out in that regard?
4. You have seen examples of research that approach data using Conversation-Analytic methods. Using YouTube, find a sixty-second clip 
of dialogue of one of your favorite scenes from a movie or television 
program. Transcribe the dialogue, being sure to account for: (1) pauses, 
(2) overlap, (3) rises and falls in intonation, and (4) turn-taking (who 
speaks). Next, describe the contexts of the pauses. Why do you think 
the speaker paused? What effect did this have? In what context did the 
overlap occur? What did a rise or fall in intonation signify? What evidence do you see in the transcription of one speaker that he or she has 
understood what the other speaker has said?
108 SECTION II: APPROACHES
NOTES
1. This factor was drawn from the notion of “language ego” developed by Guiora et al. 
(1972) to explain differential levels of success in acquiring native-like pronunciation of a second language.
2. See the introduction of Beebe and Giles (1984) for a concise overview of theoretical 
and methodological differences of social psychology and sociolinguistics.
5
Cognitive Approaches to the 
Acquisition of Sociolinguistic 
Competence
In Chapter Four we began to address the so-called social-cognitive divide, with 
social theories looking at the context of learning, and those factors outside the 
learner that might have an impact on learning and cognitive theories focusing exclusively on mental activities and the linguistic structures stored within 
the learner’s mind. We have already seen that many theories account for both 
linguistic structures within the learner’s mind and the impact of social factors 
outside the learner on language development. Thus, the approaches presented 
in this chapter should not be taken as opposites of those reviewed in Chapter 
Four. In fact, in some cases one could argue that an approach might fit equally 
well in either chapter. Nevertheless, what the theories presented here have in 
common is their focus on mental activities, or cognition. Research on cognition may explore the structure of linguistic knowledge, the study of how this 
knowledge comes to exist, or of how it is stored and used. This knowledge may, 
of course, also contain social information. Nevertheless, this body of research 
is contrasted with those theories that believe that language or linguistic knowledge is co-constructed in the world through social interaction exclusively, 
rather than taking place through individual mental activity.
EXAMPLES OF COGNITIVE APPROACHES 
TO SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
Without a doubt, there are a wide range of cognitive approaches to language 
currently employed in acquisition research. Some of these approaches have 
existed for a number of years and others are relatively new. In addition, they 
vary widely in the structure they believe that language takes within the mind 
and, thus, the way this structure is built or changed through the process of 
acquisition. Given their number and their diversity, it is not possible to include 
every cognitive approach to language in the current volume. Instead, the 
110 SECTION II: APPROACHES
approaches reviewed in the current chapter are those that appear to have the 
greatest interest in also treating sociolinguistic variation in some way. As a 
result of work on second language variation within each of these approaches, 
they are also good candidates for the exploration of the second language 
acquisition of sociolinguistic competence.
Optimality Theory
The first of the cognitive approaches to be reviewed here is a model of language based on a generative grammar. A generative grammar is a system that 
generates surface forms from underlying representations. Early models of generative grammar (e.g., Chomsky & Halle, 1968; Chomsky & Lasnik, 1977) used 
rules to explain or predict the forms that would occur in a given language. In 
other words, the underlying mental structure was predicted to lead to a finite 
set of possible outcomes cross-linguistically. Nevertheless, one problem that 
arose was that these rules were often violated due to some pre-existing constraint on surface forms or output in a given language. Thus, at that early stage 
the importance of constraints was clear, but a means by which to model them 
theoretically and account for them cross-linguistically was not. This conundrum provided the primary motivation for the development of Optimality 
Theory, originally proposed by Alan Prince and Paul Smolensky in the early 
1990s (Prince & Smolensky, 1997, 2008[1993]).
Optimality Theory is a constraint-based method of formal linguistic analysis. The theory operates using four basic components. These include a generator, which generates all of the possible candidates (or output forms) for 
a given utterance. From this list of possible candidates an evaluator selects 
the single output form that matches the actual form of the grammar. This 
selection process is based on a series of constraints, which ensure that the 
output does not violate two types of restrictions. The first set of restrictions 
is known as ‘markedness constraints’, which require that the output be wellformed according to linguistic universals. The second set of constraints is 
known as ‘faithfulness constraints’ and these stipulate that the output selected 
by the evaluator must resemble the input to the greatest degree possible. In 
other words, the evaluator must maintain the strongest correlation possible 
between the input and the output. The final component of every grammar is 
the lexicon, and this is where the language-specific elements that fill the chosen output structure reside.
Optimality Theory captures the idea that mental grammars obey universal 
principles by claiming that the generator, the evaluator, and all of the constraints exist in the grammar of every language. In other words, the process 
through which output candidates are generated is the same for all languages. 
In addition, every constraint exists in the grammar of every language. In order 
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
to capture the differences across the surface forms in all languages, Optimality 
Theorists claimed that cross-linguistic differences are fully captured by differences in constraint ranking. In essence, the evaluator is designed to favor 
violations of lower ranked constraints in order to satisfy the restrictions of 
higher ranked constraints and the differences in the order in which constraints 
are ranked from one language to another accounts for the differences in the 
surface forms. The basic components of Optimality Theory are described in 
Table 5.1 (descriptions taken from McCarthy, 2007).
To capture the manner in which the selection mechanism operates, let us 
consider a highly simplified example based only on two possible constraints. 
The first constraint says that syllable onsets with only one consonant are preferable to syllable onsets with two consonants (a markedness constraint). The 
second constraint states that the onset in the output must maximally resemble 
the onset in the input (a faithfulness constraint). Because these are universal 
constraints (i.e., present in all languages) the generator will create candidates 
that obey both and those that violate both. In a language in which this particular markedness constraint is ranked higher than this particular faithfulness constraint the optimal output candidate may exhibit epenthesis (i.e., the 
addition of a vowel, in this case for the purpose of breaking up a consonant 
cluster). For example, in a language where complex onsets are not allowable, 
a vowel may be used to divide two consonants in the input, producing two syllables of the form consonant + vowel in the output (e.g., su-ki for ‘ski’ in Japanese). 
In a language where the faithfulness constraint is ranked higher, there will be 
TABLE 5.1
Basic components of Optimality Theory
Generator (GEN) The operational component: 
constructs a set of candidate output 
forms that deviate from the input in 
various ways
Evaluator (EVAL) A constraint component: selects 
a member of the set of candidate 
output forms to be the actual output 
of the grammar
Constraint set (CON) A constraint component: consists 
of markedness constraints and 
faithfulness constraints
Lexicon Set of all possible inputs to the 
grammar
112 SECTION II: APPROACHES
no epenthesis because the onset will more closely resemble the input. This contrast is illustrated in Table 5.2.
Clearly the example in Table 5.2 is highly simplified and in a true Optimal 
Theoretic grammar there would be numerous constraints, all ranked and in 
operation at the same time. Additionally, there would be far more than two 
possible outputs generated by the grammar. Nevertheless, the example serves 
to show how changing the ranking of a single pair of constraints can account 
for differences between languages. What makes this theory even more appealing is that it is able to address variation (cf. Coetzee & Pater, 2011) by allowing 
two constraints to have parallel rankings or by allowing variable ranking of 
constraints. In this sense, the function of the model is maintained even when 
variable structures within languages are considered.1
Moving on to a discussion of second languages, an Optimality Theory 
approach to second language learning has also been developed, placing constraints at the core of second language grammars. Just as the differences across 
languages can be accounted for by different rankings of constraints, so too can 
the process of acquiring a new grammar in a second language. In essence, the 
task of the second language learner is to change his or her ranking of constraints 
to best match the constraint ranking of the second language. Development in a 
second language can be likened to a process of fine-tuning or re-ranking of constraints to best match one’s own output to the available input (i.e., the language 
to which a learner is exposed). Development ends when the learner perceives 
successful matching of his or her own output to input in the second language, 
TABLE 5.2
Example of how constraint ranking accounts 
for cross-linguistic differences
Constraint 
rankings
Input Output
Language A Onsets in output 
must equal onsets 
in input
Avoid complex 
onsets
bla bla
Language B Avoid complex 
onsets
Onsets in output 
must equal onsets 
in input
bla be-la
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
or no longer adjusts his or her own constraint ranking to match that of the 
second language (cf. Tesar & Smolensky, 1993). What makes this approach even 
more appealing in terms of its simplicity is that changes in constraint ranking may only happen in one direction. Constraints may only be lowered. This 
fact is important because it connects acquisition to evidence in the input: when 
a counterexample to an existing ranking is encountered in the input, learners 
may demote a given constraint in order to account for the apparent violation in 
the surface form. If we return to our highly simplified example in Table 5.2, we 
might expect that a native speaker of Language B (similar to Japanese) who is 
acquiring Language A (similar to English) would have to demote the complex 
onset constraint in order to produce the complex onsets common in English.
Research conducted within Optimality Theory has been conducted on a variety of second language structures, across several languages. Some of the earliest 
work to apply Optimality Theory to second language acquisition was indeed 
focused on second language syllable structure. Hancin-Bhatt and Bhatt (1997) 
examined difficulties native Spanish- and Japanese-speaking learners of English 
as a second language had with complex onsets and codas in English (e.g., /tr/ 
at the beginning of a word and consonants at the end of a word, respectively). 
Employing an Optimality Theory analysis, the authors were able to account for 
developmental and transfer effects beyond standard error rates, showing how 
language-specific constraint rankings influenced differential resolution of complex English onsets (Spanish learners deleted obstruents whereas Japanese learners deleted glides). The authors also found that both groups of learners were 
more likely to epenthesize onsets and delete codas, and were able to account 
for these phenomena through constraint ranking. In a related study with Thai 
learners, Hancin-Bhatt (2000) found similar effects of language-specific constraint rankings in their second language English production. Substitution in 
non-Thai-licensed simple codas varied more consistently in terms of native 
rankings: that is, substitution more commonly involved differences in the features [continuant] and [voice] than in place of articulation of the target sound.
Investigations of second language phonology and phonetics are, in fact, quite 
prevalent within the Optimality Theory approach. In particular, there has been 
excellent work conducted on the processes of simplification (e.g., Broselow, 
Chen, & Wang, 1998) and substitution (e.g., Lombardi, 2003). These studies 
include learners from a wide variety of first language backgrounds (e.g., Mandarin, Russian, Japanese), and serve to identify the areas of difficulty in second 
language pronunciation as well as the explanatory power of a constraint-based 
analysis. Although somewhat limited, this approach has also been applied to 
second language syntax (Eckman, 2004; LaFond, Hayes, & Bhatt, 2001; Nagy & 
Heap, 1998; Speas, 2001). Regardless of the area of the grammar investigated, 
researchers working within Optimality Theory have used their findings to provide support for a constraint-based model of formal linguistic analysis.
114 SECTION II: APPROACHES
Research Methods and Optimality Theory
The approach to data elicitation within the framework of Optimality Theory 
is not limited to a particular method. In fact, it is the method with which 
linguistic data are analyzed that is most distinctive. This method might be 
applied to oral data, to grammaticality judgments and so on, but the common 
goal across studies is to use the concept of constraint ranking to explain why 
a given output is selected by the evaluator in a given language, sometimes as 
compared to another language and sometimes in an attempt to understand 
the grammar of a single language. To illustrate this, we use Lombardi’s (2003) 
analysis of substitutions in the production of the interdental fricative /θ/ in 
English by Russian- and Japanese-speaking learners whose first language does 
not contain that segment in their phonemic inventory. Lombardi observed 
that some learners would substitute [s] for /θ/ (in particular, Japanese learners), while others would substitute [t] for /θ/ (Russian learners). Lombardi 
used an Optimality Theory analysis to account for this difference between 
learner groups.
There are three constraints that one must understand in order to follow 
her analysis. The first two are markedness constraints, one stating that fricatives are more marked than stops and the second that the interdental fricative 
does not exist in the inventory. The third constraint is a faithfulness constraint 
that claims that the manner of articulation in the input must be equal to the 
manner of articulation in the output. These three constraints and the notation 
used to denote them are summarized in Table 5.3.
Making use of the constraints in Table 5.3, Lombardi (2003) explains 
that whereas the target language would rank the markedness constraint that 
the interdental fricative does not exist (i.e., *θ) lower than the faithfulness 
constraint (Ident Manner), learners who do not produce that sound would 
TABLE 5.3
Summary of relevant constraints in Lombardi (2003)
*[cont] >> *[stop] markedness constraint; fricatives 
(continuants) are more marked 
than stops
*θ markedness constraint; interdental 
fricative does not exist in inventory
Ident Manner faithfulness constraint; manner of 
articulation of input and output are 
the same
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
rank the markedness constraint higher than the faithfulness constraint, leading to a substitution of that segment. Acquisition would therefore be represented by constraint demotion (making the *θ constraint less important) 
and eventual production of that sound. What is more, Lombardi was able to 
explain why some learners made one type of substitution and others made a 
different one. Specifically, she hypothesized that learners who substitute /θ/ 
with [t] have a first language that obeys the markedness constraint *[cont] 
>> *[stop]. In other words, because fricatives are more marked than stops 
in this language, the learner substitutes the stop [t] for the English sound 
/θ/. In contrast, learners who substitute the English /θ/ with [s] have a 
first language that “explodes” the faithfulness constraint into its component features, and then selects the output that does not violate faithfulness 
to those features. In other words, the faithfulness constraint Ident Manner 
(i.e., preserve manner of articulation) can be divided into two faithfulness 
constraints, IdentCont (preserve the continuant feature) and IdentStop (preserve the stop feature). Thus, “Cont” and “Stop” are component features of 
“Manner”. In the case of this second group of learners, [s] is selected as a 
substitution for /θ/ because it does not violate IdentCont, which is ranked 
above IdentStop. In Table 5.4 we summarize the characteristics of the target as 
well as the two different learner substitution strategies observed in Lombardi’s 
(2003) study.
What should be clear from this example of how the methods of analysis 
function within the Optimality Theory approach is that it is possible to explain 
how output forms produced by second language learners are selected, and to 
identify the linguistic motivation (i.e., influence of native language constraints) 
behind the selection of the nonnative forms produced.
TABLE 5.4
Summary of second language substitutions from Lombardi (2003)
Target (English) Learner group 1 
(L1 Russian)
Learner group 2 
(L1 Japanese)
What is 
produced
/θ/ /t/ /s/
Violation of 
faithfulness 
constraint?
[Ident Manner]
No Yes Yes
(Continued)
116 SECTION II: APPROACHES
Connectionism
The second approach to language use and language learning reviewed in the 
current chapter is known as Connectionism. In fact, this term encompasses 
a set of models that attempt to demonstrate computationally the processes of 
the human mind and the behavior underlying those processes (McClelland 
& Cleeremans, 2009). Such processes, or mental activities, include perception, cognition, and information storage and retrieval. Given the focus on 
cognitive processing, it may come as no surprise that Connectionist models 
have their origins in cognitive science. However, associated researchers share 
a particular view of the nature of behavior and mental states within the wider 
field of cognitive science: “. . . our understanding of behavior and of mental 
states should be informed and constrained by our knowledge of the neural 
processes [italics our own] that underpin cognition” (McClelland & Cleeremans, 2009, p. 177). Simply put, researchers working under a Connectionist 
framework are centrally interested in the “how” of information processing in 
the human brain.
As we explore this theoretical approach, it is important to understand how 
the brain itself is modeled. The human brain consists of nodes and links, or 
connections, between these nodes. Each node is a simple unit, and depending 
TABLE 5.4 (Continued)
Target (English) Learner group 1 
(L1 Russian)
Learner group 2 
(L1 Japanese)
Substitution 
explained by 
markedness 
constraint?
No. No 
substitution is 
made.
Yes. Learners 
produce a 
stop because 
fricatives are 
more marked 
than stops
*[cont] >> 
*[stop]
Yes. Learners 
produce a 
sibilant because 
it preserves the 
continuant feature 
of manner and this 
is ranked higher 
than the stop 
feature of manner. 
This occurs only 
when there is first 
language evidence 
to cause this 
re-ranking.
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
on the specific model, it may represent letters, words, or features (McClelland, 
Rumelhart, & Hinton, 1986). Regardless of what each unit represents, the 
baseline assumption is that the unit is too small to be meaningful on its own. 
Instead, representations emerge from patterns of association among units, a 
concept called distributed representation. This entire system of nodes and 
links is collectively called a neural network. Within the neural network, the 
basic function of each unit is to receive input from neighboring units, compute a value based on the input received, and then output that value to other 
neighboring units. The strength of transmission between units (i.e., the degree 
to which units affect and are affected by neighboring units) varies, but directly 
reflects the extent of each unit’s own activation. The links or connections 
between units, therefore, are weighted because they may be weaker or stronger 
depending on the strength of activation. Taking all of this together, processing occurs through the spread of activation signals among the various units 
along these weighted connections (McClelland & Cleeremans, 2009). Patterns 
in language variation are accounted for in terms of the configuration among 
units within the neural network.
Taking this basic description of mental structure and processing, we turn 
our attention to language learning. First, and more broadly, learning in a Connectionist model involves gradually adjusting the weight of the connections 
occurring between processing units (or nodes) over time. Recall that connection weights vary depending on the strength of activation occurring between 
units. Our experiences, specifically our mind’s exposure to stimuli occurring 
in the surrounding environment, are believed to influence strengths of activation and subsequently patterns of association over time. Returning to language 
learning, the adjustment of connection weights occurs via repeated exposure 
to language input. Learners pick up on regularities in the input to which 
they are exposed, and from these regularities, patterns of language forms are 
extracted, processed, and learned over time. This way of modeling language 
learning has been termed emergent, in that language emerges or develops in 
a speaker from the interaction between the environment and general learning 
capabilities. Further, speakers acquiring a language make use of clues or indicators to help them make inferences or assumptions about language through 
non-language-specific learning mechanisms (Poll, 2011). The same is true for 
second language learning, with the exception that second language learners 
already have knowledge of a language, the first language, with set patterns 
of association and connection weights tuned for first-language-based input. 
Researchers adopting a Connectionist model to the study of second language 
learning posit that patterns of association existing in the first language and the 
second language (i.e., areas of overlap) represent key areas for transfer (Gasser, 
1990). In fact, a related emergentist model, the Unified (Competition) Model
118 SECTION II: APPROACHES
(MacWhinney, 2008), posits that the influence of the first language is so strong 
in learning a second language that it is “. . . impossible to construct a model 
of second language learning that [does] not take into account the structure 
of the first language” (MacWhinney, 2008, p. 342). Like Connectionist models, processing and subsequent learning in MacWhinney’s model are based on 
associative patterns, which are sensitive to the strength and validity of cues
present in the linguistic input.
One particularly productive strand of research in second language acquisition that adopts Connectionist models of learning has investigated computerized simulations of morphosyntactic acquisition. We recall that Connectionist 
models are centrally concerned with capturing and explaining processes of 
second language learning. Consequently, research in this strand has first used 
human data to show what adult learners actually do, and then subsequently 
tested the extent to which connectionist networks are able to simulate learning of the particular structure(s) under study. Given the numerous studies 
available in this area, we have chosen to highlight three classic studies (Ellis 
& Schmidt, 1997; Kempe & MacWhinney, 1998; Sokolik & Smith, 1992) and 
one more recent study (Rosi, 2009) in order to illustrate the type of evidence 
available for this model as well as the way the model has developed to account 
for second language learning.
One of the earliest studies on second language within the Connectionist framework is the investigation conducted by Sokolik and Smith (1992), 
which demonstrated that a computer-based network model could accurately 
and reliably assign grammatical gender to a set of unstudied French nouns. 
The computer model was not programmed with rules of any sort, but rather 
with a set of nouns and patterns of connectivity (i.e., learning experience) that 
allowed the model to rely on the structure of the nouns themselves to assign 
gender to newly introduced nouns. A notable methodological strength of 
this study is the development of a connectionist simulation that more closely 
resembled that of an adult second language learner. The researchers first ran 
the model with a zero-state pattern of connectivity, meaning that there was no 
prior experience encoded in the model. They found that the computer model 
was able to assign gender with a high rate of accuracy and do so very quickly. 
Thus, the model provided a good parallel for first language acquisition, given 
that children have been reported to learn much faster and with a higher rate of 
success than adult learners. Next, Sokolik and Smith programmed the model 
to randomly select one of three sets of starting weights in order to represent 
experience-based biases at the starting point of acquisition. They found that 
these starting weights interfered very minimally and inconsequentially with 
the acquisition of French gender. The researchers also lowered the rate of 
learning to reflect the slower rate of learning that has been reported for adult 
learners in comparison with children learners, and reported that this did not 
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
result in any notable effect on acquisition. Thus, aside from demonstrating 
that the learning of French gender assignment is possible to model computationally, their research further provides support for associative mechanisms of 
learning. Their investigation suggests that these computational models can be 
configured to capture agreed-upon aspects of adult second language learning.
A second, classic example of the application of a simple, Connectionist 
model to second language learning is the work conducted by Ellis and Schmidt 
(1997). Specifically, the researchers sought to determine whether regular and 
irregular plural affixes of an artificial second language could be learned by 
adult learners and modeled by a computational associative learning system. 
Additionally, the researchers wanted to know how frequency influenced the 
acquisition of morphology in both conditions. Ellis and Schmidt reported that 
regular affixes were learned faster than irregulars for the adult learners. Higher 
frequency items were also learned faster than lower frequency items. There was 
also a significant interaction between regularity and frequency, such that the 
frequency effect demonstrated a greater influence on irregular plural affixes 
than regular plural affixes. Interestingly, the Connectionist simulation demonstrated the same results: regular affixes were learned more quickly than irregulars, high frequency items were learned more quickly than lower frequency, 
and the same regularity-frequency interaction encountered for adult learners 
was also found. These results suggest that the second language acquisition of 
plural affixes can be explained and modeled by simple, associative learning 
mechanisms. The authors claim that these findings support rule-like but not 
rule-governed behavior for second language learning (Ellis & Schmidt, 1997, 
p. 158). In other words, second language behavior reflects patterns abstracted 
from the distributional characteristics of the input.
In related work, Kempe and MacWhinney (1998) examined the acquisition of German and Russian case-marking comprehension by first language 
English-speaking learners. Specifically, the researchers hypothesized that 
learners’ interpretation of sentences with object-verb-subject (OVS) word order 
would be affected by cue validity, such that stronger cues would yield greater 
processing benefits than weaker cues. Using results from a lexical decision 
task and a picture-choice task, the researchers demonstrated that, as predicted, 
learners of Russian used case marking as a cue more successfully in earlier stages 
of learning than learners of German. Learners of German did, however, demonstrate less reliance on case marking as a cue for marking agenthood as their experience with the language increased. Additionally, both learner groups demonstrated 
sensitivity to animacy in the selection of the agent (the first noun was more likely 
to be selected as the agent if it was animate), although this semantic feature had 
an impact on processing to a lesser extent for learners of Russian than learners 
of German. This last finding was said to be due to the greater grammaticalization 
of animacy in the Russian case-marking paradigm. Kempe and MacWhinney 
120 SECTION II: APPROACHES
interpreted these results as support for an associative learning approach to 
second language learning, but further tested this finding by running a Connectionist simulation of case-marking acquisition in second language German 
and Russian. Not only was the simulation able to reproduce several aspects of 
the findings encountered with the adult learners successfully, but it was also 
able to help the researchers pinpoint the variables influencing the patterns of 
acquisition observed. The primary variables influencing acquisition of case 
marking were frequency in the input and a combination of cue strength and 
competition between cues across levels of development. Taken together with 
those reviewed earlier, this study provides further support that associative 
learning mechanisms of the type described under a Connectionist framework 
are a viable explanation for second language acquisition.
Having laid the foundation by describing classic studies that provided substantial early support for a Connectionist view of language learning, we move 
to a recent study to show that this strand of research continues to be productive today. Rosi (2009) tested a Connectionist simulation for the acquisition 
of aspect in second language Italian. The human data came from two learner 
groups, native speakers of Spanish and native speakers of German, who completed oral and written narratives of three scenes from the silent film Modern 
Times. Rosi’s results provided support for the Aspect Hypothesis (Andersen & 
Shirai, 1994) and the Discourse Hypothesis (Bardovi-Harlig, 1995, 2000), 
given the tendency for learners to mark telic foreground predicates with the 
past perfective aspectual morphology and atelic background predicates with 
the imperfective aspectual morphology. Rosi (2009) also reported effects for 
first language, showing that Spanish native speakers were more successful than 
German native speakers, and for frequency, finding that less frequent uses of 
imperfective aspectual forms in input affected use at different stages of development. As in the analysis of the human data, Rosi’s Connectionist simulation demonstrated differences in emergence of second language Italian aspect 
according to first language. Additionally, the model was able to capture the 
interaction between actionality and grounding such that prototypical associations (e.g., imperfective marked on background states) are marked at earlier 
stages than non-prototypical ones (e.g., imperfective marked on telic in foreground and background). Again this convergence of human data and Connectionist simulations continues to support researchers who argue in favor of 
the existence of a cognitive-based, associative learning mechanism for second 
language learning.
Research Methods and Connectionist Theory
As with Optimality Theory, the sources of the human data can be quite varied 
and are not unique to this approach. Thus, we may find that oral production 
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
or written elicitation tasks are employed and these are generally designed in 
similar ways across theoretical approaches. However, the computer simulations employed in investigating the degree to which associative models can 
capture the facts of second language learning are unique to this approach. 
Thus, we will use this subsection, and the study conducted by Ellis and 
Schmidt (1997) described earlier, to exemplify a Connectionist network simulation. In short, we seek to explore the way in which a Connectionist network 
operates. In order to understand this, we must recall that processing units 
have different activation values and that the links between units are weighted. 
In a Connectionist model, activation values range from 0 to 1, and a learning algorithm is responsible for adjusting the strength of links between units. 
According to Ellis and Schmidt, the most common learning algorithm is back 
propagation. Back propagation refers to the learning process through which 
the associative network compares its output with the target output on each 
learning trial. If a difference (i.e., an error) is noted, the network propagates 
this information back to an intermediate layer, called the hidden unit weights, 
and this is passed along to the input weights, which causes a reduction in 
future errors (see Ellis & Schmidt, 1997, p. 155). This is precisely the method 
used in their study. Because the network model has an input layer, an output 
layer, and the intermediate layer (i.e., the hidden layer), this is known as a 
three-layer network.
Ellis and Schmidt’s (1997) model consisted of 22 input units, 32 output 
units, and eight hidden units. These units represent the information that 
was provided to the associative model. Of the input units, 20 represented 
a picture of one of the word forms of the artificial language, one indicated 
whether the stimulus was a single item or part of a pair, and the last was 
used for training and pattern generalization. Of the output units, 20 represented the base form of the word forms under study, 10 represented the 
irregular affix forms, one represented the regular affix form, and the last was 
also used for training and pattern generalization. The model was trained on 
word stems and plurals to adjust connection strengths in a way that would 
simulate experience and increase performance. It is important to point out 
that in this type of research, several trial simulations are conducted to ensure 
reliability of the model because connection weights are randomized. Additionally, in order to examine how variables such as frequency influence performance, many combinations of trials are necessary to reflect all possible 
combinations of low and high frequency forms that may be available in the 
input, and subsequently in the output. What this research method tells us is 
whether or not an associative learning model can be programmed to pattern 
in the way that learners do. When the answer is affirmative, we find good 
evidence in favor of a model of learning based on this type of associative 
connection-building.
122 SECTION II: APPROACHES
Usage-Based Models
The third approach to be explored in the current chapter includes what are 
known as usage-based models. These models of language and language acquisition can be seen to overlap to some degree with the Connectionist models discussed in the previous section. The reason for this overlap is that usage-based 
and Connectionist models, along with other Emergentist models, Functionalism, and Computational Linguistics, all hold that the linguistic knowledge of 
speakers is best understood as ever-changing. Additionally, these approaches 
view linguistic knowledge as an accumulation of language experiences that 
reflect the statistical nature of form-meaning connections. Specifically, they 
explore the way that language experience influences the manner in which we 
connect the sign (i.e., string of phonological forms) with the signified (i.e., 
communicative intention). This view of language is pervasive throughout 
the broader field of cognitive linguistics, including the sub-field of cognitive 
research employing usage-based approaches to language.
In addition to the characteristics shared with other approaches in cognitive linguistics, usage-based models of language in particular focus on the 
influence of language use on its cognitive organization (Bybee, 1985, 2001, 
2006; Langacker, 1987, 2000). Language use refers broadly to a given speaker’s 
use of language as well as his or her exposure to language in the surrounding environment. Experience with language serves as the basis for linguistic 
structure in the mind. Within a usage-based model, there are several basic 
assumptions about the cognitive organization of linguistic structure (see 
Bybee [2008] for additional detail). For example, the basic unit of linguistic 
structure under this framework is known as a construction. Constructions 
may be individual words, or morphemes, or a string of words (such as idioms or conventional expressions) that are built up through experience with 
language. When a construction is encountered through experience with the 
language, it is stored in memory and is categorized by a process of mapping. Unlike models that posit specific mechanisms related exclusively to language, usage-based approaches claim that generalized cognitive mechanisms 
can account for the storage and processing of constructions. Some of these 
mechanisms include entrenchment (i.e., conservation), categorization, and 
schema formation. Entrenchment is a process by which repetition of events 
renders them routine and, as such, these events are easily accessible and 
stored as a unit, which does not require as much attention in order to perform (Langacker, 2000). Categorization is the capacity to sort and organize
 events in memory according to identity, similarities, and differences (Bybee, 
2006). Lastly, schema formation, also termed abstraction, can be thought 
of as the emergence of patterns based on the similarity inherent in numerous individual experiences (Langacker, 2000). Categorization and schema 
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
formation, in particular, account for the observation of rule-like phenomena 
and promote more efficient decoding of language.
Returning to the centrality of language experience, an important observation for usage-based researchers is the fact that our experience with language is 
biased in certain ways. Specifically, some constructions occur more frequently 
or are simply repeated more than others. This distributional bias has been 
shown to impact the representation of linguistic structure in memory. In other 
words, the way we store linguistic structure reflects the frequency of occurrence 
of these constructions in the language that surrounds us. As a result, usagebased researchers have tried to uncover the ways in which frequency of use can 
be seen to influence language structure and change. Under this approach, one 
important distinction regarding frequency is that between token frequency 
and type frequency. Token frequency refers to the number of times a given 
element appears in the language we encounter, whereas type frequency refers 
to the number of times a certain pattern appears in a given sample of language 
(Bybee, 2008, p. 218). Thus, a count of the number of times [b] occurs in the 
phrase ‘busy bee’, the word ‘thou’ appears in the Bible, or a specific phrase such 
as ‘how are you?’ is employed all constitute examples of token frequency. In 
contrast, a count of the number of occurrences of the sequence [t ] in a corpus 
of a given language (rather than the individual units [t] or [ ]) or a count of 
commonly used morphological patterns, such as regular past tense suffixes in 
English (–ed), are examples of type frequency. Each of these types of frequency 
has been associated with different effects on language storage and use.
Three effects of token frequency have been detailed and examined in 
usage-based research. The first is called the conserving effect. This effect is 
responsible for the resistance of high frequency linguistic forms to change. 
For example, irregular past tense verbs in English such as ‘kept’ and ‘slept’ 
are claimed to have resisted regularization (i.e., ‘*keeped’, ‘*sleeped’) due to 
their higher frequency and subsequent higher accessibility in memory. Other 
verbs such as ‘leapt’ or ‘wept’, however, have developed regularized forms (i.e., 
‘leaped’, ‘weeped’) due to their lower frequency and, consequently, lower accessibility. A second effect of token frequency, autonomy, refers to highly frequent sequences whose individual units remain unanalyzed. Some examples 
include ‘gimme’ or ‘gonna’ in English (cf. Bybee, 2008), hay in Spanish, and 
the tag question n’est-ce pas? in French. The final effect of token frequency 
is the reducing effect. This refers to highly frequent words and phrases that 
demonstrate phonetic reduction. A popular example in English is ‘because’ > 
‘cuz’. Grammatical structures have also been shown to exhibit this effect, for 
example ‘would have’ > ‘would[ә]’. This effect is explained by the overlapping of speech gestures that occurs when neuromotor sequences are repeated 
over time (Bybee, 2008). This repetition and gestural overlap has the effect of 
increasing efficiency in speech articulation, or reducing speech coarticulation.
124 SECTION II: APPROACHES
Regarding the effect of type frequency, Bybee (2008) explains that the frequency with which a construction is repeated (i.e., applies to a large number of 
distinct items) is related to the degree to which it is seen to be applicable to new 
items (p. 221). In other words, type frequency determines the extent to which 
a construction is productive or allows speakers to use it to parse or interpret 
other linguistic items. For example, a speaker with knowledge of the words 
‘construct’, ‘destruct’, ‘construction’, ‘destruction’, etc. could use the construction ‘–ion’ to parse other words with the same construction (e.g., ‘addiction’, 
‘confusion’, ‘location’, etc.). Additionally, the higher in frequency the construction, the stronger the mental representation it is posited to have and therefore 
the more likely it is to be extended to novel uses (e.g., ‘Californication’, a Red 
Hot Chili Peppers song title).
Two remaining concepts that are central to usage-based models of language are grammaticalization and prefabs. First, grammaticalization (also 
called grammaticization) refers to the process through which lexical items, 
or a combination of lexical and grammatical items, change over time into 
exclusively grammatical morphemes (Bybee, 2008). This process reflects the 
assertion that the cognitive representation of language is constantly modified 
by use. In this particular situation, linguistic items may be used so frequently 
that they lose aspects of their meaning and/or pragmatic inference and are, 
consequently, susceptible to changes in grammatical category or semantic 
function. Arguably the two most popular examples in English are ‘be going 
to’ (earlier used as a progressive phrase, but now used as a future marker) and 
‘will’ (which used to mean ‘to want’, but now it is used as a future marker). 
This process has received quite a bit of attention in previous research conducted on a variety of languages, and in recent years has been particularly 
important for explaining cross-linguistic phonetic and morphosyntactic 
variation. This is because we often see variation in the use of a form as it 
undergoes grammaticalization. The second concept, prefabs (or prefabricated sequences), refers to conventionalized sequences that are semantically 
predictable. These may be short phrases or expressions that are not necessarily used a lot (e.g., ‘beyond repair’ and ‘need help’ [Bybee, 2006]), yet 
native speakers immediately know and recognize these as the way to express 
a certain idea. Both of these concepts together are employed by usage-based 
theorists to provide further support for the claim that language experience 
serves as the foundation for the cognitive representation and organization 
of linguistic knowledge.
From a usage-based perspective, then, adult second language learners are 
continually confronted with linguistic forms and constructions in the second 
language that exhibit frequency effects and are constantly affected in some 
way by use. One can imagine the many challenges such a system may present to the adult second language learner. Some of these challenges and their 
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
TABLE 5.5
Summary of learner challenges in Bybee (2008)
Challenge Description
Repetition Repetition of forms guarantees more 
exposure to them. This is particularly 
helpful for high frequency irregular 
forms, but not low frequency 
irregular forms, which are likely 
to be regularized by learners. 
Repetition also yields chunking, 
which is unfavorable if incorrect 
forms are strengthened in learners’ 
cognitive representations (similar to 
fossilization).
Autonomous constructions To the extent that second language 
learners have knowledge of 
the communicative intent of 
autonomous constructions, these 
high frequency items can facilitate 
communication at earlier stages of 
learning.
Reduction Difficulties in comprehension and 
production of spoken language may 
stem in part from effects of reduction. 
Learners with less experience in the 
second language may find highly 
frequent, reduced constructions 
not only difficult to parse for 
comprehension, but also difficult to 
produce if the resulting sequences are 
phonotactically infrequent or illicit in 
their respective first languages.
implications for second language learning, discussed by Bybee (2008), are 
summarized in Table 5.5.
Bybee (2008) also addresses the role of the first language in second language 
learning from a usage-based perspective. Essentially, first language constructions form the foundation of second language constructions. Such a system 
(Continued)
126 SECTION II: APPROACHES
TABLE 5.5 (Continued)
Challenge Description
Knowledge of patterns Knowledge of patterns in the 
second language can facilitate the 
learning and production of new, but 
related, forms. That said, learners 
must be exposed to a variety of 
items exhibiting a given pattern 
to be able to apply it productively 
or innovatively in future second 
language use.
Biased input Like native speakers, learners can 
benefit from the “biased” input 
to which they are exposed. For 
paradigm-based learning, high 
frequency forms can serve as a 
reference point for low frequency 
forms.
may facilitate second language learning when constructions in the second language mirror those in the first language (e.g., Spanish es, third-person singular 
present form of the verb ‘to be’ is similar to English ‘is’, which is the third-person 
singular present form of the same verb). Alternatively, learning may be hindered to the extent that similar constructions across languages differ in detail. 
That is, even though a construction may be similar in two languages, detailed 
differences may hinder learning (e.g., the ‘to be’ verb is expressed with two 
verbs in Spanish, ser and estar, and only one in English, ‘to be’).
The application of usage-based models to second language acquisition 
research is becoming an increasingly popular endeavor. Here we provide a 
brief review of two recent studies that have examined second language development from a usage-based perspective. The first, conducted by Eskildsen 
(2009), examined development in the use of the English modal ‘can’ by one 
adult classroom learner over time. The learner under study, Carlos, was a 
native speaker of Mexican Spanish. The data submitted to analysis originated 
from transcriptions of 120 hours of classroom-based audio recordings gathered over a four-year period.2
 Eskildsen’s analysis revealed Carlos’ use of can
appeared to develop initially from the following four recurring patterns: I can
V(erb), Can you V, Can I V, and You can V. His analysis also revealed that the 
emergence of these particular patterns was linked to the communicative needs 
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
of the learning context. For example, several instances of the expression I can 
write were found at different points, but each occurrence was connected to 
moments when Carlos volunteered to write on the board. Furthermore, not all 
patterns were productive (i.e., demonstrated high type frequency) at all points 
in time examined. Eskildsen views this finding as support for the non-linear 
nature of second language development. Findings from his 2012 examination 
of the development of negation construction in second language English (by 
Carlos and one other first language speaker of Mexican Spanish) offer additional support for this conclusion and also for an experience-based explanation of second language grammar development.
Blom, Paradis, and Sorenson Duncan’s (2012) study of English third-person 
singular –s development by second language learners provides additional support for a usage-based approach to second language learning. Their longitudinal study examined spontaneous data elicited during free-play sessions 
conducted with child learners from different first language backgrounds (Cantonese, Mandarin, Romanian, and Spanish). Support for usage-based learning 
was demonstrated by greater accuracy of third-person singular –s marking on 
verbs that exhibited higher input frequencies. Similar to findings for native 
English-speaking children, these child second language learners also demonstrated a tendency to drop /ιz/ more often than other allomorphs of –s. This 
finding is explained by the lower type frequency of this particular suffix, making it unlikely to become a productive pattern. Blom and colleagues also found 
that children with a higher productive lexicon or a higher receptive lexicon 
demonstrated greater rates of accuracy for third-person singular –s. Additionally, their study revealed first language effects: those children whose first 
languages contained rich inflection (i.e., Romanian, Spanish) outperformed 
children belonging to those whose first languages did not. This finding provides support for the assertion that, where applicable, first language constructions serve as the basis for second language constructions.
Research Methods and Usage-Based Models
The methods of data collection and analysis generally employed in usage-based 
second language acquisition research reflect the centrality of language experience in second language learning. First, the majority of studies conducted 
thus far are longitudinal in nature. Longitudinal research is essential not only 
for examining language experience in detail, but also for examining previous 
uses of constructions and their potential impact on subsequent uses. A second 
feature of usage-based methods that is indicative of the importance of considering language experience is the collection of large samples of data from 
individual learners. With large datasets, researchers can gain a better understanding of learners’ experience with the second language (at the point(s) in 
128 SECTION II: APPROACHES
time that development is under analysis). Use of large datasets, in turn, allows 
researchers to pinpoint instances of use and connect them to earlier and later 
uses of a given construction under study. This has further made it possible for 
researchers to identify patterns at earlier stages that become productive and 
facilitate learning in later stages (cf. Eskildsen, 2009). As such, the methods of 
data elicitation employed in this approach provide specific tools for the analysis of changing patterns of association over time.
One final aspect of usage-based methodology that is essential for research 
adopting this approach concerns the methods employed to measure frequency. 
In fact, measuring frequency is not as straightforward as it may seem and several issues must be considered. For example, a researcher must decide whether 
to measure the frequency of a word (e.g., ‘go’) or to look at collocations containing the same word (e.g., ‘I go’ vs. ‘I’ll go’ vs. ‘I go to’). This choice will, 
in turn, reflect something about how the researcher views the relationship 
between those elements and frequency—that is, whether individual elements 
are frequent on their own (e.g., ‘go’) or frequent in the function of the context 
in which they are embedded (e.g., ‘I’ll go’ is likely more frequent than ‘I go’). A 
second issue to consider is the comparison group for this measure. For example, is the measure of frequency one that describes a word or collocation within 
a corpus relative to other elements in that same corpus or is the comparison 
to be made across different corpora? If the comparison is to be made across 
corpora, what is the criterion for selection of this comparison group? The 
researcher could, for example, compare examples across modes of production, 
dialect regions, task types, and so on. What is more, a comparison across several of these differences will make inferences about the relationship between 
any one of them and frequency difficult. In many cases, the answers to these 
questions will largely depend on the linguistic structure(s) under study as well 
as the availability of relevant resources. Nevertheless, given that frequency is a 
central concept in this approach, how it is measured and interpreted requires 
careful thought and empirical practice, both of which will ultimately come to 
bear on the findings reported in each research study.
Systems-Based Theories
The final group of approaches covered in Chapter Five is known collectively as 
systems-based theories or approaches to second language learning. The two examples we will highlight are Complexity Theory and Dynamic Systems Theory. To 
be sure, these theories are distinct and are associated with the work conducted 
by distinct research groups. Nevertheless, they are grouped here because of several fundamental assumptions that they do share. We begin with a discussion of 
what these theories have in common and then we will provide an overview of each 
approach individually, so that their unique characteristics are also apparent.
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
The class of theories or approaches that are systems-based view knowledge as 
a complex system that develops over time (de Bot, 2008, p. 167). Before we expand 
on what this means for cognition, language, and language learning, it is important to understand what is meant by a complex system. First, a system is understood simply as a naturally occurring group of interacting elements or agents 
(Larsen-Freeman, 2011). For example, the molecules of an atom or a gaggle of 
geese would fit this definition. In science, the interaction of these elements or 
agents is believed to give rise to problems of organized complexity. This interaction is complex in that we cannot restrict each variable playing a role in any given 
system, and furthermore some (or all) of those variables may behave in ways we 
cannot control. At the same time, these elements or agents naturally function as 
an integrated whole, from which complex order emerges. A systems approach, 
therefore, attempts to understand the relationships among the various parts that 
function together as an integrated whole (Larsen-Freeman, 2011, p. 50).
Researchers advocating for a systems approach to language learning view 
this process of emergent, complex order as a naturally occurring phenomenon applicable not only to language but also to the human mind. In other 
words, these approaches, like many others reviewed in the present chapter as 
well as in Chapter Four, do not view linguistic knowledge as a specific type 
of knowledge that requires separate mechanisms in order to operate. Instead, 
linguistic knowledge, and language learning as well, share the general cognitive mechanisms used for other functions. There are several characteristics of 
complex systems that are helpful to understand prior to a discussion of language acquisition under these models (see Beckner et al. [2009]3
 and LarsenFreeman [2011] for additional details about each). First, complex systems 
consist of multiple, interacting agents. Returning to our earlier examples, these 
agents might be an individual atom or a goose, for that matter. Second, complex systems are open and can receive energy from outside the system. In other 
words, they are continually influenced by the activities taking place around 
them, rather than existing in isolation. This continual influence, or input of 
energy from the outside, accounts for the dynamic and adaptive nature of the 
system. In other words, energy from outside the system is “fed” into the system. This input, in turn, affects the interaction among the parts; consequently, 
we see a change in the system to adapt to these new conditions. What emerges 
is an ever-increasingly complex system that accounts for each external force
 over time. What is clear is that this approach does not view a language system (or any other) as static. Additionally, these systems are believed to be selforganizing, meaning that they are able to spontaneously create complex order 
without external help. In other words, no additional mechanism is needed to 
organize the information held within the system. Finally, the changes in the
 system are nonlinear. This means that we do not expect to see each modification in exact proportion to the external effect that drives it.
130 SECTION II: APPROACHES
The characteristics of complex systems that we have described point to an 
important observation shared by researchers who advocate for a systems-based 
approach to language and language learning; no single variable can account for 
the patterns (frequently nonlinear) observed in language or language learning. 
Instead, it is the interaction of several variables at several different levels that 
explain the organization of the complex system or the manner in which it 
changes over time (de Bot, Lowie, & Verspoor, 2007). Additionally, this interaction of variables at different levels is understood as an integrated whole, 
and not the sum of its individual parts (cf. Finch, 2004). Thus, the patterns 
observed in language are believed to emerge as stabilities in a complex system, 
or simply put, a natural by-product of human interaction and communication 
(Larsen-Freeman, 2011). Language learning is believed to occur via repeated 
exposure to these patterns, a viewpoint that is shared by usage-based theorists.
Dynamic Systems Theory
Taking the shared assumptions about the nature of complex systems as our 
starting point, we begin with the first example of such an approach. One source 
of difference across complex systems approaches is the aspect of the system on 
which each theory focuses. For example, the Dynamic Systems Theory has 
its origins in mathematics and emphasizes the examination of behavior and 
change in systems over time. An important aspect of this theory is the notion 
of nested systems. This concept captures the idea that every system is, in fact, 
part of another system (de Bot, Lowie, & Verspoor, 2007, p. 8). The implication of this idea is that it is not feasible to trace the exact development of such 
a system over time, precisely because each variable of each system (which is 
constantly influencing and being influenced by other, interconnected systems) 
is constantly changing and is in continual interaction with other dynamic variables. This does not mean, however, that the system is necessarily “chaotic” in 
the sense that every element in the system is constantly in flux. In contrast, 
dynamic systems may stabilize over time, or settle into what are called attractor states. Another important consideration for dynamic systems is the initial 
state. The initial conditions of dynamic systems are considerably less stable. 
Therefore, small changes or “disturbances” in the system can greatly influence 
the trajectory of their development. This notion is commonly referred to as the 
butterfly effect, in light of the fact that a small difference in the initial state of a 
system can have larger consequences later on (Larsen-Freeman, 2011). The idea 
that small changes have a great impact in initial stages of development not only 
highlights the importance of initial conditions in dynamic systems, but rather 
it also reinforces the idea of an interrelated, interconnected whole. Dynamic 
Systems Theory has been connected to the issue of language learning in particular, viewing the learner as a subsystem within a larger, nested social system 
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
(de Bot, Lowie, & Verspoor, 2007). In this view, language development requires 
constant input of energy and resources, which can be internal (e.g., capability 
for learning, motivation, etc.) or external (e.g., physical environment, materials
 in the physical environment) in nature. Given the constant input of energy in 
an interconnected whole, language development is necessarily nonlinear and 
inherently variable. What is more, the developing system is influenced by a host 
of factors, not simply those internal to the linguistic system.
Complexity Theory
A second complex systems approach is Complexity Theory, which also places 
emphasis on change over time, but as it relates to better understanding the 
relationship between the parts that make up the whole (Larsen-Freeman, 
2011). Because the parts of a complex system are constantly changing, the system as a whole is continually changing as well. Nevertheless, this change over 
time is not so great that the system completely loses its identity. The emergence 
of stabilities in the system at different periods allows the system as a whole 
to maintain its identity, regardless of the fact that it is constantly evolving. 
The most relevant example here is language, which is viewed as continually 
perceptually changing, while at the same time staying sufficiently stable to be 
identified as itself (Larsen-Freeman, 2011, p. 51).
In her seminal article, Diane Larsen-Freeman (1997) argues that this 
systems-based approach is especially relevant for second language learning. 
Specifically, she detailed the parallels between complex systems and second 
language acquisition, showing how a Dynamic Systems/Complexity Theory perspective could address some of the recurring questions in the field of second 
language acquisition. Among these parallels she includes dynamicity, complexity, and nonlinearity. Like dynamic, complex systems, the acquisition of a second 
language can be characterized as dynamic because second language grammars 
are also continually developing. Likewise, second language systems are complex 
(i.e., not explainable by a single or few causative factors or variables) and they 
are nonlinear (i.e., mastery of second language linguistic items and concepts 
is not step by step). She notes that the precise mechanisms of second language 
acquisition remain unclear in many models, approaches, and theories of second language acquisition. Additionally, they fail to account for the complexity 
of second language output that is observed in second language research. As an 
alternative, Larsen-Freeman (1997) offers a Dynamic Systems Theory/Complexity Theory approach to second language acquisition because of its potential for 
the examination of development in complex systems over time, and also for 
the conceptualization of the adaptation and variability evident in such systems.
Since Larsen-Freeman’s initial proposal, the application of systems-based 
theories has received growing attention and the theory has been further 
132 SECTION II: APPROACHES
developed to account for second language learning. Two empirical studies that 
provide strong models for framing second language research within this perspective are Larsen-Freeman (2006) and Verspoor, Lowie, and van Dijk (2008). 
The study conducted by Larsen-Freeman employs a dynamical description 
methodology (defined in the next section of this chapter) to examine the 
interlanguage patterns of five Chinese-speaking learners of English. She provides specific examples to support her observation of recurring patterns of 
second language use and the nonlinearity of second language development. 
Verspoor, Lowie, and van Dijk’s (2008) study similarly examines variability in 
the second language performance of one Dutch-speaking learner of English. 
Using quantitative measures of complexity and lexical creativity of eighteen 
academic compositions collected over three years, the researchers were able 
to demonstrate the extent of variability encountered. Additionally, they were 
able to describe how the relative importance of variables associated with that 
variability may change over time. In both cases, the authors demonstrated how 
a Dynamic Systems approach accounted for issues that were not previously 
encompassed in earlier work.
Research Methods and Systems-Based Theories
Like the usage-based approaches described earlier, the second language data 
that researchers seek to describe may be elicited in a variety of ways, and does 
not tend to differ from other approaches to second language acquisition. 
What does differ, however, are the approaches to modeling and/or describing the patterns in those data. Citing van Gelder and Port (1995), LarsenFreeman (2011) identifies three methodological approaches to the study of 
complex, dynamic systems. These include quantitative modeling, qualitative 
modeling, and dynamical description. Quantitative modeling, as the name 
suggests, involves numbers and uses mathematics to study complex systems. 
This approach is not the most feasible for the study of human systems, which 
consist of variables that cannot necessarily be expressed numerically. Qualitative modeling instead may provide a more suitable alternative to the study of 
human complex systems, as computers can be used to simulate these systems 
and run multiple iterations. Nevertheless, these are ways of modeling dynamic 
systems in the real world and, thus, they represent an approximation rather 
than a precise account of real world data. The third method, dynamical 
description, provides a means of conceptualizing certain aspects or processes 
of dynamic systems in the real world. Using the tools provided by ethnography 
(e.g., observation and detailed description), insight into the dynamic, interconnected nature of a particular language learning context can be achieved. 
For example, a detailed, longitudinal description of the classroom-learning 
context allows us to understand the dynamic and interconnected nature of 
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
the parts of this particular system. Consequently, this method can lead to 
a better understanding of the current state or future potential of a system. 
It cannot, however, account for an end state or for an absolute account of a 
given system.
SUMMARY
The goal of this chapter has been to provide an overview of some of the most 
well-known, and also most recent, cognitive approaches to the study of language. While these theories prioritize the role of cognition in language and 
language learning, the manner in which cognition is viewed can differ greatly. 
A summary of the approaches covered in this chapter is provided in Table 5.6 
below. Similar to the summary table in Chapter Four, for each approach we 
define language learning, identify cognitive aspects addressed, and indicate 
whether research on sociolinguistic competence exists.
TABLE 5.6
Overview of cognitive approaches to the acquisition of a second language
Model/theory/
approach
Second language 
learning
“Cognitive” 
aspects considered
Sociolinguistic 
competence 
examined?
Optimality 
Theory
Change ranking 
of constraints 
to best match 
constraint 
ranking of second 
language
Components of 
mental grammars, 
including GEN, 
EVAL, CON, 
and the mental 
lexicon
Yes
Connectionism Adjustment 
of connection 
weights 
between units 
in a distributed, 
neural network 
(already finely 
tuned for the 
first language); 
process-oriented
Patterns of 
connectivity 
between units in 
a neural network; 
associative 
learning 
mechanisms
No relevant 
research to date
(Continued)
134 SECTION II: APPROACHES
EVALUATION OF COGNITIVE APPROACHES
A central contribution of the approaches reviewed in this chapter is the 
place they give to cognition in researching language and language learning. 
Unlike many of the approaches covered in the previous chapter, this focus on 
cognition allows researchers of these theories to examine linguistic aspects 
of language and its acquisition. For example, Optimality Theory is able to 
account for the role of linguistic universals (the same constraints in every 
language), cross-linguistic differences (different rankings of constraints), 
and the ease of acquisition (a simple constraint demotion process). In contrast, Connectionism and usage-based approaches model linguistic knowledge as associations between form and meaning. Though quite different, 
each incorporates acquisition and storage of linguistic knowledge in their 
account. One advantage of these later, emergentist approaches is that they 
also account for changes in native and nonnative grammars that result from 
additional experiences. In other words, the dynamic view of the linguistic 
system provides a clearly articulated avenue for the inclusion of social factors in the linguistic model. Consequently, we see several options for modeling sociolinguistic competence, the myriad factors involved in language 
variation, and, most especially, the manner in which this competence develops over time.
Among the approaches covered in the last two chapters, there is, in general, 
less research available in the field of second language acquisition conducted 
TABLE 5.6 (Continued)
Model/theory/
approach
Second language 
learning
Cognitive aspects 
considered
Sociolinguistic 
competence 
examined?
Usage-based 
models
Language 
experience and 
use impacts 
cognitive 
representation of 
second language, 
which is emergent
Repetition of 
linguistic forms 
and its effect on 
experience in the 
second language
Yes
Systems-based 
theories (Dynamic 
Systems Theory, 
Complexity 
Theory)
Emergent 
stabilities in a 
complex system; 
dynamic and 
nonlinear
Variability; 
dynamic and 
nonlinear nature 
of variables 
studied
No relevant 
research to date
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
under these frameworks. Thus, while we can see the promise in each, only 
Optimality Theory and Connectionism have witnessed at least a decade of 
research on second language use within that model. The other models presented in the present chapter, however, do a much better job of modeling language as a socially situated phenomenon. Fortunately, the newer, usage-based 
and complex systems approaches are currently the object of much discussion 
and debate (cf. colloquia and plenaries given in 2013 and 2014 at important 
second language research conferences such as American Association of Applied 
Linguistics, Second Language Research Forum, etc.) and we anticipate tremendous growth in these areas in the next decade. As we turn our attention to 
variationist models in the following chapter, we will be reminded that it is 
likely that these fields are not only compatible but will be an area for extensive 
cross-disciplinary investigation in the future.
READING BEYOND THE TEXT
a. Blom, E., Paradis, J., & Sorenson Duncan, T. S. (2012), Effects of input 
properties, vocabulary size, and L1 on the development of third person 
singular –s in child L2 English. Language Learning, 62, 965–994.
b. Broselow, E., Chen, S., & Wang, C. (1998). The emergence of the unmarked 
in second language phonology. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 20, 
261–280.
c. Eskildsen, S.W., & Cadierno, T. (2007). Are recurring multi-word expressions really syntactic freezes? Second language acquisition from the perspective of usage-based linguistics. In M. Nenonen & S. Niemi (Eds.), 
Collocations and Idioms 1. Papers from the First Nordic Conference on Syntactic Freezes, Joensuu, Finland, May 19–20, 2006 (pp. 86–99). Joensuu: 
Joensuu University Press.
d. MacWhinney, B. (2008). A unified model. In P. Robinson & N. Ellis (Eds.), 
The Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics and Second Language Acquisition
(pp. 341–371). Routledge.
e. Verspoor, M., Lowie, W., & van Dijk, M. (2008). Variability in second language development from a dynamic systems perspective. The Modern Language Journal, 92, 214–231.
COMPREHENSION AND APPLICATION
A. Comprehension
1. What are the four basic mechanisms that operate in Optimality 
Theory?
2. What constraints are included in Lombardi (2003)? How do constraint rankings need to be ordered to result in production of /θ/ as 
[s]? As [t]?
136 SECTION II: APPROACHES
3. What does Connectionism attempt to demonstrate? What processes 
are included?
4. What are distributed representations and neural networks?
5. What does MacWhinney’s Unified (Competition) Model posit? What 
role do cues play within that model?
6. What do Sokolik and Smith (1992) conclude?
7. What do Ellis and Schmidt (1997) conclude about the role of rules in 
second language learning?
8. What is the focus of usage-based models? What mechanisms are 
included in such models?
9. What is the difference between token frequency and type frequency? 
What three effects are associated with token frequency?
10. What is grammaticalization?
11. According to Blom, Paradis, and Sorenson Duncan (2012), why do 
learners drop /ιz/ more often than other allomorphs of –s?
12. In systems-based theories, what are five features of a complex system?
13. How do quantitative and qualitative modeling differ?
B. Application
1. What are some difficulties associated with Optimality Theory, Connectionism, usage-based models, and systems-based theories? What 
strengths do they offer? Which do you find the most compelling? 
Why? Can you offer evidence from your own language learning?
2. Two learners of English, Nikolai and Hiro, pronounce the word thin
very differently. Nikolai produces [t]in, while Hiro’s pronunciation is 
[s]in. How would Lombardi (2003) use Optimality Theory to explain 
these differences?
3. In English, that-deletion is a common process, such that the phrase ‘I 
think that we should go’ is often produced as ‘I think we should go’. On 
the other hand, ‘I hypothesize that we should go’ is less likely to be produced as ‘I hypothesize we should go’. How would researchers within the 
usage-based model account for this difference?
4. In answering one of the application questions in the previous chapter, 
you transcribed part of one of your favorite movie scenes. Imagine 
that when you were writing the transcription, you accidently wrote 
the word ‘goal’ instead of ‘objective’, even though these words sound 
nothing alike. How would Bybee and other researchers in usage-based 
models explain this?
5. Systems-based theorists hold that language learners have a grammar 
that is systematic but also ever-changing. Think of non-target-like 
examples of language that you have used in a second language. What 
word or structure did you produce? What word or structure would a 
COGNITIVE APPROACHESg
native speaker be more likely to use in that context? How did your use 
demonstrate that you had some rule in place? Since language learning is dynamic, there is a good chance that now you no longer would 
use that word or structure in the same context. What are some other 
examples of changes that you have noticed in your second language?
NOTES
1. Variable constraint ranking is characteristic of stochastic accounts of Optimality Theory (cf. Boersma & Hayes, 2001), as well as the Maximum Entropy Model 
(cf. Goldwater & Johnson, 2003; Hayes & Wilson, 2008). The reader is directed to 
these works for further reading.
2. All transcriptions belong to the Multimedia Adult Learner English Corpus 
(MALEC), a large-scale corpus compiled and maintained by The National Labsite 
for Adult ESOL.
3. There are ten authors on this article: Clay Becker, Richard Blythe, Joan Bybee, 
Morten H. Christiansen, William Croft, Nick C. Ellis, John Holland, Jinyun Ke, 
Diane Larsen-Freeman, and Tom Schoenemann.
6
Variationist Approaches to the 
Acquisition of Sociolinguistic 
Competence
We will see that unlike the previous two chapters, which reviewed several different approaches all labeled under the same, larger umbrella term (social or 
cognitive approaches), the present chapter focuses on one particular approach: 
the Variationist Approach. Variationist approaches are compatible with several of the theories advanced in Chapters Four and Five. For example, variationist theory affords a role for social factors, either those describing the individual 
(e.g., age or level of education) or the setting in which the individual uses language (e.g., abroad vs. at home). In addition, because it models the patterns in 
language itself, rather than finding its roots in a particular conceptualization of 
how the mind works, this approach is compatible with several of the emergentist theories described in Chapter Five. Thus, this final chapter on approaches 
to second language variation, in our view, represents a viable bridge between 
the range of theories outlined in the two preceding chapters and, consequently, 
will receive greater attention throughout the remainder of this volume.
The Variationist Approach to the study of language has its origins in the 
broader field of sociolinguistics. To be clear, there are many approaches to the 
study of language variation and change that tend to fall under the umbrella 
term “sociolinguistics” (Preston, 2004). Examples include quantitative or variationist sociolinguistics, ethnography of speaking, interactionist conversation 
analysis, social psychology of language, and sociology of language, to name 
but a few. Nevertheless, as the chapter’s title suggests, we will limit our discussion to variationist or quantitative sociolinguistic approaches to the study of 
second language variation. Traditionally, this approach sought to identify the 
internal (i.e., linguistic) and external (i.e., social) factors influencing variability in language.1
Unlike the early foundational chapters on language variation (Chapters 
Two and Three), the present chapter addresses the specific models followed by 
variationist-oriented second language researchers, with a focus on probabilistic 
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
models of language variation (e.g., Preston, 2000, 2004). After introducing 
these models, we discuss the tools for collecting and analyzing data and the factors most commonly examined in this area of research. Once these preliminaries are established, we provide an overview of how models of second language 
variation were initially conceptualized and gradually modified over time. We 
conclude with a critical analysis of variationist approaches and their compatibility with other models that attempt to account for second language variation.
PROBABILISTIC MODELS OF VARIATION
Probabilistic models of variation have their origins in the subfield of sociolinguistics known as variationist or quantitative sociolinguistics. This subfield 
was developed to examine the internal and external factors influencing the use 
of two or more forms conveying the same meaning in discourse. The way in 
which variationist sociolinguists go about examining these factors gives the 
subfield its name—researchers provide a quantitative model of the linguistic variation under study. Nevertheless, this model does not simply provide 
a count of how often one variant is used in comparison with others. Instead, 
it aims to uncover the nature of the distribution of use of each variant, using 
quantitative terms to identify the factors that influence the distribution of a 
particular linguistic form in variation with other “equal” variants. In other 
words, these models assess the frequency of use of a form and the linguistic 
and social constraints on that use.
But how are these quantitative models probabilistic rather than merely 
descriptive? The wealth of previous research employing variationist approaches 
to language variation has provided overwhelming support for the assertion 
that selection among multiple forms can be predicted through a careful examination of the interplay of internal and external factors influencing that selection. That is, language users tend to select for use (arguably consciously and/or 
unconsciously) one of two or more forms when certain other factors, related 
to the linguistic or social context of the utterance, are present. Thus, a pattern 
is established for selection of a given form. This pattern serves as the basis for 
future form selection, a process that will be influenced by the same interplay 
of internal and external factors. This manner of characterizing or modeling 
language variation is probabilistic in that it attempts to uncover the circumstances under which (i.e., which factors are present) a user is likely to select 
a particular form. Thus, the study of patterns of use under this framework 
describes a dataset and also serves to predict future patterns of use of the same 
forms under the same conditions.
To illustrate these ideas, let’s take the case of final stop deletion in English, a variable linguistic phenomenon that has been examined for a variety 
of English language dialects (e.g., Guy [1980, 1991a, 1991b] for standard 
140 SECTION II: APPROACHES
American English in Philadelphia and New York City; Labov, Cohen, Robins, & Lewis [1968] for African American English in New York City; Santa 
Ana [1992] for Chicano English in Los Angeles; etc.). Variable deletion of 
/t/ and /d/ in word final position (e.g., ‘mist’, ‘missed’) across dialects is 
influenced by several internal or linguistic factors, including the type of segment following it (greater deletion when a consonant follows), the type of 
segment preceding it (greater deletion when a segment with similar features precedes), and the grammatical status of –t or –d (greater deletion in 
monomorphemic words like ‘mist’). Research on this topic shows that deletion of –t and –d in pre-consonantal position does not occur 100% of the 
time. Similarly, a 100% or categorical deletion rate will not be observed 
for all regular past tense (–ed) verbs. Rather, these factors conspire to lead 
to a greater likelihood of –t/d deletion when they are present. This allows 
researchers to examine a context for the presence or absence of each relevant factor and know the probability of occurrence of a given form. Variationist sociolinguists have developed tools to talk about this likelihood of 
occurrence in a quantitatively sophisticated manner, and this is the topic to 
which we now turn.
TOOLS OF ELICITATION AND ANALYSIS
As was noted in Chapter Two, sociolinguists have developed special tools for 
analysis of linguistic data and also specific methods for eliciting such data from 
speakers of a given community. We review these briefly with a focus on how 
this can be used in the context of second language learners. Beginning with 
the first variationist sociolinguistic studies conducted by William Labov (e.g., 
1963, 1966, 1972a), a broad range of elicitation methods have been developed 
and continue to be used to capture distinct facets of linguistic variation. One 
of the most popular elicitation methods is the interview, conducted one on 
one with the researcher or in a group setting. Interviews are popular because 
they provide the opportunity for elicitation of a particularly large number of 
tokens, especially for analyses of variation in the sound system. Additionally, 
the interview is believed to create an opportunity for spontaneous, vernacular (informal) speech. In fact, the sociolinguistic interview is a specific type of 
interview developed to further maximize the degree to which the interaction 
elicits unmonitored production. The sociolinguistic interview arose from the 
need to capture different levels of use of a linguistic form, ideally from the most 
casual (e.g., spontaneous conversation during interview) to the most careful 
(e.g., reading a word list of minimal pairs) production of the variable under 
study. However, Labov (1972b) noted that even in the most casual setting, there 
is still a tendency to employ careful speech due to the presence of the researcher, 
a phenomenon he termed the Observer’s Paradox (see Chapter Two). In an 
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
effort to minimize this effect, the sociolinguistic interview, unlike other types 
of interviews, includes topics of conversation that are likely to be emotionally 
charged, personal, and important enough to the speaker that the focus is on the 
content expressed rather than the manner of expression. For example, speakers 
might be asked to relate a time during which they felt they came close to death or 
to recount childhood memories or stories. The hope is that a speaker will “get 
lost” in the content of the conversation and focus to a lesser degree on the presence of the interviewer. In the context of second language learners, this same 
style of interview has been employed, often with a shift in the topics believed to 
elicit the most involved speech. Thus, for study abroad learners, such narratives 
might involve moments of frustration in the host country. Despite this difference, the intention remains the same for second language interviewees: to elicit 
informal, unmonitored language production.
In addition to developing particular interview questions geared toward 
minimizing the impact of the researcher, Labov (1972b) also addressed this 
phenomenon in his famous department store study examining the production of post-vocalic /r/ among store employees holding distinct positions 
(e.g., stock boy, sales associate) and of distinct racial background (e.g., African American, Caucasian) (see Chapter Two for details). To briefly review, 
Labov’s research team approached store employees to make a store-related 
inquiry that elicited the phrase ‘fourth floor’. The researchers also elicited a 
repetition of the phrase so that a careful production could be observed. 
After departing from the informant, the researcher recorded impressionistically how the /r/ was produced in each word of the phrase. Thus, in addition to the sociolinguistic interview, the “quick survey” represents another 
method of data elicitation that has been used in sociolinguistic studies. This 
sort of elicitation task may be slightly more difficult to employ with second 
language learners, but the idea behind it has been applied effectively to this 
context. One such example is found in Schmidt (2014), who sought to examine the degree to which second language learners of Spanish demonstrated 
voicing assimilation between word final /s/ and the following consonant. The 
elicitation task used by Schmidt required participants to state the number of 
items various individuals were bringing to a party. A series of pictures with 
a person (name indicated below the image) was shown with a sketch of a 
specific number of items. When there were two of a given item, the phrase 
elicited was something along the lines of Ernesto vende dos vestidos ‘Ernest 
sells two dresses’. In some items the object name began with a voiced consonant and in others it did not. Thus, speakers produced the target contexts 
but the focus of their message was content-based. Clearly this is not the same 
as an impersonal encounter in a department store, but the short utterance 
produced with a focus on meaning, rather than on form, is incorporated into 
research on second languages as well.
142 SECTION II: APPROACHES
A final method employed in second language research on variation is the 
written contextualized task. This task is an important complement to the sociolinguistic interview because it allows the researcher to examine the process 
of form selection by many speakers in identical contexts. Using this elicitation 
method, a researcher can select a particular subset of relevant linguistic variables to manipulate, while holding the others constant. If we return to the earlier 
example of –t/d deletion, we might opt to manipulate the grammatical category 
of each token as well as the preceding segment while holding the following segment constant. Thus, an instrument of this type ensures that every participant 
is exposed to every context of interest. Additionally, for morphosyntactic variables, where constructs such as the referent of a direct object, the time frame of 
an event, or other sentence or discourse-level characteristics are important, the 
researcher is able to ensure that all participants are viewing the situation in the 
same way. This avoids the difficulty of needing to interpret speaker intentions 
properly in order to classify the linguistic context. In the case of second language learners, where formal accuracy is not yet achieved, this can be especially 
challenging (see Chapter Seven and Woolsey, 2008). Although the response format on a written contextualized task can vary, it is not always limited to production of a response to a given context. Instead, oftentimes, these measures elicit 
a preference from the speaker, thereby allowing speakers to indicate contexts 
in which more than one option is possible. In other words, the way in which 
speakers respond may tell the researcher something about their awareness of 
linguistic variation as well, depending on the goals of the project itself and the 
way in which the response format is crafted. We will see several examples of this 
type of task employed in the research reviewed in the next two chapters.2
From methods of data elicitation we now shift our attention to how the 
data elicited through these methods is modeled quantitatively. The most wellknown and commonly used method of quantitative analysis is multivariate 
regression analysis. Recall that variationist sociolinguists employ a probabilistic model of variation where the likelihood that a form occurs or is selected 
for use by a speaker can be predicted by analyzing the relationship between 
the frequency of occurrence of linguistic forms and the interplay of internal 
and external factors influencing those rates of use. This model can be constructed through a regression analysis, which is a statistical “. . . technique that 
allows you to look at a number of explanatory variables and decide which 
ones have independent power to explain what’s going on with the variable 
you have measured” (Larson-Hall, 2010, p. 176). Here the variable measured 
refers to the dependent variable—that is, the variable linguistic phenomenon 
under study (e.g., deletion of word final –t/d). The explanatory variables, on 
the other hand, are the independent linguistic and social factors believed to be 
related to use of a given form. In the case of –t/d deletion, these might include 
the preceding and following segments as well as social variables, such as gender or level of education.
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
 In most cases, variationist sociolinguists have approached the study of variable linguistic phenomena in a binary manner (e.g., word fi nal –t/d is retained 
or deleted in elicited data). Th is means that the dependent variable has two categories. In other words, variation is oft en viewed as the linguistic and socially 
indexed alternation between two forms (either of equal meaning or fulfi lling the 
same function). Th us, this limitation of the dependent variable to two categories 
may be related to the nature of the statistical models most frequently employed 
to model this variation (i.e., the binary logistic regressiong
 ), rather than an examination of the dataset to determine the range of forms used to fulfi ll a given function. Nevertheless, we will see later in this chapter, as well as in Chapter Seven , 
that other statistical options exist that allow for multi-category dependent variables and these have already been applied to second language variation research. 
 Researchers have used regression analyses in two ways: (1) to determine 
the extent to which the explanatory variables examined can account for the 
variance observed in the response variable (or dependent variable), or (2) to 
establish a predictive model that best accounts for observed variance (LarsonHall, 2010, pp. 204–205). In either case, a regression analysis uses a plotted set 
of observations to draw a line demonstrating the relationship among explanatory variables. Figure 6.1 presents a simplifi ed version of these observations in 
which they are plotted based on two explanatory variables (one on the x -axis 
and the other on the y -axis). We can see a trend line drawn through the scatterplot where its slope indicates that, in general, the higher the number on the 
x -axis, the higher the number on the corresponding y -axis. Of course there are 
exceptions to this tendency, and those tend to be the observations or dots falling farther away from the trend line. Th is line is established by a mathematical 
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2 4g
Explanatory variable A
8 18 12g
 FIGURE 6.1 Sample scatterplot with linear trend line Explanatory variable B
144 SECTION II: APPROACHES
formula (y = α + β1x1 + β2x2 + . . . + error, where α is the intercept and β is 
the slope), which is used for both of the two purposes of regression analyses 
described above.
The most commonly used statistical software tool by variationist sociolinguists is Goldvarb X (Sankoff, Tagliamonte, & Smith, 2012). This tool has also 
allowed researchers to conduct multivariate analyses using the same conceptual framework of regression analysis. Instead of explaining variance, however, 
the quantitative output represents assignment of probability weights to factors 
(or explanatory variables) entered into the statistical analysis. Factor weights
indicate how influential each independent variable included in the analysis is 
in the variation observed for one level or category of the dependent variable 
(called the application value) of the (generally) binary dependent variable. 
A factor weight above 0.50 indicates that the respective category of the variable favors selection of the application value, while a factor weight below 0.50 
indicates that the respective category of the variable does not favor selection of 
the application value. To provide a concrete example, let’s explore the results 
reported in Howard, Lemée, and Regan’s (2006) study on Irish learners’ variable /l/-deletion in French, which are repeated in Table 6.1.
In order to make sense of the information provided in Table 6.1, we must 
first understand the application value. In Howard, Lemée, and Regan’s (2006) 
study of /l/-deletion in French by Irish learners, the dependent variable has 
two categories (i.e., is binary). That is, either learners retained or deleted /l/ in 
production. The researchers chose the deletion of /l/ as the application value. 
Thus, their quantitative results are to be interpreted in relation to /l/-deletion 
(rather than retention). In other words, each independent variable is examined 
for its influence on /l/-deletion and for the categories within each independent 
variable that favor or disfavor this phenomenon. As we move through the third 
column of the table from top to bottom, we have bolded those factor weights 
greater than 0.50 to help the reader to identify, at a glance, which categories of 
the independent variables entered into the statistical analysis favor /l/-deletion, 
or the application value. Their analysis examines the effects of five independent variables, and the findings of this analysis are summarized in Table 6.2, 
which identifies the degree and direction of the effects for the categories of 
each of the independent variables on /l/-deletion.
Howard and his colleagues (2006) also reported values for input and log likelihood. Log likelihood values are used to determine how well the analysis conducted and resulting model offered by Goldvarb fit the data (the closer to 0 the 
better). These values are used when comparing models obtained from multiple 
analyses of the same dataset in order to select the most appropriate one. Input
refers to how likely it is that the application value occurs. In Howard, Lemée, 
and Regan’s dataset, therefore, /l/-deletion occurs about 26.4% of the time.
As was mentioned earlier, probabilistic models of linguistic variation are 
generally modeled in the way that is illustrated with the example from Regan, 
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
TABLE 6.1
Goldvarb results for /l/-deletion in Howard, Lemée, & Regan 
(2006, adapted from Table 2, p. 14)
Groups and factors Percent deleted tokens Factor weight
Pronoun
il impersonal
il personal
ils/elles
elle
45
20
29
6
0.632
0.353
0.520
0.151
Following phonological 
segment
Vowel 
Consonant
34
32
0.459
0.546
Preceding phonological 
segment
Vowel 
Consonant
Pause
38
27
33
0.524
0.441
0.521
Following grammatical 
category
Verb
Pronoun
Other
23
47
31
0.405
0.639
0.513
Input = 0.264
Log likelihood = −984.607
TABLE 6.2
Summary of findings from Howard, Lemée, & Regan (2006)
Independent 
variable
Categories Effects found Factor weight
Pronoun il impersonal
il personal
ils/elles
elle
il impersonal 
and ils/elles favor 
/l/-deletion
0.632 and 0.520, 
respectively
(Continued)
146 SECTION II: APPROACHES
Howard, and Lemée (2009). That is, in nearly all cases researchers have adjusted 
the dependent or response variable such that it is expressed in binary terms. 
Returning to the example of /l/-deletion, this means that data are analyzed for 
presence or absence of deletion, but no degrees of deletion are reported. In 
some cases, this is not merely an artifact of the statistical test employed but also 
of the manner in which it is most appropriate to view a given phenomenon. 
In others, however, we know that additional categories would be useful. For 
example, a study of syllable final /s/ in Spanish would do well to account for [s] 
production relative to both aspiration [h] and complete elision [Ø]. An account 
of presence or absence of [s] alone would miss important details. In cases where 
the envelope of variation includes more than two variants, this poses a challenge 
to models of analysis like the one presented previously and has led to at least 
two different solutions. The first, and most commonly applied, approach has 
been to group the individual categories of the dependent variable to accommodate statistical analysis. In the case of /s/-retention, for example, the [s] would 
be compared to all other variants. Nevertheless, this type of methodological 
accommodation, while telling us something about the factors that lead to retention of the /s/, may fail to capture the manner in which those same factors favor 
or disfavor one reduced form or another (e.g., [h] as compared to [Ø]).
Given the importance of statistical modeling for variationist approaches to 
linguistic variation, it has been essential to identify ways in which models can 
account for additional categories (or levels) of the dependent variable. This 
TABLE 6.2 (Continued)
Independent 
variable
Categories Effects found Factor weight
Following 
phonological 
segment
Vowel 
Consonant
/l/-deletion is 
favored when 
followed by a 
consonant
0.546
Preceding 
phonological 
segment
Vowel
Consonant
Pause
/l/-deletion is 
favored when 
preceded by a 
vowel or pause
0.524 and 0.521
Following 
grammatical 
category
Verb
Pronoun
Other
/l/-deletion is 
favored when 
the grammatical 
category of the 
following word is a 
pronoun or other
0.639 and 0.513, 
respectively
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
area of research is somewhat new, but we cover two examples of how recent 
research on second language variation has met this challenge to statistical 
modeling. Perhaps the simplest solution is to employ a regression analysis 
in a different statistical package that allows for additional categories in the 
dependent variable. In the case of subject expression, for example, Linford 
and Geeslin (2013) sought to extend the envelope of variation beyond the 
comparison between overt and null pronominal subject forms to also include 
full lexical noun phrases. In their study, based on a written contextualized 
task, all items included subjects that had been mentioned previously in the 
discourse and, thus, should have been good contexts for pronominal forms 
only. Nevertheless, they included three response options (null subject pronoun, overt subject pronoun, and full lexical noun phrase) and found that 
all three forms were selected regularly by both native and nonnative speakers. 
Consequently, it was imperative that they employ a statistical test that could 
adequately model this variation: the relative influence of each independent 
linguistic and social variable on all three subject forms. To do so, Linford 
and Geeslin employed multinomial regression analyses that enabled them 
to examine the patterns of selection for each of the three response options 
relative to the other two. This same method has been employed in an investigation of future time reference by Gudmestad and Geeslin (2013). In the 
case of that study, the researchers sought to compare the relative effects of 
several linguistic and social variables on the selection of three forms, all of 
which can be used in contexts of future time reference in Spanish (the simple 
present, the morphological future, and the periphrastic future). Because the 
multinomial regression uses similar means to model variation as the binary 
logistic regression, researchers who are accustomed to working with the latter are likely to be able to extend their knowledge to this type of test without 
tremendous difficulty.
In contrast with the two studies cited above, which employ a different type 
of regression analysis to model the variation found in their respective datasets, there is one example of research to date that employs a different type of 
modeling and likely requires a greater degree of statistical knowledge. Nevertheless, for the problem examined, the complexity of the analytical methods 
is justified by the demands of the phenomenon under investigation. Gudmestad, House, and Geeslin (2013) employed a Bayesian multinomial probit 
model to examine all forms of Spanish third-person subject expression used 
by native and highly advanced nonnative language users. The unique advantage of this quantitative model is the ability to examine a non-binary variable. Additionally, the selection among two, three, four, or more variants or 
levels of a dependent variable is understood as “preference” for a non-baseline 
variant over the baseline variant. For example, in Gudmestad, House, and 
Geeslin’s study, the four levels of the dependent variable, third-person subject expression included null subjects, overt personal pronouns, lexical noun 
148 SECTION II: APPROACHES
phrases, and other pronouns (i.e., demonstrative, indefinite, and interrogative pronouns). Because each of these was attested in their interview data, it 
was important to include them all in the analysis. In their model, the “null 
subjects” variant was selected as the baseline; thus, their findings for personal pronouns, lexical noun phrases, and other pronouns were expressed 
with regard to preference for these variants over null subjects or vice versa. 
Another advantage of this model is the ability to account for dependent 
observations in the dataset. This is an important advantage over regression 
models, such as those conducted in Goldvarb, because of the assumption of 
independence of observations. This is even the case for improved versions of 
Goldvarb, such as random forests (Breiman [2001], as cited by Gudmestad, 
House, & Geeslin, 2013). To be sure, there are alternatives to this approach, 
such as models conducted in Rbrul, which can account for dependent observations in the dataset, but these models handle only binary dependent variables (cf. Johnson, 2009). Thus, Gudmestad, House, and Geeslin identified a 
manner in which the relationship between a multi-category dependent variable and several independent variables could be examined in order to provide 
new information about native and nonnative patterns of use of third-person 
subject forms. Despite the heavy technical requirements of this type of analysis, it is likely that future research will continue to foster collaborations 
between statisticians and linguists because of the added detail this sort of 
analysis provides.
Before we conclude this section, it is worth addressing the issue of dependent or independent observations in greater depth. Many of the statistical 
tests regularly employed by linguists, such as chi-square tests or binary regression analyses, assume that there is an independence of observations. Nevertheless, this is rarely the case (Labov’s department store study might be an 
exception). This is because nearly every analysis of variation includes multiple tokens produced by a single individual. Thus, the tokens produced by that 
individual cannot be seen as independent from one another. In other words, 
the most frequently employed practices in linguistics would be frowned 
upon by those in the field of statistics. While it is important to state that we 
do not seek to discredit research that employs the current, central mode of 
analysis, we would like to note that there are recent efforts to overcome this 
statistical challenge. For example, in her work on requests and complaints 
in second language Spanish, Kuriscak (2006) employed a multi-level regression model that allowed her to include her participant variables (those that 
would be true for multiple tokens) in one level of the model and her linguistic variables (those that were true for individual tokens) in a separate level. 
The resulting statistical analysis was one in which the effect of each of these 
independent variables could be understood, while at the same time the study 
maintained the assumption of independence of observations. In more recent 
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
research, linguists have begun to employ a Generalized Estimating Equation 
test (Hanley, Negassa, & Forrester, 2003; Hardin & Hilbe, 2003). This model 
accounts for the fact that each individual may also contribute to the variation 
observed in the dataset. In other words, it does not assume that each token is 
independent from all others. This method has been used to examine subject 
expression (Geeslin, Linford, Fafulas, Long, & Díaz-Campos, 2013) as well as 
the contrast between the present progressive and the simple present (Fafulas, 
2012), both for second language learners of Spanish and their native speaker 
comparison groups. Although analyses of this sort remain somewhat limited, 
it is likely that we will see a shift toward these more sophisticated statistical 
models.
PREDICTIVE FACTORS
We have discussed the manner in which the effects of independent variables 
on a given sociolinguistic variant are modeled statistically. Nevertheless, these 
factors themselves deserve greater consideration. Although a variationist 
probabilistic model should include several independent variables related to 
the linguistic context, and these factors are specific to the phenomenon under 
investigation, there are other factors that have been widely used across studies 
and may serve to guide second language researchers. These factors generally 
fall into one of the following three categories: those related to the speaker, 
those related to the interlocutor, and those related to the speech context. Factors related to the speaker have been investigated to the greatest extent and 
in a variety of ways depending on the speech communities under study. These 
factors include age, gender, ethnicity, social class, occupation, education, and 
country of origin, among others (see Chapter Three). We will see that these 
factors have also been applied to the second language context in a variety 
of ways. For example, Adamson and Regan (1991) found that the variation 
between –in and –ing among learners of English from Vietnam and Cambodia was influenced by gender; male speakers used the reduced variant with 
greater frequency than females and, perhaps more interestingly, with greater 
frequency than their male native speaker counterparts (see also Pica, Holliday, 
Lewis, Berducci, & Newman, 1991). Nevertheless, the impact of these factors 
has not generally been as significant as that of the linguistic independent variables (Preston, 2000). This may be related to the fact that learners tend to focus 
more on local factors, beginning with the word level and then extending to 
the sentence and eventually to discourse, as a result of basic processing limitations in the second language, but it may also be a reflection of the average 
participant population in these studies. As we will see in the upcoming chapters, a great deal of research on this topic focuses on college-educated second 
language learners, and, thus, the diversity of characteristics such as social class 
150 SECTION II: APPROACHES
can often be limited in a given participant group (e.g., Geeslin & Gudmestad, 
2010; Regan, Howard, & Lemée, 2009).
Factors related to the interlocutor and factors related to the speech 
context have also received attention in the variationist sociolinguistic literature. For example, Rickford and McNair-Knox (1994) examined how one 
speaker’s speech style (defined as audience accommodation, cf. Bell, 1984; 
Giles & Powesland, 1975) shifted depending on who she was talking to 
and what she was talking about with her interlocutor(s). Characteristics of 
the interlocutor examined by Rickford and McNair-Knox (1994) included 
ethnicity, gender, and relation to the participant (i.e., whether family, 
friend, or stranger). With regard to topic, the researchers observed differences in the use of zero copula (e.g., ‘they stupid’) and invariant be (e.g., ‘She 
be happy’) when talking about political topics (lesser use of these features) 
versus when discussing others’ personal relationships (greater use of these 
features). Another study examining factors related to the speech context was 
conducted by Medina-Rivera (1999) on the realization of the Spanish tap
/ / and trill /r/ in word final position by native residents of Caguas, Puerto 
Rico. Medina-Rivera reported a tendency for use of nonstandard variants 
in the group conversation settings as compared to an oral presentation. He 
also observed an effect for discourse type, where nonstandard variants were 
favored in dialogues and narratives. The application of these factors to the 
second language setting has generally been subsumed under the umbrella 
term “task-based variation”. However, some of the effects found are closely 
related to the characteristics of the interlocutor. For example, the ethnicity of the interviewer (Beebe & Zuengler, 1983) and the degree of cultural 
empathy shown by the interviewer (Berkowitz, 1989) both correspond to 
variation in use. Likewise, there is a sub-field of research that has explored 
how the characteristics of the elicitation tasks themselves are related to variable language production or form selection. For example, Medina-Rivera 
(2004) extended his research on type and topic of discourse to second learners of Spanish, analyzing interview data from four near-native speakers. His 
analysis of the copula contrast, the preterit/imperfect contrast, and mood 
choice showed that in conversations where the topic was family or religion, 
as well as for narrative and argumentative discourses, accuracy across structures fell. Although Medina-Rivera’s previous research on native speakers 
had shown that narratives are associated with nonstandard forms whereas 
argumentation produces the opposite effect (Medina-Rivera, 1999), MedinaRivera hypothesized that the pressures that make native speakers produce 
more standard language may impact nonnative speakers differently. The differences found in learner language across tasks have then been explained as
 a result of differing types of discourse (Cadierno, 2000), differing topics of 
speech (García-Amaya, 2008, 2012; Liskin-Gasparro, 2000; Medina-Rivera, 2004; 
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
Selinker & Douglas, 1985) or the degree to which discourse is controlled or 
planned ahead of time (e.g., Ellis, 1999; Ellis & Yuan, 2004). Thus, although 
most second language studies generally begin with “task” as the primary 
independent variable, the explanations for the differences found across 
tasks are often couched in terms of the characteristics of the setting or 
the interlocutor. These extralinguistic predictive factors examined in variationist research are summarized in Table 6.3.
As we explore research on second language variation, the factors related to 
the speaker, the interlocutor, and the speech context are likely to be relevant 
even if their application to the second language context requires modifications in order to be situationally appropriate. Furthermore, these factors are 
likely best examined using the modeling techniques described earlier in this 
chapter, rather than in isolation. One final connection the reader might note 
is that researchers who examine this interaction among native speakers often 
do so through investigations of style-shifting or stylistic variation (e.g., Bell, 
1984; Giles, Coupland, & Coupland, 1991; Tarone, 1978, 1979). What is more, 
this research may be couched in theories such as Accommodation Theory 
(see Chapter Four), even though the analysis seeks to analyze variation in 
the manner described in the present chapter. Thus, we continue to find an 
important overlap among approaches and also a reminder that the goals and 
methods of analysis of one approach are often well aligned with those of 
another.
TABLE 6.3
Predictive factors examined in variationist sociolinguistic studies
Related to the speaker Related to the 
interlocutor
Related to the speech 
context
Age
Gender
Ethnicity
Relationship to 
interlocutor (e.g., family, 
friend, stranger, etc.)
Education
Occupation
Income level
Social class
Geographic location
Country of origin
Age
Gender
Ethnicity
Relationship to speaker 
(e.g., family, friend, 
stranger, etc.)
Topic
Task
Discourse type
152 SECTION II: APPROACHES
MODELS OF SECOND LANGUAGE VARIATION
Now that we have explored the methods of data elicitation and techniques 
for modeling linguistic variation developed in variationist sociolinguistics, 
we turn our attention to the manner in which second language variation has 
been conceptualized. Models of second language variation generally reflect the 
influence of two approaches in variationist sociolinguistics. The first is the 
early Labovian paradigm and the second is the dynamic paradigm (Preston, 
1996). From the early Labovian paradigm emerged an approach called the 
continuous competence model (or the Chameleon Model) (Tarone, 1982, 
1988, 1989),4
 which examined the linguistic forms produced by learners in 
relation to the concept of stylistic variation. Like native speakers, learners’ 
speech was believed to vary as a function of attention. As learners’ attention 
to speech increased, so too did the production of more “prestigious” or more 
target-like forms. In contrast, as attention to speech decreased, so too did the 
rates of production of “prestigious” or target-like linguistic forms. This is consistent with early work by Labov (1972b) (see Chapter Two). What emerged 
then from early second language variation research under this approach were 
studies that examined variation across elicitation tasks. For example, Dickerson and Dickerson (1977) found systematic differences in the production of 
English (r) and (z) by Japanese speakers in data elicited through free speech, 
dialogue reading, and word list reading. Similar effects have since been found 
for numerous variants, among speakers from many language backgrounds 
(Adamson & Kovac, 1981; Adamson & Regan, 1991; Bayley & Preston, 1996; 
Beebe, 1980; Geeslin & Gudmestad, 2008a; Salaberry & López-Ortega, 1998; 
Weinberger, 1987; Zampini, 1994).
While the influence of style-based variation on first and second language 
speech remains of interest, we have already seen that the differences across 
tasks are no longer viewed as a function of differing attention paid to form. 
This change reflects developments in sociolinguistic theory, such as the recognition that a host of situational factors come to bear on the language we 
produce (e.g., Bell, 1984). In the second language context, as with the first 
language context, these factors include those mentioned above, related to the 
characteristics of the speaker, the interlocutor, and the topic and type of discourse produced. However, unlike the first language context, where research 
focuses on variable forms (perhaps with differing degrees of associated prestige), in the second language context, some research also focuses on nonnative 
errors and the degree to which they increase in frequency from one task to 
another. This has led to an additional stream of research examining the type 
of linguistic context produced across tasks. For example, Tarone and Parrish 
(1988) conducted a reanalysis of data collected from 20 learners of English, 
10 of whom had Arabic as a first language and 10 of whom had Japanese as 
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
a first language. They identified differences in the types of noun phrases that 
were elicited through different tasks and the degree to which this was related to 
variation in accuracy across tasks. Originally, Tarone (1985) found differences 
in the accuracy with which learners used noun phrases on a grammaticality 
judgment task, an oral interview, and an oral narration task. By categorizing 
the noun phrases into four different types, Tarone and Parrish showed that 
learners produced different quantities of each of the four types on the two 
oral tasks, even though some types of noun phrases were consistently more 
frequent than others regardless of the task. In addition, the accuracy rates for 
each type of noun phrase were different within a single task, and, in some 
cases, these rates also varied across all three tasks. This early study showed 
that one key difference between more and less guided tasks was the actual 
language produced, and a failure to assess these differences prior to assessing 
overall accuracy changes across tasks ignored a key source of variation. These 
findings were later applied to variable structures in research by Geeslin (2006) 
and Geeslin and Gudmestad (2008a), who demonstrated that variable structure use also varies by the type of task. The study by Geeslin and Gudmestad 
(2008a), in particular, not only demonstrated that task impacts variable use 
of the copulas ser and estar and the subjunctive or indicative mood in native 
and second language Spanish, but also that the linguistic factors conditioning use of these variable structures differed by task type. In sum, we note that 
the importance of task-based variation has not diminished, but there are two 
primary changes in the way this variation is presently conceptualized. First, 
just as sociolinguists no longer claim that style-shifting is a simple function 
of varying degrees of attention to speech, second language researchers who 
encounter task-based differences have looked beyond attention to explore 
other characteristics of the task that together might explain the differences 
found. The second difference, given the findings of Tarone and Parrish (1988), 
Geeslin (2006), and Geeslin and Gudmestad (2008a), is that task-based differences are no longer believed to be limited to changes in the frequency of use 
of a given form. Instead, we see evidence that under different conditions, the 
frequency and/or constraints on use may differ for the same learner. What has 
not changed, however, is the interest in task-based variation and the importance of employing multiple elicitation tasks in second language research (see 
also Chapter Seven).
The second theoretical approach that has influenced second language variation research is Wave Theory. In this theory, variation is seen as a linguistic 
innovation initiated within a particular group of speakers that then spreads 
outward to other groups of speakers over time. The spread from one group 
to another typically occurs along some aspect of the social dimension (e.g., 
age or gender), although it may also occur as a result of geographic proximity. 
Applying the basic mechanisms of Wave Theory to second language variation, 
154 SECTION II: APPROACHES
researchers like Gatbonton (1978) and Huebner (1983) have modeled variation in learner interlanguage as the increase or spread of target-like use of linguistic forms over time. Gatbonton’s (1978) study examined the use of three 
phonological variables—/ð/, /θ/, and /h/—in the speech of 27 male French 
Canadians’ use of English to propose a model of how second language learners came to gradually replace incorrect variants of these variables with correct 
ones. She showed that learners’ use of the variants largely supported the implicational model of gradual diffusion proposed. For example, use of nonnative 
variants of /ð/ decreased first in the “heaviest” phonetic environment (i.e., after 
a vowel) and lastly in the “lightest” phonetic environment (i.e., after a voiceless stop). Similarly, Huebner’s (1983) longitudinal study on the acquisition 
of English is(a) (e.g., But Sunday, Saturday and Sunday, isa stop ‘But as for 
Sunday, Saturday and Sunday, stop working’, p. 71) by an adult Hmong-Lao 
bilingual learner revealed how use of this morphosyntactic variable became 
increasingly target-like, and also how it spread to other functions observed in 
the target language over time (e.g., from a topic-comment marker, as observed 
in the previous example, to a copula, as in Pao Xiong isa fifteen dollars, p. 116). 
In these earlier studies, the mechanisms of language change (conceptualized 
as waves through various socially defined groups) were adapted to the second 
language context. What was not imported, however, was the social dimension 
of the wave model. Thus, we can see that more recent research, such as Regan, 
Howard, and Lemée (2009), which explores the role of learner gender on linguistic variation, could make use of this sort of modeling, while at the same 
time representing an important advance over these studies by also accounting 
for the social nature of linguistic variation.
Thus far, we have presented two approaches to the study of second language variation influenced by variationist sociolinguistics and models of 
language  variation and change. In the first, researchers conceptualized second language variation as the alternation between use of target-like and nontarget-like forms shifting along a continuum of formality. Researchers using 
this first approach pinpoint the external or extralinguistic factors influencing 
use of target-like and non-target-like forms (e.g., task type), as well as the relative degree of influence of those factors. In the second, researchers examine how 
learners’ use of target-like variants spread from one (linguistic) context of use 
to another, as well as how learners’ functional use of linguistic forms increased 
over time. Both models represent important early attempts to address linguistic 
variation in the second language context. Nevertheless, these approaches do not 
address the psycholinguistic underpinnings of variability in second language 
speech. That is, they do not account for the choice of one variant over another 
and do not explain the influence of internal and external factors on this choice.
Dennis Preston’s psycholinguistic model of interlanguage variation (2000; 
see also Preston, 1996, 2002) addresses the psycholinguistic nature of linguistic 
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
variation. In this model, variation in second language is conceptualized in 
probabilistic terms. Recall that a probabilistic model of variation attempts to 
uncover the circumstances under which a language user is likely to select a particular form. This same idea is reflected in Preston’s model, where the “circumstances” include those linguistic and social factors (chosen by the researcher) 
that are believed to condition variation in selection among variants of a particular linguistic structure. In addition, the linguistic and social factors under 
examination often do not carry the same degree of influence on a learner’s 
selection of a particular variant of a linguistic structure. Thus, use of a particular variant is “unfairly” biased by these influences, and Preston describes this to 
be like flipping a weighted coin:
Imagine that, for a two-way variable, one is equipped with a coin which 
is flipped before the product appears. . . . When flipped, it is as likely to 
turn up heads as tails. . . . unfair coins can be (and have been) made. If I 
add weight to the tails side of a coin and flip it, it is more likely to come 
up heads; the more weight I add, the greater the probability it will come 
up heads. (Preston, 1996, p. 33–34, 37)
We can see from Preston’s description that the choice of one form over another 
is likened to tossing a weighted coin. In this analogy, the likelihood or probability that the coin will land on one side versus another depends on how 
“weighted” each side is. In other words, the likelihood of selecting one form 
over another depends on the extent to which internal or external factors exert 
influence on selection of a particular variant. This coin-tossing metaphor 
model of selection has been applied with success to second language variation. 
We will also see that it accounts for the findings of several empirical studies on 
variation in second languages and is compatible with the concepts advanced 
in several of the sociolinguistic models reviewed in Chapters Four and Five.
Expanding on the coin-tossing metaphor, Preston’s (1996) model includes 
three levels. Each level refers to a type of factor believed to influence the selection of a particular linguistic variant in a probabilistic manner. These factors 
include social factors (Level I), linguistic factors (Level II), and time (Level III). 
In what follows, we provide a brief overview of these levels, each exemplified 
by an empirical study that explores those factors.
Level I Factors
Level I factors include those related to the influence of social or, more generally, 
external factors on variation. The range of social or external factors previously examined is expansive, including characteristics of the learner (e.g., 
Beebe, 1981; Beebe & Zuengler, 1983; Gatbonton, Trofimovich, & Magid, 2005; 
156 SECTION II: APPROACHES
Mougeon, Nadasdi, & Rehner, 2010; Pica, Holliday, Lewis, Berducci, & Newman, 1991), characteristics of the speech context (e.g., Selinker & Douglas, 
1985), and context of learning (e.g., Rehner, Mougeon, & Nadasdi, 2003; also see 
Chapter Eight, this volume), to name but a few. Thus, Level I studies are those 
that focus on the influence of these external factors on the use or selection of a 
given sociolinguistic variable.
A good example of a Level I study is the work by Gatbonton, Trofimovich, 
and Magid (2005), who investigated the relationship between learners’ ethnic 
group affiliation and ratings of pronunciation accuracy. Accurate pronunciation was operationalized as “nativelike, nonaccented second language speech 
or second language speech that contains no first language influences” (p. 489). 
Their study was conducted in two parts. In the first (based on an earlier study 
conducted by Gatbonton, 1975), they examined how pronunciation of English by Francophone learners was perceived by their peers in terms of degree 
of affiliation to the Francophone ethnic group. Twenty-four learners of English listened to and rated native French speakers reading the same passage in 
English and French. The learners were further subdivided into three groups 
of eight learners, each based on self-rated measures of ethnic group affiliation: nationalistic listeners, non-nationalistic listeners, and liberal listeners. 
Although the researchers found no effect for learners’ self-rated ethnic group 
affiliation on their ratings of their peers’ speech, they did find that the less 
accented the speech produced in the second language of their peers, the more 
learners rated them as “pro-Anglophone.”
In the second part of their study, the researchers sought to determine the 
extent to which the patterns in the first study held for learners belonging to 
a different ethnic group. Thus, they investigated perceptions of accented and 
non-accented second language speech by Chinese learners of English. The 
participants of their study were 84 native speakers of Mandarin attending 
one of two universities in Montreal. From these learners, 30 were recorded 
reading the same passage in English and Chinese. Six of these recordings 
were chosen to be rated for ethnic affiliation by 84 learners.5
 In this portion 
of the study, Gatbonton, Trofimovich, and Magid (2005) found that when 
Chinese learners heard the speakers in English only, they rated the more 
heavily accented stimuli as “pro-Chinese.” On the other hand, when they listened to the same speakers in Chinese, they rated the moderately accented 
stimuli as less “pro-Chinese.” This latter finding went against the expectations of the researchers based on the first set of findings, although they discovered that the moderately accented speaker spoke a nonstandard variety 
of Chinese. Nevertheless, Gatbonton, Trofimovich, and Magid’s study as a 
whole uncovered a relationship between ethnic group affiliation and second 
language accent. Ethnic group affiliation is one of many Level I factors that 
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
has been examined in second language variation (see summary Table 6.6 for 
other Level I factors).
Level II Factors
Level II factors include those internal or linguistic factors that influence variation in second languages. Like studies examining Level I factors, research on 
Level II factors investigates the influence of a wide range of factors on the use 
or selection of the variants of a given sociolinguistic variable. However, it is not 
possible to list all of the factors that have been examined in Level II studies precisely because these factors are dependent on the particular linguistic structure 
under study. Returning to the study described earlier in the present chapter by 
Regan, Howard, and Lemée (2009), the inclusion of the preceding and following segments in the analysis is logical only in relation to the phenomenon of 
/l/-deletion. Thus, we provide an example of a study of this type, although the 
factors themselves will not necessarily be generalizable to other studies.
Bayley’s (1996) study on phonological variation observed in the speech of 
Chinese learners of English incorporates both Level I and Level II factors. Bayley’s goal was to uncover patterns of variable deletion of word final –t/d in the 
speech of Chinese learners of English. The data were comprised of over 3,000 
word final consonant clusters (e.g., –lk and –rk, in words such as ‘walk’ and 
‘bark’, respectively) extracted from hour-long sociolinguistic interviews. Each 
token was coded for several linguistic factors related to the morphosyntactic 
and phonetic features of the context. These factors are summarized in Table 6.4.
TABLE 6.4
Summary of linguistic factors in Bayley (1996)
Linguistic factor Categories
Grammatical category of the verb monomorpheme, semiweak verb, 
regular participle, or regular preterit
Preceding segment liquid, obstruent, or nasal
Following segment vowel, pause, glide, obstruent, or 
liquid
Voicing (C_##) heterovoicing, homovoicing; with 
preceding segment
Syllable stress stressed, unstressed
Cluster length CC##, CCC##
158 SECTION II: APPROACHES
In order to illustrate how each token was coded for these independent linguistic variables, we take the example ‘barked’, produced as [bɑɹkt] in the 
hypothetical utterance ‘the dog barked all night’. First, one codes for the dependent variable, which is word final –t/d deletion. In this hypothetical production, /t/ is retained, so we will code “0” to indicate “not deleted”. Next, we code 
for each of the independent linguistic factors. This coding scheme is summarized in Table 6.5.
Bayley’s (1996) analysis was conducted using Varbrul 2 (a regression analysis that supplies factor weights). The analysis showed that of the six linguistic 
factors considered, four significantly predicted –t/d deletion. Specifically, final 
–t/d deletion occurred significantly more with regular preterit, a preceding 
obstruent or nasal, a following liquid or obstruent and glide, and when voicing 
was the same as the preceding segment. We will see in Chapter Seven that there 
are multiple examples of this type of study, demonstrating similar effects for 
morphosyntactic phenomena as well.
Level III Factors
The third level, or factor type, described by Preston (1996) is time. Studies 
that incorporate time in their models of analysis examine how the influence 
of social and linguistic factors characterizing learner interlanguage variation changes over time. In the first language context, one of the principal 
goals of sociolinguistic research has been to characterize language change. 
TABLE 6.5
Summary of coding for ‘barked’ in ‘the dog barked all night’
Linguistic factors Category (Coding)
Grammatical category of the verb regular preterit (–ed ending on regular 
verb ‘to bark’)
Preceding segment obstruent ([k])
Following segment vowel (/ɑ/ from ‘all’)
Voicing (C_##) homovoicing (goes from voiceless /k/ 
to voiceless /t/)
Syllable stress stressed
Cluster length CCC## (three consonants in the 
cluster, [ɹ], [k], and [t])
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
Nevertheless, there are fewer examples of second language studies that include 
time in the analysis conducted. One exception is that conducted by Tarone 
and Liu (1995), which examined the use of interrogative structures and other 
linguistic characteristics (e.g., complexity) of one learner’s utterances over a 
26-month period. The learner under study, Bob, was a five-year-old Chinese 
boy living in Australia during the period of the study. The utterances analyzed 
in Tarone and Liu’s study came from videotaped interactions of Bob speaking 
English in the following four contexts: with preschool peers and staff, with his 
primary school teachers, with primary school peers, and with the researcher 
(Liu, 1991). Tarone and Liu’s analysis revealed differences in Bob’s utterances 
by interactional context. For example, Bob produced more complex utterances when speaking with the researcher than when speaking with peers. 
The researchers also found that Bob initiated more conversations with peers 
and the researcher, while at the same time responding less to their initiations. 
Tarone and Liu further related the situationally based variation observed to 
his interlanguage development of interrogative structures and the rate of that 
development. The researchers demonstrated that new structures appeared 
first in interactional contexts where the researcher was involved, followed 
by contexts involving his peers, and lastly in contexts involving his teacher. 
These findings led the researchers to suggest that rates of development may be 
slower in contexts facilitating less interaction—in this case, those interactional 
contexts involving Bob’s teacher. Not only is this study a good example of an 
analysis that includes time as a factor, but it has also led to discussion about 
whether the path of acquisition of certain grammatical structures depends on 
the speech context.
Summary of Preston’s (1996) Model
It will be recalled that Preston (1996) conceptualizes variation in second languages like the toss of a weighted coin. The weight of the coin reflects the 
influence of several types of factors, each of which conspires to determine the 
probability that a particular variant will be selected in a particular moment. 
To review, the Level I factors deal with the social influences on language variation, the Level II factors are related to the linguistic constraints, and, finally, 
the Level III factors are related to change over time. As stated earlier in the 
review of Bayley’s (1996) study of –t/d deletion in second language English, 
the linguistic factors (Level II) are directly related to the structure under 
examination. In contrast, the Level I and Level III factors are more likely to 
generalize across learners and learning contexts. To complement the specific 
examples already provided here, we summarize a broader range of these two 
types of factors in Table 6.6.
160 SECTION II: APPROACHES
ADDITIONAL THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
IN SECOND LANGUAGE VARIATION
In the current chapter we have reviewed the tools for conducting variationist 
research and for modeling linguistic variation (both descriptive and predictive) for first and second language users. There are, however, a few additional 
issues that must be understood prior to continuing our review of research on 
the second language acquisition of variation in subsequent chapters. These 
issues involve the nature of variation in second languages and some important 
distinctions between types of variation. We noted in Chapter One that as early 
as Corder (1967) researchers working on second languages noticed that language use was systematic. In other words, second languages are rule-governed 
and independent of the first and the second language grammars, reflecting 
typological patterns, learning strategies, and the like. Our review of approaches 
to language variation in the preceding two chapters indicates that “rules” may 
be conceptualized in a variety of ways, but the basic assumption that second 
languages develop as a function of a range of influencing factors is compatible with a variety of approaches. In these early studies on second language 
variation, the variation under consideration was nearly exclusively between 
a target-like form and a non-target-like form. Ellis (1999) hypothesized that 
for a short period of time these two forms might even be in free variation, or 
TABLE 6.6
Summary of three levels of Preston’s (1996) model
Level I (social 
factors)
Level II (linguistic 
factors)
Level III (time)
Characteristics of 
learner (age, gender, 
ethnicity, etc.)
Characteristics of 
interlocutor (age, 
gender, ethnicity, 
etc.)
Context of learning
Context of 
interaction
Task
Topic
Specific to the 
linguistic variable 
under study
Change over time
Relative time of 
acquisition
Change from 
above
Change from 
below
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
variation that is not constrained by social or linguistic factors.6
 This free variation was said to serve the purpose of allowing the learner to introduce new, 
target-like forms into the grammar and to test hypotheses about the appropriate contexts of use of those forms. As the learner progressed, this free variation 
gives way to constrained variation, such as that influenced by task, and eventually to use of only the target form.
In addition to free variation, there are two other types of variation that 
have been examined in the second language context, and this additional distinction is especially important for the remaining chapters. The first type of 
variation has been referred to as developmental variation (e.g., Adamson & 
Regan, 1991) or as Type I variation (e.g., Rehner, 2002), and refers to variation 
between a native-like form and one or more nonnative forms. This type of 
variation is seen as learners go through the developmental process but disappears once a structure is acquired. A classic example of this type of variation 
is that between the forms ‘goed’ and ‘went’ in both child and second language 
English. In the case of all successful learners, the form ‘goed’ disappears over 
time and the variation dissipates. The second type of variation is known as 
horizontal (e.g., Adamson & Regan, 1991) or Type II (e.g., Rehner, 2002) variation, and this refers to variation between two or more target-like forms of the 
type found among adult native speakers of a language. To be sure, this does not 
mean that both forms share equal prestige or acceptability in formal contexts, 
but rather it means that both forms exist in variation among native speakers 
of the language. It is the case that social factors might be relevant to both types 
of variation, such that gender may play a role in the manner in which a form 
is acquired, but it is only Type II variation that is relevant for the acquisition 
of sociolinguistic competence. This is because the ability to vary one’s speech 
in native-like ways refers only to the acquisition of patterns of use that adult 
native speakers use to reflect individual and situational factors. Thus, while 
it is certainly the case that the Variationist Approach has been applied to the 
analysis of developmental (Type I) variation, as we transition to the critical 
review of empirical studies of the acquisition of sociolinguistic competence, 
we will necessarily focus on Type II variation.
EVALUATION OF VARIATIONIST APPROACHES
The Variationist Approach to language variation allows for an examination of 
linguistic and social influences on the forms produced or selected for both 
native and second language users. The wealth of research conducted under 
this framework has led to highly sophisticated methods of analysis as well as 
innovation and creativity in the manner in which less monitored, more casual 
speech has been elicited. Additionally, several variants have been studied so 
extensively that the Level II factors have been corroborated and operationalized 
162 SECTION II: APPROACHES
in increasingly effective ways, such that studies can now begin to assess the 
degree to which findings are generalizable across speech communities, discourse contexts, and, in some cases, even across languages (Torres-Cacoullos & 
Travis, in press).7
 One considerable advantage to this approach is the degree 
to which both linguistic and social factors figure prominently in the analysis. 
This stands in stark contrast with approaches that focus nearly exclusively on 
one or the other. A second advantage to this approach is the sophistication 
with which it describes variable forms in terms of the frequency and manner in which they are used. The accuracy with which actual datasets can be 
described has led to the ability to develop predictive models to explain patterns of use more globally.
One potential disadvantage to variationist approaches is the sometimes 
weak connection between models of linguistic data and the conceptualization of how language is acquired, stored, and used from a psycholinguistic 
or cognitive perspective. In response to this criticism, Preston has developed the coin-tossing metaphor to illustrate precisely how variation might 
operate from a psycholinguistic perspective. To be sure, there is much to be 
learned about how the mind operates, but it is inaccurate to say that variationist research has not sought to address this point. What is more, it has 
been noted by several prominent researchers (Bayley & Preston, 2008; Preston, 1993, 1996, 2000; Tarone, 2005, 2007) that several of the models reviewed 
in Chapter Five are, in fact, compatible with models of linguistic variation. 
For example, Connectionism or other usage-based models can easily incorporate “experience” in such a way that social information is connected (cognitively) to linguistic information and stored so that this social information can 
later come to bear on language use. In sum, it is accurate that there is limited 
research that models cognitive processes as they relate to linguistic variation, 
but, despite this, it is not the case that variationist approaches are incompatible with psycholinguistic ones.
Another challenge that variationist researchers working on the second language context, in particular, have faced is maintaining the ability to address 
long-standing issues such as language transfer or linguistic universals while 
adapting a new (i.e., the variationist) approach to second languages. One would 
hesitate to adopt an approach, for example, that did not allow us to examine 
the influence of the first language on the developing second language grammar, or one that could no longer show stages of acquisition. In response to 
such challenges, there is now research to demonstrate exactly how these issues 
can be conceptualized while at the same time recognizing linguistic variation. 
For example, Preston (1993) demonstrates how a variationist analysis can help 
us to glean new insights into language transfer and linguistic universals using 
these tools. One classic example of new insights to existing data sets can be 
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
seen in Berdan’s (1996) analysis of the data elicited from Alberto (Schumann, 
1978b), an adult learner of English who had been identified as having reached 
a state of “fossilization” in which he was not able to acquire certain formal 
properties of the grammar. Berdan’s reanalysis of these data showed that when 
time (Level III) was integrated into the analysis, there was clear evidence of 
both variability and development over time. Likewise, Geeslin (2011b) argues 
that even with a shift from an error analysis to a probabilistic model of variable 
forms, we can still show stages of acquisition and address issues such as native 
and near-native differences. We will explore this research in greater depth in 
the subsequent chapter, and we will see that there are now myriad examples of 
research demonstrating the effectiveness of this approach for addressing longstanding concerns in the field of second language acquisition.
READING BEYOND THE TEXT
a. Bayley, R. (1996). Competing constraints on variation in the speech of adult 
Chinese learners of English. In R. Bayley (Ed.), Second Language Acquisition and Linguistic Variation (pp. 97–120). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins.
b. Guy, G.R. (1980). Variation in the group and the individual: The case of 
final stop deletion. In W. Labov (Ed.), Locating Language in Time and Space
(pp. 1–36). New York: Academic Press.
c. Huebner, T. (1983). A longitudinal analysis of the acquisition of English. Ann 
Arbor: Karoma.
d. Medina-Rivera, A. (2004). Mood, tense, and copula verb selection in nearnative speakers of Spanish. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 14, 133–152.
e. Tarone, E., & Parrish, B. (1988). Task-related variation in interlanguage: 
The case of articles. Language Learning, 38, 21–43.
COMPREHENSION AND APPLICATION
A. Comprehension
1. Within what larger field did variationist approaches originate?
2. What does it mean to say that variationist sociolinguistics employs 
probabilistic models of variation?
3. What sort of speech is desired in a sociolinguistic interview?
4. What is the Observer’s Paradox?
5. What does a factor weight above 0.50 indicate? Below 0.50?
6. What are five factors related to the speaker?
7. What predictions does the Chameleon Model make?
164 SECTION II: APPROACHES
8. What does wave theory posit?
9. What does Preston’s (2000) coin-flipping metaphor explain?
10. What factor do Level III studies incorporate?
B. Application
1. According to researchers working on variable /t/ and /d/-deletion 
(e.g., Guy, 1980), how is it explained that ‘mist’ would be more likely to 
feature deletion than ‘missed’? Why would ‘I missed John’ suffer more 
deletion than ‘I missed it’? Why is there more deletion for ‘She shredded it’ than ‘She played it’?
2. What potential biases do you see in studies such as Gatbonton, Trofimovich, and Magid (2005), in which speakers rate other speakers? If 
you had to rate the speech of someone else, can you think of some factors that might intervene or cause you to rate one speaker more highly 
than another?
3. In this chapter, studies which integrate the role of change in learner 
language over time were considered. Locate a paper or homework 
assignment from a second-language course that you took (or are currently taking). Identify evidence in your writing (or speaking, if you 
have a recording) that your second language production has changed 
over time. What has changed?
4. Table 6.1 reports findings on /l/-deletion from Regan, Howard, and 
Lemée (2009). Interpret the factor weights in the table. What do these 
values mean in terms of deletion? What does the input value mean?
5. Imagine that you have to give a speech tomorrow. What factors would 
influence the language that you use in your speech? Think about factors related to you (i.e., the speaker), the interlocutor, and the speech 
context, in addition to other factors that might be relevant.
NOTES
1. This approach to variation is also known at the “first wave” of variationist research 
and is contrasted with second and third waves that demonstrate increasing focus on 
the social factors and the social meaning of variation (Eckert, 2012).
2. Although we also explored elicitation methods such as matched guise tests in Chapter 
Two, these are not described in the present chapter because they are not commonly 
applied to second language learners (see Ringer-Hilfinger, 2012 for exception).
3. Regression analyses carry a number of assumptions that, once violated, weaken 
the robustness of statistical findings. For further discussion, refer to Chapter 7 of 
Larson-Hall’s (2010) A Guide to Doing Statistics in Second Language Research Using 
SPSS.
4. A second approach also emerged based on Krashen’s (1977) Monitor Model. Like 
the Chameleon Model, the Monitor Model characterized variation in learner 
VARIATIONIST APPROACHESg
speech as the production of target-like or non-target-like forms. However, unlike 
the Chameleon Model, the Monitor Model originates variation in learner speech 
from learners’ access to one of two systems of linguistic knowledge, one explicit or 
metalinguistic (i.e., learned) and the other implicit (i.e., acquired).
5. We refer the reader to the original article for a more detailed description of speakers 
and listeners.
6. Preston (1996) has argued that free variation is simply variation for which the 
proper constraints have not been identified. Nevertheless, this does not constitute a 
serious conflict because Ellis (1999) is careful to note that this period of free variation is short-lived and characteristic of a particular stage of development.
7. A good example of this is that the large corpus of research on subject forms in Spanish has led to recent research on the influence of the same linguistic constraints on 
subject expression in English (e.g., Torres-Cacoullos & Travis, in press).
7
Empirical Research on the 
Acquisition of Sociolinguistic 
Competence
In Chapter Six we explored the application of variationist theory to second 
language acquisition, noting that this empirical approach to the study and 
analysis of patterns of language use is likely compatible with several of the 
social and cognitive models reviewed in Chapters Four and Five. In the present chapter we turn our attention to empirical investigations of the development of sociolinguistic competence in second languages conducted under 
the Variationist framework. This field is still relatively young, but research 
on this topic has witnessed exciting growth in recent decades, and even in 
the past few years. We begin our discussion with an overview of important 
developments in inquiry into second language variation and continue with 
examples of recent studies of the acquisition of sociolinguistic competence. 
Because sociolinguistic competence often entails the use of linguistic structures that are in variation, rather than absolute categorical grammatical 
rules, the Variationist Approach provides a mechanism for addressing longstanding issues in the field of second language acquisition without recurrence to an error analysis. In other words, this body of empirical research 
allows us to continue our discussion of issues like the influence of the first 
language on the acquisition of the second, the interfaces between different 
areas of the grammar, and the degree to which native-like patterns of language use can be achieved by very advanced second language users through 
an assessment of the frequency of use and constraints on the use of a given 
form, rather than an evaluation of accuracy. Thus, the purpose of the present chapter is to demonstrate how the Variationist Approach has been used 
to address important concerns in the field of second language acquisition, 
rather than to provide a complete review of all existing work in this field (for 
comprehensive reviews, see Bayley & Tarone, 2013; Geeslin, 2011a, 2011b; 
and Gudmestad, 2013b).
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
EARLY DEVELOPMENTS IN SECOND LANGUAGE VARIATION
In Chapter Six we explored the manner in which early work investigating variability in learner language was heavily influenced by theory and also by research 
carried out at the same time within two broader paradigms: the early Labovian 
paradigm and the dynamic paradigm. The question we did not address was why 
these particular approaches were influential in the study of second language 
variation, and perhaps more importantly, why research on second language 
variation surfaced in the first place. Thus, we begin our account of developments in this sub-field of second language acquisition research by addressing the latter question first. That is, what motivated the emergence of research 
on variation in second languages? In Corder’s revolutionary work (1967; see 
Chapter One for details), he noted that interlanguages were systematic and 
that errors were clues to the rule-based system underlying second language 
use. From this insight, several researchers moved the field forward by demonstrating that interlanguages behave like all natural languages. This meant, for 
example, that interlanguages are also inherently variable (cf. Dickerson, 1974; 
Huebner, 1979). These two ideas together, that interlanguage is both systematic 
and variable, led second language researchers to seek ways in which to describe 
and explain this variability. Because a central goal of sociolinguistics is to demonstrate how variation in the use of linguistic forms is systematic, the field of 
sociolinguistics provides models that can be adopted in the second language 
context. These models of variation appealed to researchers aiming to uncover 
the systematic nature of second language variation. Thus, second language 
researchers subsequently adopted and adapted principles, practices, and tools 
of these models to examine and explain variability in interlanguage. It is within 
this context that research examining second language variation first emerged 
and laid the foundation for investigation that continues to the present day.
We will also recall that in Chapter Six we addressed an important distinction between variation that was related to language acquisition (Type I) and 
variation that involved two or more native-like forms (Type II). This second 
type of variation, also found in the speech of native speakers of a language, is 
related to sociolinguistic competence. The earliest studies examining Type II 
variation focused nearly exclusively on second language learners of French or 
English. One of the best known studies, which has served as a model for subsequent research, is the work conducted by Adamson and Regan (1991), who 
investigated the acquisition of variable –ing (e.g., ‘eating’, ‘walking’) by Vietnamese and Cambodian immigrants living in Philadelphia and Washington, 
DC. The variation between forms of [–ing], realized as either [iŋ] or [ɪn] in 
a variety of linguistic contexts, including gerunds of progressive tenses (e.g., ‘I 
am eating’, ‘she was eating’, etc.) and noun phrases (e.g., ‘I like swimming’), is 
168 SECTION II: APPROACHES
a well-studied sociolinguistic phenomenon. This variable structure has been 
examined in both American English (e.g., Fischer, 1958; Labov, 1966) and 
British English dialects (e.g., Houston, 1986; Trudgill, 1974), and shown to be 
influenced by both linguistic and extralinguistic factors, such as the phonological environment in which it occurs, as well as a speaker’s gender and social 
class. Adamson and Regan studied how Vietnamese and Cambodian speakers 
(10 Vietnamese and four Cambodian) varied their use of the two –ing variants. Specifically, they sought to identify the factors that conditioned the use 
of the variant [ɪn] and to understand how patterns of variation were similar 
to or different from a native speaker comparison group of 31 Philadelphia 
residents. Thus, they first showed how the native speakers in their comparison 
group varied in their production of –ing as [ɪn], noting that their use of the 
reduced variant was conditioned by grammatical category of the word, the following phonological environment, the speaker’s sex, and speaking style. Their 
Varbrul 2 analysis (see Chapter Six for overview) showed that [ɪn] was favored 
in verbs marked for progressive aspect and when the following segment was 
apical or labial. Regarding the extralinguistic factors, [ɪn] was favored by male 
speakers and in unmonitored speech styles. In comparison, the Vietnamese 
and Cambodian speaking learners showed that use of [ɪn] was also favored by 
a following labial or apical segment. However, unlike the native speaker group, 
the nonnatives demonstrated a greater likelihood of [ɪn] when the following 
segment was a velar or palatal segment or a vowel. The results for grammatical 
category were mediated by proficiency, such that lower level speakers did not 
produce any tokens of [ɪn], while more proficient speakers produced several 
instances of [ɪn] across the different grammatical categories encountered in 
the dataset (e.g., noun, gerund, adjective, future, etc.). Lastly, regarding speaker 
sex and speech style, the researchers found that males produced more [ɪn] 
variants than females, showing that the nonnatives appeared to be conforming to native norms for social conditioning of variation. However, while both 
male and female native speakers use more [ɪn] in unmonitored speech, only 
the females of the nonnative group used more [ɪn] in unmonitored speech. In 
contrast, the males demonstrated a greater frequency of [ɪn] use in the monitored style than the unmonitored style. The results of this analysis of sociolinguistic variation in native and learner speech in Philadelphia are summarized 
in Table 7.1.
There are several reasons that the study by Adamson and Regan (1991) has 
served as a model for research on second language variation. First, their use 
of a native speaker comparison group in the same geographic region provides 
a concrete and appropriate basis for assessing the degree to which their learner 
group has acquired the sociolinguistic norms of that community. Likewise, 
their use of variationist methods of analysis allows them to provide a detailed 
account of the linguistic and social influences on the patterns of use for each 
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
participant group. Finally, their account shows that not only do social factors, 
such as gender, play a role in the production of second language speech, but 
also that learners are sensitive to the patterns of variation inherent in native 
speech and, over time, may acquire the ability to vary their speech in nativelike ways.
Since the time of Adamson and Regan’s (1991) study, there has been steady 
expansion to additional grammatical structures in English as well as other second languages. For example, we saw in Chapter Six that Bayley (1996) analyzed 
Chinese-speaking learners of English and their acquisition of the variable use 
of –t/d deletion. Likewise, Adamson, Fonseca-Greber, Kataoka, Scardino, and 
Takano (1996) extended this approach to the variable use of tense-marking 
in the narratives of Spanish-speaking learners of English. A characteristic of 
tense-marking in English narratives is that in foreground clauses (i.e., those 
that advance the action of the narrative), verbs may be inflected for either the 
TABLE 7.1
Summary of results from Adamson & Regan (1991)
Factor Native speakers: Factors 
that favor [ɪn]
Second language 
speakers: Factors that 
favor [ɪn]
Part of speech Progressive aspect (0.63) Lower proficiency 
learners do not produce 
this variant
Higher proficiency 
shows production across 
grammatical categories
Phonetic environment Following segment is 
apical (0.61) or 
labial (0.56)
Following segment is 
apical (0.52) or 
labial (0.59)
Following segment 
is velar or palatal 
segment (0.82)
Following segment is a 
vowel (0.57)
Gender Males (0.77) Males produce more
Speech style Unmonitored (0.72) Only females show higher 
rates in unmonitored
Males show higher rates 
in monitored
170 SECTION II: APPROACHES
past tense or the present tense (Kumpf, 1984). This use of the present tense 
in foreground clauses of narratives is known as the historical present. Based 
on the findings of previous studies on Vietnamese speakers of English (e.g., 
Wolfram, 1985; Wolfram, Christian, & Hatfield, 1986), Adamson and his colleagues wanted to know which phonological, lexical, and discourse-level constraints influenced past-tense marking by their Spanish-speaking participants, 
as well as the impact of length of residence on the patterns of past-tense marking observed. The participants of their study were seven middle school students that had been living in the US for 2 to 14 years (only 2 were US-born). 
The data for their study were elicited using a sociolinguistic interview, where 
verbs referring to past events in narratives were extracted and coded for the 
following factors: verbs and verb classes (e.g., ‘be’, ‘go’, –t/d, preceding segment,
following segment, etc.) and clause type (background or foreground). The 
researchers also coded for gender and proficiency of the speaker, which was 
defined as a direct function of length of residence (e.g., less than four years = 
“low proficiency”). The results show higher rates of past-tense marking among 
the high proficiency group. The analysis of constraints on use revealed that the 
learners demonstrated more variable marking between present tense and past 
tense for verbs in foreground clauses, similar to the native-like patterns. The 
researchers also reported greater rates of –t/d deletion in verbs marked for past 
tense before a consonant or pause, a finding that had been reported in some 
varieties of American English but not others.1
 Thus, the research conducted 
by Adamson and his colleagues added to the growing evidence that second 
language speakers can acquire sociolinguistic norms of use.
The research on sociolinguistic competence in second language English 
demonstrates a trajectory of expansion from phonological variable structures to those at the level of discourse. As stated previously, there has also 
been expansion from second language English to other second languages. For 
example, there is extensive research on the acquisition of sociolinguistic variation by learners of French in the study abroad setting (e.g., Regan, 1995, 1996), 
and this work will be reviewed in detail in Chapter Eight, which focuses on the 
role of study abroad in the acquisition of sociolinguistic competence. Likewise, there is a growing body of research on second language Spanish (for a 
review, see Gudmestad, 2013b) and Chinese (e.g., Li, 2010), and examples of 
this research will be reviewed below. In the field today we see contemporary 
examples of the issues explored in these early studies, such as Hansen Edwards’ 
(2011) study on –t/d deletion by Chinese learners of English, as well as a push to 
address new developments and long-standing issues in the field of second language acquisition in general, within the Variationist Approach. The remainder 
of the present chapter is devoted to exploring how some of these issues have 
been connected to the goal of describing and understanding the second language acquisition of sociolinguistic competence.
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
SHOWING DEVELOPMENT IN SECOND LANGUAGE 
SOCIOLINGUISTIC COMPETENCE
Just as the interest in systematic variation in interlanguage drove second language researchers to adopt principles of sociolinguistics in order to account for 
the constraints on the variability inherent in both first and second languages, 
there has been a long-standing push to understand not simply the product of 
second language acquisition, but also the process. In keeping with this effort, 
early studies of the orders of acquisition of multiple morphemes (e.g., Krashen, 
Dulay, & Burt, 1982) gave way to accounts of the stages of acquisition of single 
grammatical structures (e.g., Wode’s 1977 study on negation in English or VanPatten’s 1987 study of the copula contrast in Spanish). It was argued that the 
nature of learning a second language is best understood by tracing development over time and through an understanding of how patterns of use come to 
evolve from one moment to another. In order to do this, researchers must focus 
on how a structure is used or a function is accomplished, rather than simply 
whether a learner is using a structure correctly. The degree to which these stages 
of acquisition appeared to hold across different groups of learners, even those 
with differing experiences (e.g., naturalistic vs. classroom) and different characteristics (e.g., different first languages) led to some debate about whether these 
stages of acquisition were, indeed, universal. While some argued that it was only 
the rate that differed from one group to another, others claimed that the route 
of acquisition also differed (see discussion in Gass, Behney, & Plonsky, 2013). 
In fact, we saw in Chapter Six that Tarone and Liu (1995) have argued that the 
route of acquisition may be dependent on the context such that these routes 
may differ from one environment to another, even for the same learner. What 
is apparent is that there is a great deal more to be learned about the nature of 
second language acquisition and the questions raised may only be answered if 
we are able to examine how interlanguages change over time. Thus, it has been 
important for researchers working within the Variationist framework to incorporate new methods of analysis while at the same time maintaining the ability 
to study acquisition as a process. In this section we review a handful of examples 
of variationist research that has employed a cross-sectional design and a variationist analysis to chart the path of acquisition. In sum, these studies examine 
the process of acquiring sociolinguistic competence in a second language.
One of the most comprehensive examples of research on the development of sociolinguistic competence is Sax’s (2003) investigation of American 
English-speaking learners of French as a second language. She examined the 
development of stylistic variation through an analysis of how learners at three 
proficiency levels used three variable structures in role-plays simulating a formal 
and an informal speech context. The first of the three variable structures was ne
deletion, or the deletion of the preverbal particle ne as shown in Example 7.1.
172 SECTION II: APPROACHES
Rates of deletion of ne range from 40% in the formal speech of Parisian 
speakers to 61% in informal speech (Ashby, 1976). Ne deletion in Quebec and 
Ontario is nearly categorical, occurring 98% of the time in an analysis of Montreal French (Sankoff & Vincent, 1977) and 99% of the time in Poplack’s (1989) 
analysis of speakers from Ottawa. Sociolinguists have shown that ne deletion 
correlates with verb type, clause type, presence or absence of another clitic 
pronoun (e.g., Armstrong, 2002; Coveney, 1996, 1998; Sandy, 1997; Tennant, 
1995), and occurrence in lexicalized phrases (Ashby, 1976, 1981). Additionally, ne deletion patterns occur according to age (greater deletion by younger 
speakers), gender (greater deletion by women), social class, and style (greater 
deletion occurring in informal speech) (Ashby, 1981). Previous research conducted by Dewaele and Regan (2002) on 27 Dutch learners of French demonstrated that second language learners showed native-like sensitivity to style 
in their deletion of ne in oral interviews, particularly at more advanced levels 
of proficiency. A noteworthy aspect of Dewaele and Regan’s findings for Sax 
(2003), therefore, is the finding that native-like or Type II variation with ne
deletion is more likely to be observed among advanced learners.
The second variable structure examined by Sax (2003) is the alternation 
between nous and on in second language French, illustrated in Example 7.2. 
Nous corresponds to ‘we’ in English, and on roughly corresponds to ‘one’, but it 
may be used in place of nous (as well as other subject pronouns like tu ‘you’).
EXAMPLE 7.1. Ne deletion
a. Je ne mange pas de fruits de mer. ‘I don’t eat seafood’
b. Je Ø mange pas de fruits de mer. ‘I don’t eat seafood’
EXAMPLE 7.2. On and nous alternation
a. Nous allons à la piscine. ‘We go to the pool’
b. On va à la piscine. ‘One/we/you go to the pool’
Across varieties of French, nous is less frequent than on (cf. Laberge [1977] 
for Montreal French; Boutet [1986] and Coveney [2000] for metropolitan 
French). Previous research investigating the alternation of nous and on has 
shown that nous is more likely to be used when the referent is specific and 
restrictive (Boutet, 1986), and it is more frequent among older speakers, 
women, and the middle class (Laberge, 1977). This sociolinguistic variable is 
particularly sensitive to speech style such that nous is also more frequent in 
formal speech (e.g., Coveney [2000] for metropolitan French; Deshaies [1986] 
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
for Canadian French). With regard to the linguistic behavior previously demonstrated by second language learners, Dewaele (2002) reported that in oral 
and written productions elicited from 32 Dutch-speaking learners of French, 
use of on was influenced by more linguistic or internal variables such as morpholexical accuracy rates, presence of ne deletion, and use of colloquial lexical 
items. Nevertheless, interaction in the second language also played a role in the 
native-like use of on.
The third and final variable structure examined in Sax (2003) is /l/-deletion, 
illustrated in Example 7.3.
EXAMPLE 7.3. /l/-deletion in French
a. il va ‘he goes’ [il.va] → [i.va]
b. il y a ‘there is/are’ [i.li.ja] → [ija] or [ja]
Sociolinguistic research has shown that rates of deletion for il are very high: 
88% in Ashby (1984) and 94% in Laks (1980). Linguistic factors influencing 
/l/-deletion in French include occurrence in an impersonal phrase (e.g., il faut
‘one needs’) or with certain lexical items (e.g., more deletion in masculine 
personal pronouns il and ils than feminine elle and elles). Armstrong (1996) 
has also reported that rates of deletion are higher for females than for males, 
making this a good variable structure to examine for effects of style.
The participants in Sax (2003) were 30 female learners of French enrolled in 
second year, fourth year, or graduate level French courses at a large, Midwestern university. Sax also included four native French-speaking graduate teaching assistants in the department where the learners were enrolled in classes, as 
well as one postdoctoral fellow from outside of the department but researching at the same institution in order to have a native baseline for comparison. 
All participants completed two guided role-plays: one in which the participants were interviewed for a job and another in which they meet their new 
French roommate for the first time. The job interview role-play was designed 
to simulate a formal speech setting while the roommate meeting scenario was 
designed to simulate an informal speech situation. Following sociolinguistic 
research, Sax coded for a range of linguistic and extralinguistic factors, which 
are exemplified in Table 7.2, and analyzed her data using Varbrul.
Sax (2003) found that the learners used the same range of variants as the 
native speakers for each of the variables studied, but their distribution of use differed. Variable ne deletion demonstrated the greatest range of stylistic variation, 
followed by /l/-deletion and then the nous/on alternation. Sax also found that 
experience abroad and high proficiency were good predictors of variation for 
these learners. Sax observed that use of informal variants increased as previous 
174 SECTION II: APPROACHES
experience abroad increased. Second, Sax found that the range of stylistic 
variation increased as previous experience abroad increased, with the exception of use of on. Lastly, the patterns of use of these variants moved toward the 
native norm, with the exception of on for the intermediate level group. Based 
on these patterns, Sax proposed that on was the first stylistic marker to emerge, 
followed by /l/-deletion then ne deletion. Most importantly, she showed that 
learners can indeed acquire sociolinguistic aspects of second language use, and 
that the developmental trajectory for sociolinguistic variants is gradual.
The work by Sax (2003) is not the only example of developmental research 
on sociolinguistic competence in French, but because the other studies largely 
TABLE 7.2
Summary of coding scheme for Sax (2003)
Variable Factors examined
ne deletion Following phonological segment (vowel, consonant, yod)
Syntactic structure of the verb (e.g., main, auxiliary, 
copula, modal)
Lexicalization (i.e.. whether or not it occurred in a formula 
such as je sais pas ‘I dont know’)
Post-verbal negator (pas or another, such as rien ‘nothing’ 
or plus ‘more’)
Subject type (pronoun, full noun phrase)
Presence of object pronoun
nous/on
alternation
Specificity and restrictedness (i.e., all members of group 
are nameable by speaker)
/l/-deletion Following phonological segment (vowel, consonant, yod)
Clitic type (personal, impersonal)
Clitic number (singular, plural)
Subject type (personal, impersonal)
Il y a ‘there is/are’ versus other expressions
All tokens Extralinguistic
Current class level
Time abroad in a French-speaking country
Number of years of pre-university French
Number of years of college French and college French courses
Contact with French outside of the classroom
French speaking outside of the classroom
Attitude
Formality of context
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
take place in the study abroad context, we will discuss them in greater depth 
in Chapter Eight. Thus, we now turn to the development of sociolinguistic 
competence in second language Spanish. The earliest example of this type of 
research on Spanish is Geeslin (2000), who investigated the development of 
Spanish copula use in attributive contexts (i.e., with adjectives) by Englishspeaking learners at four different levels of proficiency in Spanish. In Spanish, 
many adjectives allow either ser or estar in attributive contexts. This contrast is 
illustrated in Example 7.4.
EXAMPLE 7.4. Copula contrast in Spanish
a. Ella es bonita. ‘She is (ser) pretty’
Ella está bonita. ‘She looks (estar) pretty’
b. El perro es sucio. ‘The dog is (ser) dirty’
El perro está sucio. ‘The dog is (estar) dirty’
Unlike the research reviewed in French thus far, the use of this structure is 
constrained by syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic factors. In order to investigate how the use of the copula contrast developed over time, Geeslin (2000) 
elicited data from 77 high school learners of Spanish enrolled in four different 
levels of instruction. Each participant completed a semi-structured interview, 
a picture description task, and a contextualized grammaticality judgment 
questionnaire. The questionnaire contained 15 contextualized utterances for 
which learners were prompted to select the version they preferred from three 
options: an utterance with ser, one with estar, or a preference for both. Each 
token was coded for the semantic and pragmatic features listed in Table 7.3.
Geeslin (2000) found the rates of use of estar increased from one level to 
the next. This finding was especially important because it was consistent with 
the research on this structure conducted using an error analysis and, thus, 
demonstrated that the Variationist Approach to data analysis did not lose the 
important insights of earlier work. In addition, it was shown that some predictors changed from one level to the next, such that the predictive models 
were qualitatively different for each level. This afforded a mechanism through 
which development could be characterized. Specifically, the constraint susceptibility to change was significant at the lowest level, and the importance of this 
constraint weakened over time. In contrast, the frame of reference constraint 
was not included in the predictive models at lower levels but became a significant predictor of estar use for the higher two levels of proficiency. Taking these findings together, development of the copula contrast in Spanish 
176 SECTION II: APPROACHES
TABLE 7.3
Coding scheme for Geeslin (2000)
Contextual feature Distinction denoted by each classification
Adjective class What is the lexical class of the adjective (e.g., 
physical state)?
Modality Does copula choice change adjective meaning 
completely, slightly, or not at all?
Animacy Is the referent an animate being?
Susceptibility to Change Is the adjective susceptible to change?
Dependence on 
Experience
Does the description depend on prior experience 
with the reference?
Directionality Is the adjective unidirectional (e.g., age), 
bidirectional (e.g., emotional state), or nondirectional (e.g., race)?
Dynamicity Does the underlying verb phrase denote a 
constant input of energy (e.g., worried)?
Perfectivity Is it the viewpoint of the speaker that the event 
described is complete or ongoing?
Frame of Reference Is the referent compared to a class of items or to 
itself at another point in time?
Telicity Does the underlying verb phrase have a natural 
endpoint?
was characterized as a decreasing sensitivity to the feature Susceptibility to 
Change and increasing sensitivity to pragmatic features such as Frame of Reference. More recent work on this topic has benefited from advances in the 
operationalization of the linguistic constraints included in the analysis, as well 
as the inclusion of more advanced learners and native speaker participants 
(see Geeslin [2005] for a critical discussion). Additionally, controlled elicitation instruments, such as the written judgment questionnaire, have evolved to 
better control the relevant linguistic factors (e.g., Geeslin, 2003) and to refine 
our conceptualization of particular linguistic constraints (e.g., Woolsey, 2008). 
Likewise, research has been extended to learners with Portuguese (e.g., Geeslin & Guijarro-Fuentes, 2006) and Chinese (e.g., Cheng, Lu, & Giannakouros, 
2008) as a first language.
Research by Gudmestad (2006, 2012) extended variationist research in 
second language Spanish to the alternation between the subjunctive and the 
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
indicative. Hers is the first large-scale, cross-sectional analysis of the acquisition of variable mood use in Spanish. Subjunctive mood is marked grammatically primarily in dependent clauses, as exemplified in Example 7.5.
EXAMPLE 7.5. Mood contrast in Spanish
a. Dudo que venga Marcos a clase hoy. ‘I doubt Marcos is coming to class 
today’
b. Espero que nieve este diciembre. ‘I hope it snows this December’
EXAMPLE 7.6. Item from task two (Gudmestad, 2012)
Clara tends to have a hard time picking just one dish off of a menu. She 
asks Pedro for a recommendation since he eats at the restaurant often. He 
says:
“Te sugiero que _________________________________________________”
“I suggest that __________________________________________________”
The use of the subjunctive verb form (e.g., venga in 7.5a and nieve in 7.5b) is 
triggered by semantic features of the independent clause (cf. Butt & Benjamin, 
2004) to mark meanings such as volition (e.g., querer que ‘to want to’) and uncertainty (e.g., dudar que ‘to doubt that’). The indicative, on the other hand, is used 
to mark assertions (e.g., creer que ‘to believe that’) and habitual or definite actions. 
Use of the subjunctive is nearly categorical in some contexts (e.g., volition) and 
variable in others (e.g., in expressions of emotion) (Silva-Corvalán, 1994).
The participants of Gudmestad’s (2012) study were 130 English-speaking 
learners of Spanish enrolled in five levels of instructional levels and a native 
speaker baseline group in the same university community. All participants 
completed three tasks. The first task, a monologic role play, presented six scenarios and instructed participants to respond orally to the questions provided 
to an imaginary listener. The second task, a contextualized clause elicitation 
task, instructed participants to read aloud a set of interrelated passages and 
at different moments throughout the narrative to complete a sentence with 
a phrase of their choosing that fit the context of the story. The third task, a 
contextualized verb elicitation task, was similar in format to the second task 
but requested that participants produce a verb that fit the context of the story. 
Samples of these last two tasks are provided in Examples 7.6 and 7.7. From 
these three tasks, each context for verbal mood choice was analyzed as a single 
token. The dependent variable for the analysis was (non)use of a subjunctive 
form. Each token was also coded for four linguistic variables and two extralinguistic variables, each of which is summarized in Table 7.4.
178 SECTION II: APPROACHES
EXAMPLE 7.7. Item from task three (Gudmestad, 2012)
Ana knows Barcelona has a lot of tourist attractions and wonders if three days 
will really be enough for them to visit all of the sites on their list. She adds:
“Dudo que _______________ (hacer) todas las cosas en la lista.”
“I doubt that ______________ (to do) all the things on the list.”
TABLE 7.4
Summary of coding scheme for Gudmestad (2012, pp. 379–381)
Variables Levels and examples
Linguistic variables
Form regularity Regular (e.g., bailar ‘to dance’, bailo ‘I speak’, bailas ‘you 
speak’, baila ‘he/she speaks’, etc.)
Irregular (e.g., servir ‘to serve’, sirvo ‘I serve’, sirvió ‘he/she served’)
Form-specific irregular (e.g., venir ‘to come’, vengo ‘I come’)
Semantic 
category
Volition (i.e., desire, hope; e.g., querer que ‘to want to’)
Comment (i.e., emotion, evaluation; e.g., gustar que ‘to like 
that’)
Uncertainty (i.e., doubt; e.g., dudar que ‘to doubt that’)
Temporality (i.e., with adverbial conjunctions; e.g., cuando
‘when’, tan pronto como ‘as soon as’)
Assertion (i.e., certainty; e.g., saber que ‘to know that’)
Time reference Past-time
Present-time
Future-time
Hypotheticality Non-hypothetical (e.g., Los estudiantes asisten a clase ‘The 
students attend class’)
Non-past hypothetical (Si los estudiantes asisten a clase, sacan 
buenas notas ‘If students attend class they get good grades’)
Past hypothetical (Si los estudiantes asistieran a clase 
sacaran buenas notas ‘If the students had attended class 
they would have gotten good grades’)
Extralinguistic variables
Participant 
group
Learner group (Level 1–Level 5)
Native group
Task Monologic role-play
Contextualized clause elicitation task
Contextualized verb elicitation task
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
In her analysis of the frequency of use of subjunctive forms, Gudmestad 
(2012) found a nonlinear increase in the use of subjunctive forms as learners’ 
proficiency in Spanish increased (from 4.1% at Level 1 to 53.8% at Level 5, 
with a lower frequency of use at Level 4 than Level 3). The analysis of the constraints on use for each level showed development across proficiency levels. 
At Level 1, none of the linguistic factors were statistically significant predictors 
of use. At Level 2, semantic category was the only significant predictor of use, 
and this variable remained significant through Level 5. At Level 3, learners 
have added Time Reference and Hypotheticality, so that by Level 4 and 5 all 
of the factors examined in the statistical model are identified as constraints 
on the use of subjunctive forms. This finding mirrors the general patterns of 
use for native speakers. There were, however, subtle differences between the 
upper level learners and the native speakers. For instance, the variable Time 
Reference was a significant predictor of mood use for Levels 3 through 5, but 
only the Level 5 learners demonstrated native-like patterns of use across all 
three categories of this variable. These findings serve to demonstrate that frequency and constraints on use provide information about second language 
development. What is more, by examining the categories of each independent 
variable we further see that the patterns of distribution across the categories 
of that variable provide additional detail about the path of development. Gudmestad’s work provides additional evidence that second language learners can 
come to vary their speech in native-like ways; at the same time, it contributes 
the first large-scale, cross-sectional study of the subjunctive in second language 
Spanish. Although the subjunctive has been studied extensively (see Collentine 
[2013] for review), Gudmestad’s (2012) study was the first to approach this 
structure using a variationist analysis. Since this large-scale study, research on 
variable mood use has expanded to include an analysis of the second language 
development of tense-aspect distinctions within the subjunctive mood (Gudmestad, 2013a) and an exploration of how second language mood use relates 
to issues of vocabulary and frequency (Gudmestad, in press). The Variationist 
Approach has also been adopted to address interpretation of subjunctive forms 
(Kanwit & Geeslin, 2014).
Killam’s (2011) examination of differential object marking in Spanish 
by English-speaking learners represents another important extension of this 
body of research. Differential object marking, another variable linguistic phenomenon in Spanish, refers to the variable marking of direct objects with the 
accusative marker a. This is illustrated in Example 7.8, where 7.8c and 7.8d 
represent variable contexts for a.
The examples in 7.8 show that some direct objects are marked with the 
accusative a (e.g., los niños), some are not (e.g., los edificios), and others are 
variably marked (e.g., Buenos Aires). Direct object marking has been shown to 
be influenced by an array of linguistic factors, such as definiteness, animacy, 
180 SECTION II: APPROACHES
EXAMPLE 7.8. Object marking in Spanish
a. No veo a los niños. ‘I don’t see the children’
b. No veo los edificios. ‘I don’t see the buildings’
c. Visité Buenos Aires el verano pasado. ‘I visited Buenos Aires last 
summer’
d. Visité a Buenos Aires el verano pasado. ‘I visited Buenos Aires last 
summer’
and topicality (cf. Balasch, 2011), and it also demonstrates variation by dialectal region (cf. Schwenter, 2006; Tippets & Schwenter, 2007).
Killam’s (2011) participants were 102 English-speaking learners of Spanish and 22 native speakers of Spanish who resided in the same community as 
the learners. The learners were further divided into four groups based on the 
instructional level in which they were enrolled: Level 1 (N = 28), Level 2 (N = 
28), Level 3 (N = 22), and Level 4 (N = 24). In addition to a background questionnaire and proficiency test, all participants completed three tasks. The first, 
an oral picture description task, presented participants with a series of images 
depicting an event on a computer screen and asked them to describe what 
had happened using a guided prompt. The response prompt was structured 
in such a way as to elicit an utterance ending in an animate direct object, as 
demonstrated in Example 7.9.
The second task, a written contextualized task, presented participants with 
items contextualized in a story. Each item provided a pair of sentences and, 
upon arriving at each sentence pair, participants were instructed to rate their 
preference for one sentence over the other (or indicate equal preference), as 
demonstrated in Example 7.10.
The final task, a word order perception task, instructed participants to 
choose the picture (among four picture options) that matched the sentence 
they heard. The target sentences were manipulated to topicalize the direct 
object—that is, place it in sentence initial position, as demonstrated in Example 7.11. Killam (2011) used this task to determine whether perceived word 
order played a role in the acquisition of direct object marking.
EXAMPLE 7.9. Oral picture description task (Killam, 2011)
Guillermo besó __________. ‘Guillermo kissed __________.’
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
Killam coded data elicited from the first two tasks for three linguistic variables. The data elicited from the third task were coded for two different independent linguistic factors. These coding schemes are detailed in Table 7.5.
Killam’s (2011) analysis showed that on both the oral picture description 
task and the written contextualized task, overt object marking increased as 
learner level increased. In fact, on the written task Level 1 learners were as 
likely to prefer non-marking to marking of human direct objects with a. With 
regard to the linguistic factors constraining direct object marking, definiteness 
was a significant factor for each learner level with slight differences by task. 
For the oral task, Killam found that learners were more likely to mark objects 
that were “more definite” on the definiteness continuum (e.g., pronouns and 
proper names), and this likelihood increased as learner level increased. He 
encountered the same tendency on the written contextualized task, with the 
exception that the Level 2 model included number as a significant factor and 
the Level 4 model included kinesis as a significant factor. It was only on the 
EXAMPLE 7.10. Written contextualized task item (Killam, 2011)
Juan se quedaba inmóvil, acostado en la cama, mirando una mosca que 
bailaba entre las aspas del ventilador. ‘Juan remained motionless, lying on 
the bed, watching a fly that danced between the blades of the fan’
A. Su esposa y él esperaban una llamada de la policía.
‘His wife and he waited a call from the police’
B. Su esposa y él esperaban por una llamada de la policía.
‘His wife and he waited for a call from the police’
Only A 
acceptable
Both 
acceptable, 
but A 
preferable
Both are 
equally 
acceptable
Both 
acceptable, 
but B 
preferable
Only B 
acceptable
1 2 3 4g
EXAMPLE 7.11. Object topicalization in Spanish
Juan vio a la mujer. ‘Juan saw the woman’ (typical subject-verb-direct 
object)
A la mujer la vio Juan. ‘The woman: Juan saw her’ (topicalized direct 
object)
182 SECTION II: APPROACHES
TABLE 7.5
Summary of coding scheme in Killam (2011)
Variables Categories and examples
Oral picture description task and written contextualized task
Definiteness Pronoun (e.g., él, ella)
Proper name (e.g., Silvia, Raquel)
Definite common noun (e.g., has already been mentioned 
in discourse; preceded by definite article as in el libro
‘the book’, possessive adjective as in mi libro ‘my book’, or 
demonstrative adjective as in este libro ‘this book’)
Specific indefinite common noun (i.e., indicative verb in 
subordinate adjectival class; e.g., Juan vio (a) un hombre 
que llevaba una chaqueta negra ‘Juan saw a man that wore 
a black jacket’)
Nonspecific indefinite common noun (e.g., common 
noun not modified in any way, or preceded by indefinite 
article, as in un libro)
Kinesis High (i.e., direct object physically affected by sentential 
subject; e.g., matar ‘to kill’)
Low (i.e., direct object not physically affected by 
sentential subject; e.g., encontrar ‘to meet’)
Number Singular direct object (e.g., Veo al niño ‘I see the boy’)
Plural direct object (e.g., Veo a los niños ‘I see the children’)
Word order perception task
Use of a on 
Oral Picture 
Description Task
a is used at least once
a is not used at all
Ambiguity Number of subject and object is same (e.g., Veo al niño, 
both are singular)
Number of subject and object is different (e.g., Veo a los 
niños, subject is singular and object is plural)
written task that the Level 4 learners most closely approximated the performance observed with native speakers, not only in the inclusion of kinesis as 
a significant predictive factor, but also in distinguishing object marking by 
nonspecific indefinite nouns and all other levels of the definiteness variable 
with the exception of specific indefinites. Although Killam did not find a notable relationship between direct object marking and word order (as measured 
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
by the word order perception task), his study does show that development of 
variable object marking does approximate native-like norms. Further, acquisition of this variable morphosyntactic structure can be best characterized by 
increasing the frequency of overtly marked direct objects, and then adjusting 
the linguistic constraints on use to include kinesis and distinguishing among 
the levels of definiteness in such a way that pronouns, proper names, and definite common nouns are marked significantly more than specific indefinites, 
which are in turn marked significantly more than nonspecific indefinites.
In Chapter Six we mentioned Gudmestad and Geeslin (2013) as an example 
of research that employs a multinomial logistic regression in order to account 
for a three-category dependent variable, but this study also shows development across levels of proficiency and, thus, is relevant to the present discussion. 
The focus of that study was the variable use of three forms used to indicate 
future events: the periphrastic future, the morphological future, and the present indicative (see Chapter Three for Wagner and Sankoff ’s [2011] work on 
the same phenomenon in native French). In Spanish, variation among these 
forms has been linked to the distance of the event in the future, the presence of 
a lexical temporal indicator, the certainty of the event, the type of clause, and 
also the person and number of the verb (Blas Arroyo, 2008; Gutiérrez, 1995; 
Orozco, 2005, 2007; Sedano, 1994). Gudmestad and Geeslin designed a written 
contextualized task to manipulate the first three of these linguistic constraints 
while holding the others constant across items. Their participants were 151 
English-speaking learners of Spanish enrolled in five levels of instruction, as 
well as 22 native speakers of Spanish from a variety of countries of origin, all 
residing in the same US community. Results showed that learners gradually 
increased their use of the periphrastic future while decreasing the use of the 
other two forms, although not in a purely linear fashion. The highest level 
group was seen to overshoot the native speaker norms for use of the morphological future, using this at much lower rates. The multinomial logistic regression, which compares each category of the dependent variable against the 
others, showed that certainty appears to constrain the selection of future time 
forms prior to the other two variables and that the presence of a lexical temporal indicator is the last to demonstrate influence on form selection. Another 
interesting finding was that development is also seen as the adjustment of the 
rates of selection across each of the categories of the temporal distance variable such that even when this constraint becomes a significant predictor of 
form selection, the distribution takes several more years to acquire. Thus, the 
work by Gudmestad and Geeslin illustrates innovations in the methods of 
analysis while at the same time contributing to our general knowledge of the 
acquisition of second language sociolinguistic competence.
The final and most recent study on the acquisition of variable structures in 
second language Spanish we review in this section is Fafulas (2013). Fafulas 
184 SECTION II: APPROACHES
examined development of variation between the simple present and the present progressive by English-speaking learners of Spanish, as shown in Exam­ple 7.12. The example shows that in Spanish two verb forms, the simple present 
and present progressive, can both encode the meaning “action in progress”, 
while in English only the be + V-ing form is acceptable in expressing ongoing 
action simultaneous with speech time.
Fafulas noted that this variable structure is particularly understudied, not 
only in second language acquisition research, but also in first language or 
native speaker variation research. We do know, however, that the estar + V–ndo
form is favored with temporal adverbs indicating immediacy (ahora ‘now’); in 
dynamic predicates, especially with activity verbs (comer ‘to eat’); in describing background information; with animate subjects; and with full, post-posed 
direct objects (Cortés-Torres, 2005; Geeslin & Fafulas, 2012; Klein, 1980; Mayberry, 2011; Torres-Cacoullos, 2000). In addition to variation between the 
present and the estar + V–ndo present progressive forms, there is also variation 
in the base used to form the progressive, and this is illustrated in Example 7.13. 
The estar + gerund form is the most frequent and therefore the most studied, 
and little is known about the patterns of use of other auxiliary verbs such as 
seguir ‘to continue, to follow’ and venir ‘to come’.
Fafulas’ (2013) participants included English-speaking learners of Spanish 
(N = 75), native speakers of Spanish from Mexico and Spain (N = 20), and 
native speakers of English from the US with less than one semester of experience with the Spanish language (N = 20). The inclusion of a native Englishspeaking baseline group, and two distinct dialect target groups, represents a 
unique methodological contribution in that Fafulas was able to characterize 
how patterns of use reflect first language influence across the process of development, while also considering the variability of the input based on geographic 
EXAMPLE 7.12. Present progressive in Spanish
a. Ahora mismo, el perro corre por el parque. ‘Right now, the dog *runs 
through the park’
b. Ahora mismo, el perro está corriendo por el parque. ‘Right now, the dog 
is running through the park’
EXAMPLE 7.13. Variation in progressive auxiliaries
El perro está/sigue/viene corriendo por el parque. ‘The dog is/continues/
comes running through the park’
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
origin of the native Spanish speakers. All participants completed a background 
questionnaire, a proficiency test, and three additional tasks. The first was a 
simultaneous film narration in which participants were instructed to narrate 
orally a silent film as it was playing on a computer in front of them. The second 
elicitation task, a written contextualized questionnaire, required participants to 
select the phrase among contrasting pairs. These sentence pairs were contextualized in an interconnected story; a sample item is shown in Example 7.14.
The third and final elicitation task was a judgment task in which participants were instructed to select among variants of the present progressive to 
indicate all those that they would use in the provided context. Although there 
are others, Fafulas included the five auxiliaries that are reported most frequently in the literature. A sample, which shows each of the five auxiliaries in 
context, is provided in Example 7.15.
The data elicited through the oral narrative task were coded for the form 
produced (the present indicative, estar + gerund, venir + gerund, andar + gerund, ir + gerund, seguir + gerund, other + gerund [e.g., pasar + gerund ‘to pass 
by doing something’], and nonnative auxiliary + gerund [e.g., *es comiendo ‘is 
eating’]) and a series of independent linguistic and extralinguistic variables, 
which are summarized in Table 7.6. On the other two elicitation tasks, which 
are more highly controlled, these factors were either manipulated or held constant, according to the goals of each task.
EXAMPLE 7.14. Sample item from written contextualized task (Fafulas, 
2013)
Lees un periódico mientras esperas. Algunos minutos después, entra a la 
sala de espera un hombre vestido como médico. El hombre saluda a la 
secretaria y a la enfermera y desaparece detrás de una puerta. La secretaria 
mira a la enfermera y le dice:
A. “El doctor Ramírez está llegando tarde a la oficina todos los días.”
B. “El doctor Ramírez llega tarde a la oficina todos los días.”
___ Prefiero A. ___ Prefiero B. ___ Ambos.
You read a magazine while you wait. A few minutes later, a gentleman 
dressed as a doctor enters the waiting room. He says hello to the nurse and 
secretary and disappears behind an office door. The secretary looks at the 
nurse and says:
A. “Every day Doctor Ramírez is arriving late to the office.”
B. “Every day Doctor Ramírez arrives late to the office.”
___ I prefer A. ___ I prefer B. ___ Both.
186 SECTION II: APPROACHES
The results of the analysis of the oral narration task showed that, overall, the 
native English-speaking group displayed a higher rate of progressive use than 
the native Spanish group, with the learner group falling somewhere in between. 
Learners did not demonstrate the use of progressives with auxiliaries other than 
estar until the fourth year, but their use increased steadily after that level. Fafulas (2013) also found that lexical aspect was a significant factor for all groups 
EXAMPLE 7.15. Judgment task item from Fafulas (2013)
Tú le dices a tu amigo que te parece que ha bajado mucho de peso. Le 
preguntas cómo lo ha hecho. Él te dice:
a. “Gracias, ando corriendo 5 km. todos los días.”
___ Posible ___ No es posible
b. “Gracias, vengo corriendo 5 km. todos los días.”
___ Posible ___ No es posible
c. “Gracias, sigo corriendo 5 km. todos los días.”
___ Posible ___ No es posible
d. “Gracias, voy corriendo 5 km. todos los días.”
___ Posible ___ No es posible
e. “Gracias, estoy corriendo 5 km. todos los días.”
___ Posible ___ No es posible
You tell your friend that he looks like he has lost a lot of weight. You ask how 
he did it. He responds:
a. “Thanks, I go around walking 5 kilometers every day.”
___ Possible ___ Not possible
b. “Thanks, I come along walking 5 kilometers every day.”
___ Possible ___ Not possible
c. “Thanks, I keep on walking 5 kilometers every day.”
___ Possible ___ Not possible
d. “Thanks, I go walking 5 kilometers every day.”
___ Possible ___ Not possible
e. “Thanks, I am walking 5 kilometers every day.”
___ Possible ___ Not possible
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
TABLE 7.6
Summary of coding scheme for Fafulas (2013)
Variables Levels Representative example
Adverbs/verbal 
modifiers
Locative (e.g., aquí ‘here’)
Temporal (e.g., ahora ‘now’)
Other (e.g., después ‘then’)
None (no adverb in context)
El hombre está ahí
recolectando peras
‘The man is there 
gathering pears’
Clause type Subordinate (Dependent clause)
Simple (Main clause; includes 
coordinated clauses)
Yo creo que él los conoce
‘I believe that he 
knows them’
Aspect State (querer ‘to want’)
Activity (correr ‘to run’)
Accomplishment (correr 1 km ‘run 
one km’)
Achievement (caer ‘to fall’)
Él recolecta las peras
‘He gathers the pears’
(Activity predicate)
Animacy of 
subject
Animate (e.g., person)
Inanimate (e.g., machine, car)
El hombre está corriendo
‘The man is running’
(Animate)
Object type Direct (e.g., object of transitive 
construction)
Indirect (e.g., recipient of 
ditransitive construction)
Other (e.g., reflexives)
None (e.g., intransitive verbs)
Veo al hombre
‘I see the man’
(Direct object)
Object form Full noun phrase (e.g., las peras
‘the pears’)
Pronoun (e.g., lo ‘it’)
Other (e.g., se, reflexive particle)
None (no object)
Veo a las peras ahí
‘I see the pears there’
(Full noun phrase)
Object position Pre-posed (before verb)
Post-posed (after verb)
Other (e.g., part of reflexive 
construction)
None (no object)
Lo llama con un silbido
‘He/She calls him with 
a whistle’
(Pre-posed object)
Object number Singular (la pera ‘the pear’)
Plural (las peras ‘the pears’)
Other (non-count)
None (no object)
Tomo café todos los días
‘I drink coffee every 
day’
(Non-count)
(Continued)
188 SECTION II: APPROACHES
Variables Levels Representative example
Intervening 
material 
between 
auxiliary and 
gerund
Intervening material
No intervening material
Not applicable
El hombre está en su 
casa viendo tele
‘The man is at his 
house watching tv’
(Intervening material)
Polarity Negative utterance
Affirmative utterance
Yo no los veo
‘I don’t see them’
(Negative particle)
examined, but it was not until the fourth year that learners began to approximate patterns of native use, with object type, object form, and object position 
strongly predicting the form produced. At the graduate level, despite overall 
similarities with the native Spanish-speaking groups, polarity is a significant 
factor even though it is not for either of the native Spanish speaker groups. 
Likewise, experience abroad was significant for the graduate student learners.
Turning to findings for the written contextualized questionnaire, Fafulas 
(2013) first found that the simple present was preferred by all participants on 
this particular task. Lexical aspect was the most significant factor predicting 
selection of the present progressive form by all participants. Among the learner 
groups, examination of selection of a progressive form revealed a U-shaped 
pattern of development, where lower level learners demonstrated target-like 
rates of selection, selection rates decline away from native-like norms among 
the middle proficiency learners, but at later stages of acquisition the selection 
rates increase and approximate native-like rates once again. Lastly the analysis 
of the judgment task data showed that the canonical estar + gerund form was 
the most accepted by all participant groups. Selection of additional auxiliaries 
was found to be influenced by lexical aspect and adverb among the more proficient learners, with adverb serving as the stronger predictor between these 
two factors for the native English speaker group. In summary, Fafulas’ (2013) 
results indicate that both recognition and use of other Auxiliary + V–ndo
progressive constructions is an acquisitional challenge for second language 
learners of Spanish, given that these forms are restricted to specific aspectual/
temporal contexts in native-speaker Spanish and vary by dialect.
In the past few years, excellent variationist research has also emerged for 
learners of Chinese as a second language. One such example, Li (2010), examines the acquisition of variable use of the particle de, which is used in native 
speech as a genitive marker, attributive marker, or a nominalization marker. 
These functions are illustrated in Example 7.16. This particle is used variably 
and is sensitive to style such that its use is less frequent in informal speech.
TABLE 7.6 (Continued)
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
The participants of Li’s (2010) study were 12 native speakers of Chinese (half 
the participants were female) and 20 learners of Chinese from four different first 
language backgrounds and at different levels of proficiency in Chinese. All participants completed a background questionnaire and a sociolinguistic interview (twice 
for the learners). Li also collected audiotaped recordings of four instructors of the 
learners while they were teaching and analyzed the learners’ textbooks in order 
to examine the nature of the input the learners received. For the sociolinguistic 
interviews, all environments where de occurred, could possibly occur, and where 
it is not prescriptively allowed were identified and first coded for presence of 
de (the dependent variable), and then for several independent variables. These 
include the function of de, speaker gender, formality (native speakers only), and 
first language (learners only). Results showed that the native speakers always used 
de in conditional clauses but never in lexicalized expressions. Native speakers variably omitted de in contexts of modified relative clauses, as well as in fast and informal speech. A Varbrul analysis revealed that females used de significantly more 
than males in the genitive and demonstrative/number + classifier contexts, and de
was encountered significantly more in formal contexts. Overall, the learners used 
de more than the native speakers, especially in certain contexts. Like the native 
speakers, learners always used de in conditional clauses and almost never in lexicalized expressions. Finally, they used de nearly obligatorily in contexts of relative 
clause modifiers. This higher frequency of use of de is consistent with the higher 
rates of use reported in pedagogical materials. A Varbrul analysis with the learner 
data revealed that females also use de more than males and de-omission is favored 
by learners who have stayed in China for longer periods of time and have higher 
proficiency in Chinese. Li reported some interaction between variables, but the 
learners’ first language was not selected as a significant predictor of de-omission. 
EXAMPLE 7.16. The particle de in Chinese (Li, 2010, pp. 369–371)
a. Genitive marker:
wo˘ (de) péngyou
I (GEN) friend
‘my friend’
b. Attributive marker:
zho¯ ngguó (de) la˘ oshı-
China (ATT) teacher
‘native Chinese teacher’
c. Nominalization marker:
hánguórén bù xı˘hua_
n chı- de
Korean:people not like eat NOM
‘What Korean people don’t like to eat’
190 SECTION II: APPROACHES
Thus, like the other studies reviewed thus far, learners’ use of variable forms in the 
second language is highly complex but systematic, and it is sensitive to the sociolinguistic variables demonstrated to play a role in native variation. Although this 
study did not include cross-sectional data, the effects for proficiency do indeed 
further our understanding of the development of sociolinguistic competence.
Using a similar design, Li (2014) employed a variationist analysis to study 
variable subject pronoun expression, which has been researched extensively 
for second language Spanish but has not received the same attention in Chinese as a second language. In Chinese, pronominal subjects can be expressed 
with an overt pronominal form or may be null (i.e., unexpressed), as demonstrated in Example 7.17.
EXAMPLE 7.17. Null and overt subjects in Chinese (Li, 2014)
ta
_
 méi xué guò hànyu˘ , Ø yı-
dia˘ nr ye˘ bù hu˘ ì shuo_
He not learn EXP Chinese, Ø a:little also not can speak
‘He has never learned Chinese and he can’t speak it at all’
Li’s (2014) participants were 23 high-intermediate and advanced learners 
studying in China. Each participant completed a conversation-style interview and an elicited narrative task. These tasks were completed twice at a tenweek interval. Li’s analysis was based on 13,345 tokens and the overall subject 
expression rate was 59.4%. The factors found to have the greatest influence 
on subject expression were the person and number of the verb and switch reference. Significant effects were also found for sentence type, native language, 
length of residence in China, gender, discourse context, proficiency level, and 
specificity. These results are largely consistent with the findings reported in Li, 
Chen, and Chen (2012) for native speakers in the same region. Of interest to 
second language researchers are the findings that first language contributed 
to rates of subject expression, such that native speakers of English and Russian used overt forms at higher rates than speakers of Korean and Japanese. 
Likewise, longer stays in China (over two years) and higher proficiency favored 
null forms. Finally, females favored overt forms more than males, and overt 
forms were favored more in conversations than in narratives. These last two 
findings show that learners were sensitive to social and stylistic variation and 
were able to demonstrate this in their second language use.
The research studies included in the present section demonstrate, collectively, 
that the adoption of a variationist approach does not pose a threat to the view 
of second language acquisition as a process, rather than a product. In fact, these 
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
studies show that development in the area of sociolinguistic competence can be 
understood through changes in the frequency of use of a given form, changes in 
the linguistic and extralinguistic factors that constrain that use, and, more subtly, changes in the distribution of the rates of use across the categories of those 
constraining variables. Additionally, the research reviewed here demonstrates 
how the application of sociolinguistic methods of analysis to cross-sectional 
second language research designs has fostered exciting new research on a range 
of structures and second languages. The level of detail with which these studies were presented further allows future researchers to employ these techniques 
to new areas of study. Nevertheless, there are a host of other issues that are 
addressed through variationist research. The remainder of the present chapter 
is devoted to providing a sampling of studies within the Variationist framework 
that address issues common to the field of second language acquisition.
RESEARCH ON PHONOLOGICAL VARIATION
In contrast with research in the field of sociolinguistics as a whole, recent 
research on Type II phonological variation in second languages is rare. There 
are, however, some examples of research from which to build. As mentioned 
previously, Sax (2003) examined /l/-deletion (see also work by Regan, Howard, & Lemée [2009] in Chapter Eight). Another phenomenon investigated in 
second language French is schwa deletion (e.g., demain ‘tomorrow’ [d̩.mɛ̃]),
which is a well-attested sociolinguistic variable in European French that has 
been shown to be influenced by speaker age and style (e.g., Hansen, 2000), as 
well as linguistic factors such as the surrounding phonetic context in which 
variable deletion occurs (Uritescu, Mougeon, & Handouleh, 2002). Uritescu, 
Mougeon, Rehner, and Nadasdi (2004) examined the French immersion context of Ontario. The data for their analysis came from semi-directed interviews 
with 41 high school students participating in a French immersion program. 
They found that with regard to overall frequency of occurrence, the French 
immersion students did not delete the schwa nearly as frequently as the native 
speaker comparison group (21% for the learners and 68% for the native
speakers). Regarding the linguistic factors constraining schwa deletion for the 
learners and the native speakers, several similarities were found. For example, 
both learners and native speakers favored schwa deletion word medially after 
one consonant (e.g., maint(e)nant ‘now’) and after more than one consonant 
(e.g., exact(e)ment ‘exactly’), as well as in monosyllabic words followed by a 
non-schwa vowel or pause (e.g., j(e) sais pas ‘I don’t know’). However, some 
differences were observed with regard to the linguistic factors. For example, 
certain high frequency lexical items exhibited schwa deletion in the native 
speaker group, but not the learner group. With regard to the extralinguistic 
factors constraining schwa deletion, Uritescu and colleagues found a favoring 
192 SECTION II: APPROACHES
effect for gender (females favor deletion), exposure to French media (those 
who reported “occasional” use), and previous length of stay with a Francophone family (at least one week or longer). These findings were different from 
those observed for the native speaker comparison group, where only the informal speech style (defined as informal topics) favored schwa deletion.
Schmidt (2011) conducted a large-scale study on the perception of /s/-
aspiration in Spanish by English-speaking learners enrolled in various levels 
of university language and content classes. Like schwa deletion in French, /s/-
aspiration in Spanish is a well-attested sociolinguistic variable notable across 
several dialects of the Spanish-speaking world, particularly in coastal varieties 
(cf. Hualde, 2005; Lipski, 1994). This phonological process (also called debuccalization) is one that changes [s] to [h] most often in syllable-final position 
before a consonant (e.g., basta ‘(that’s) enough’ [bah.ta]) or in phrase final position (e.g., dos ‘two’ [doh]). Several studies cross-dialectally have provided support for differences in /s/-aspiration by gender, social class, and age (cf. Lipski 
[2011] and Samper Padilla [2011] for an overview). With the exception of Geeslin and Gudmestad (2011a), research has not examined learners’ acquisition 
of /s/-aspiration production. However, the study by Schmidt (2011) examined 
development of perception of this process (i.e., association of the [h] variant 
with Spanish /s/), especially given it is one that learners do not tend to be aware 
of without some exposure to an /s/-aspirating variety of Spanish. The participants of her study were 215 university-level English learners of Spanish. All participants completed an identification task in which they had to identify nonce 
or invented words containing syllable final variants of /s/ word medially (e.g., 
baspe [bah.pe]). The options provided to them for identifying the entire word 
included /s/, /f/, /l/, /r/, /n/, and a /V/ (no coda). Taking the example of baspe, 
they would hear [bah.pe] and then be directed to click whether they heard 
baspe, bafpe, balpe, barpe, banpe, or bape. In this way, Schmidt could determine 
how learners were categorizing [h] phonemically, and how that categorization 
changed with increasing experience with and exposure to Spanish as a second 
language. Schmidt found that learners indeed developed in their perceptual 
acquisition of /s/-aspiration with increasing exposure to the second language. It 
was not until the intermediate level that learners first began categorizing [h] as 
/s/, and by the advanced level more than half of the learners were demonstrating 
patterns of perception that mirrored those of native speakers of Spanish from 
/s/-aspirating varieties (e.g., Argentina). Schmidt also linked patterns of identification performance demonstrated on the task to dialect exposure and location 
of study abroad experience. Specifically, those learners who had been exposed 
previously to /s/-aspirating varieties or studied abroad in an /s/-aspirating region 
identified [h] as /s/ more than learners who had not had such experience with 
the second language. As with morphosyntactic variation, it appears thus far 
that learners can also acquire sociolinguistic variables that are phonological in 
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
nature. More research is needed in this area, not only with other segmental and 
suprasegmental features of second language speech, but also with those that 
may carry more or less prominence in social stigma among learners and the 
native speakers or advanced users from which they are receiving input.
THE NATURE OF NEAR-NATIVE COMPETENCE
Across approaches to second language acquisition, one persistent question is 
whether second language learners can come to use that language in native-like 
ways. For some, this entails access to innate grammatical knowledge; for others, this has to do with the degree to which the existing first language knowledge influences the second language system. Regardless of the approach, this 
question is important because it helps us to understand the nature of second 
language acquisition in general (cf. Gass, Behney, & Plonsky [2013] for review). 
Given the importance of this question, it is essential to address this same issue 
for variable structures in order to assess the degree to which learners can 
acquire native-like sociolinguistic competence. Many of the studies reviewed 
above included a very advanced participant group as part of the cross-sectional 
design. Thus, we have already seen examples of how learners differ from native 
speakers on the use of structures like mood contrast, the present progressive, 
future-time marking, and object marking in Spanish; the use of on, ne deletion, 
and /l/-deletion in French; and the use of the variable de and subject expression 
in Chinese. In addition to the studies reviewed earlier in the present chapter, 
there are several that have focused exclusively on the comparison of highly 
advanced learners to their native-speaking counterparts. A fairly large body of 
work examining these differences has been conducted with English-speaking 
learners of Spanish and has covered a variety of variable morphosyntactic 
structures, such as the copula contrast (e.g., Geeslin, 2003), mood use (Geeslin & Gudmestad, 2008a), subject expression (e.g., Abreu, 2012; Geeslin & 
Gudmestad, 2008b, 2011b; Gudmestad & Geeslin, 2010; Gudmestad, House, & 
Geeslin, 2013), present-time expression (e.g., Geeslin & Fafulas, 2012), and 
future-time expression (Gudmestad & Geeslin, 2011). One of the most widely 
studied structures in research on native and near-native differences is subject 
expression. Geeslin and Gudmestad (2008b), an early example of this type 
of research, analyzed sociolinguistic interviews conducted with 16 advanced 
nonnative learners of Spanish and 16 native speakers from a variety of dialectal regions, all residing in the same community. As with Chinese (see Exam­ple  7.17), subject forms in Spanish may be null or overt. Overt forms may 
include pronouns of several types (e.g., personal pronouns, interrogative 
pronouns) or full lexical noun phrases. Geeslin and Gudmestad found that 
near-native and native speakers employed null subjects most often, followed 
by lexical noun phrases and then by overt subject pronouns. Nevertheless, the 
194 SECTION II: APPROACHES
rates of use were, in fact, statistically different for both groups, and the examination of the independent linguistic factors provided details of these differences. 
Specifically, the near-native learners tended to use more null subjects in all contexts except first-person singular and third-person plural, two contexts where 
native speakers used more null subjects. Additionally, in nonspecific contexts 
(i.e., those where the referent could not be named) native speakers used more 
subject pronouns than the near-native speakers, constituting another subtle 
difference between the two groups studied. Accounts of these subtle differences 
between native and highly advanced learners of a second language develop our 
understanding of the abilities that sociolinguistic competence entails, as well as 
the degree to which nonnative speakers are able to achieve this goal.
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
Second language acquisition researchers have also witnessed growing interest in 
the role of the individual in the process of language learning. We have already 
mentioned that the universality of the stages of acquisition has been questioned 
in recent work (e.g., Tarone & Liu, 1995) and there is mounting evidence that 
language learning is influenced by a host of individual factors, ranging from 
personality to inherent capacities such as working memory (cf. Miyake & Friedman, 1998; Robinson, 2003). Unlike the many instances where sociolinguistic 
research is not only compatible but provides the model for second language 
analysis, this may be a case where second language variation research must 
break with that tradition. This is because it has been demonstrated, and argued 
quite effectively, that looking at results in aggregate is appropriate because individuals display the patterns of the group (Guy, 1980). In fact, this same point 
has been demonstrated for second language learners (Bayley & Langman, 2004) 
but recent research has called this into question. Geeslin and Gudmestad (2012) 
found that in a study of use of future time forms, learners differed in both frequency of form selection and the effect of certain constraints on that selection. Additionally, speakers often differed on one measure but not on the other, 
indicating even greater degrees of variability. Likewise, Geeslin, Linford, Fafulas, 
Long, and Díaz-Campos (2013) found individual variability in their study of 
sentence-level constraints on subject expression. In contrast to the work by Gees­lin and Gudmestad, however, they found that the degree to which individuals 
differed from the group norms decreased as proficiency increased. The authors 
suggest that this may have to do with the sociolinguistic status of the variable 
structure (i.e., stable variation vs. change in progress and/or degree of prestige 
of a given variant) in conjunction with the individual differences in the group. 
Clearly, this work is in its infancy but represents an exciting new method for 
examining individual differences in the second language context. What is more, 
the use of insights from sociolinguistics may provide new variables related to 
sociolinguistic status, which serve to move these fields forward.
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
MULTILINGUAL TARGETS
For several decades now, there has been a tension between our understanding of what it means to be a native speaker of a language and the reality of 
the second language acquisition context. For example, when we think of what 
it means to be a native speaker, this idea may include monolingual, highly 
educated adults, even though much of the world’s population uses several 
languages in the course of a single day to fulfill a variety of functions. Thus, 
researchers like Vivian Cook (1992) have argued that the target for second language learners ought to be multi-competence, on the grounds that knowing 
two languages is not identical to being a monolingual in each of those languages. This argumentation has evolved and has come to be known as the 
“bilingual turn” in second language acquisition; its proponents advocate for 
the inclusion of bilinguals as appropriate comparison groups, and for a more 
thoughtful evaluation of the speakers to whom learners are compared (Ortega, 
2011, 2013). In other words, researchers must ask the question: is this a reasonable target for my learner group? Variationist approaches, because of the 
incorporation of social factors, individual factors, and geographic factors, all 
of which are linked to differences in patterns of language use, are well poised 
to lead in moving second language acquisition research toward an acceptance 
of bilingualism as a norm (and a goal) for language learners. To this end, we 
see that many of the studies reviewed in the present chapter provide models for this movement. For example, Sax (2003) included native speakers who 
were also instructors in the language program she investigated, and the native 
speaker comparison groups for Killam (2011), Gudmestad (2012) and Geeslin 
(2003) were all bilinguals residing in the area of research (rather than in a 
distant home country). Fafulas (2013) provided yet another approach to this 
issue by including monolingual native speakers of Spanish from Mexico and 
from Spain as well as monolingual native speakers of English. In this way, he 
was able to assess the degree to which his learners showed similar tendencies to 
each of these groups without arbitrarily designating speakers of a single variety of Spanish as the target for his learners. Each of these studies demonstrates 
the importance of the bilingual turn in second language acquisition research.
INCORPORATING NEW THEORETICAL INSIGHTS: 
LEXICAL EFFECTS AND FREQUENCY
In Chapters Four and Five we provided an overview of several different 
approaches to modeling linguistic knowledge and language development. In 
some sense these models represent a differing focus between social factors on 
the one hand and cognition on the other. Nevertheless, they were each included 
in the present volume because they account for the social influence on language 
in some way. Thus, in order for the Variationist Approach to effectively respond 
196 SECTION II: APPROACHES
to increasing interest in the role of social factors in language acquisition, it must 
be able to incorporate insights from many of these approaches and also to adapt 
when new findings are made available. To this end, we see that the statistical 
modeling employed in variationist research is, in fact, quite capable of incorporating influences of newfound social constructs as well as linguistic ones. What 
is more, the statistical relationship identified between these factors can be modeled in a variety of ways, including in several of the theories advanced in Chapter Five. To illustrate this, we take two examples, one from second language 
research and the other from usage-based approaches. In second language acquisition research, there has been growing interest in the role of vocabulary and 
lexical acquisition in the process of second language learning as a whole (for a 
review, see Castañeda-Jiménez & Jarvis, 2013). For example, research has shown 
that vocabulary size is related to several other properties of second language use. 
Likewise, it has been suggested that second language acquisition is intricately 
tied to learning the properties of individual lexical items. In other words, rather 
than viewing second language learning as developing the ability to plug lexical 
items into an acquired structure, we benefit from also knowing how the properties of those lexical items come to be acquired. This can be illustrated with the 
research on the copula contrast in Spanish, which has previously viewed adjectives as a unified group and focused on the properties of the two copular verbs, 
ser and estar (both mean ‘to be’). However, recent variationist work has explored 
the degree to which an adjective allows variation in relationship to patterns of 
use, showing that one key difference between native and near-native language 
use rests in the fact that the natives allow variation with a larger range of adjectives than the nonnatives (Geeslin, 2013). In other words, the learners appear to 
allow variation and to respond to the same linguistic constraints, but they do so 
in a more restricted range of lexical contexts. This example serves to show how 
new insights from second language acquisition research can be integrated into 
variationist analysis, leading to improved knowledge in both areas.
A second example of this type comes from the growing interest in usagebased approaches to language use and language learning (e.g., Bybee, 2002). 
Recent research in the field of sociolinguistics has shown that lexical frequency mediates the effects of several linguistic constraints on subject 
expression in Spanish (Erker & Guy, 2012). At the same time, there are interesting discussions about how frequency is best measured (e.g., within corpus 
vs. within speaker vs. outside measure) and also whether frequency is best 
viewed as one of many explanatory factors or as the single principle guiding 
language acquisition and use. In order to participate in these discussions, we 
see that the Variationist Approach must provide the necessary tools to address 
these issues. In fact, it does so quite effectively, and this type of research is 
presently underway (e.g., Linford, Long, Solon, Whatley, & Geeslin, 2014). 
For example, one might measure frequency in several different ways and 
compare statistical models to determine which explains the greatest portion 
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
of the variation. What is more, one might simply come to add a measure of 
lexical frequency into the statistical analysis along with other linguistic and 
extralinguistic constraints, lending greater predictive and explanatory power 
to existing models. The important insight is that as the field develops and 
new factors are examined, the Variationist Approach is able to incorporate 
these insights and participate in cross-disciplinary dialogue.
CONCLUSION
In the present chapter we have shown that the Variationist Approach to second 
language acquisition, which was born out of the need to explain the systematic 
variability inherent in interlanguages, has grown to provide empirical accounts 
of second language development for a variety of second languages and grammatical structures. This approach uses changes in frequency of use and constraints on use to identify the path of development and to better understand 
how sociolinguistic competence is acquired. This is accomplished through the 
adoption of recent insights in sociolinguistic research, as well as innovation 
in elicitation tasks and statistical modeling. It offers a means for assessing the 
degree to which second language learners can acquire native-like patterns of 
use and the manner in which individual differences influence second language 
acquisition. Likewise, it addresses key concerns in recent second language 
acquisition work, such as the identification of the appropriate target for comparison and the role of vocabulary building in language learning, as well as new 
developments in linguistic theory, such as the examination of the role of lexical 
frequency in language acquisition and use. Moreover, this approach is compatible with the push to incorporate social factors into our account of language 
learning and also with several of the cognitive models advanced to accomplish this goal. In this sense, we see that the Variationist Approach is not only 
compatible with current theories of second language acquisition, but it is also 
responsive to the primary concerns of second language acquisition researchers. 
Despite this promise, however, there is a great deal of territory left to explore. 
For example, researchers will do well to delve into the differences across learning contexts and learners, as well as how this is mediated by differences across 
grammatical structures and the linguistic factors that constrain their use.
READING BEYOND THE TEXT
a. Adamson, H.D., & Regan, V. (1991). The acquisition of community speech 
norms by Asian immigrants learning English as a second language. Studies 
in Second Language Acquisition 13(1), 1–22.
b. Baker, W., & Smith, L.C. (2010). The impact of L2 dialect on learning 
French vowels: Native English speakers learning Quebecois and European 
French. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 66(5), 711–738.
198 SECTION II: APPROACHES
c. Cook, V. (1992). Evidence for multicompetence. Language Learning, 42(4), 
557–591.
d. Geeslin, K.L., & Gudmestad, A. (2010). An exploration of the range and 
frequency of occurrence of forms in potentially variable structures in 
second-language Spanish. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 32(3), 
433–463.
e. Hansen Edwards, J.G. (2011). Deletion of /t, d/ and the acquisition of linguistic variation by second language learners of English. Language Learning, 61(4), 1256–1301.
f. Li, X. (2010). Sociolinguistic variation in the speech of learners of Chinese 
as a second language. Language Learning, 60(2), 366–408.
COMPREHENSION AND APPLICATION
A. Comprehension
1. What motivated the emergence of research on variation in second 
languages?
2. Why were sociolinguistic approaches to the study of second language 
variation particularly influential?
3. What is Type I (or vertical) variation? What is Type II (or horizontal) variation? What does Type II variation tell us about sociolinguistic 
competence?
4. In Adamson and Regan (1991), what was the relationship between 
proficiency and production of [ɪn]? What role did speaker gender play?
5. In her study of ne deletion, nous/on alternation, and /l/-deletion, what 
did Sax (2003) find with respect to the variants used by learners and 
native speakers of French and their frequencies of use? What order did 
Sax propose for the emergence of these stylistic markers?
6. What evidence of linguistic predictors changing according to learner 
proficiency can be found in Geeslin’s (2000) study of the Spanish copula ser and estar?
7. What other structures have been studied in variationist work on Spanish and Chinese? What do these studies have in common? How do they 
differ?
8. Give an example of research on Type II variation in the second language sound system and describe that study.
9. What is near-native competence? What evidence exists for the potential for second language learners to achieve near-native sociolinguistic 
competence?
10. Why is it important to consider the comparison group in variationist 
research? How might that group differ from one study to another?
EMPIRICAL RESEARCHg
B. Application
1. The current chapter has presented the results of empirical research on 
near-native attainment. Given your own language learning, are there 
particular structures or aspects of your L2 that you have found to be 
particularly challenging? Are there linguistic contexts in which you are 
uncertain of which form to use over another or how to produce that 
form? Reflect on how you might be able to gain input to overcome 
these details.
2. Now, turn your attention to the language learning of someone other 
than yourself. Think of someone you know or a famous person who 
is a nonnative speaker of a language. What particular structures or 
aspects of their L2 seem to be particularly challenging? Are there linguistic contexts in which this is especially apparent?
3. In this chapter, you have read about horizontal (i.e., native-like) and 
vertical (i.e., developmental) variation. Think of a structure in English 
(or another language) for which you demonstrate horizontal variation. 
What variants exist? In which context(s) do you produce one variant? 
In which context(s) do you produce the other(s)?
4. Think of an original example of a structure in English (or another L2) 
for which learners might demonstrate vertical variation. What variants 
exist? In which context(s) might the learner produce one variant? In 
which context(s) might he or she produce the other(s)?
5. Imagine that two learners, Mary and Karen, have encountered the following sentence in Spanish: El muchacho está muy alto ahora (‘The boy 
is very tall now’). Mary explains that the verb estar is used because 
“someone is saying that the boy is tall and that’s something that can 
change, so you use estar”. Karen explains that estar is used because 
“someone is saying that the boy is tall and we can compare the boy to 
how he used to be, so you use estar”. Both of these responses indicate 
predictors of estar use. Using your knowledge of Geeslin (2000), which 
of these learners has more advanced development of the copula contrast? Why?
NOTE
1. Linguistic constraints on –t/d deletion have been found to differ between varieties 
of English. For example, a following pause has been shown to favor deletion in New 
York City while it has been shown to disfavor deletion in Philadelphia (cf. Guy, 
1980).
8
The Role of Study Abroad 
on the Acquisition of 
Sociolinguistic Competence
Linguists and nonlinguists alike often believe that a second language learner 
must spend time in a setting that provides intense exposure to the second language in real contexts of use in order to acquire communicative competence. 
For this reason, the study abroad setting has received considerable attention. 
Use of the term, however, spans a variety of related, yet often distinct, language 
learning settings. Table 8.1 illustrates the many types of learning contexts that 
can be subsumed under the umbrella term of “study abroad”. None of the definitions in Table 8.1 should be taken as absolute; rather, they are examples of 
the degree to which “study abroad” experiences can differ.
In Table 8.1 we see the importance of understanding the characteristics of 
the study abroad experience. Failure to do so is likely to lead to conflicting 
research results. We further note that the terms “study abroad” or “year abroad” 
tend to be meaningful terms for Americans and Europeans, while elsewhere in 
the world these experiences may be called “exchanges” (e.g., Korean students 
studying in Australia; for discussion, see introduction of Freed, 1995). In this 
chapter we adopt the term “study abroad”, and we will use it to refer to all experiences in which students travel to another country for the purpose of studying 
language and/or content in a classroom setting. To be clear, this is not the only 
type of experience that constitutes study abroad, but we find that this type of 
experience has been researched most widely in relation to the acquisition of 
communicative competence.
RESEARCHING THE EFFECTS OF STUDY ABROAD: 
THE HISTORICAL CONTEXT
Research on the effects of study abroad has a long history, dating back to Carroll (1967) and generally focused on more global abilities, such as measures 
of proficiency and fluency. For example, several studies using the ACTFL Oral 
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
TABLE 8.1
Examples of study abroad contexts
Examples Description
Freed (1995)
Segalowitz & Freed (2004)
Lafford & Collentine (2006)
Díaz-Campos & Lazar (2003)
Berg, Connor-Linton, & Paige (2009)
The traditional stay abroad: learners 
leave the home country and live in a 
country where the second language 
is spoken as a majority language; 
length of stay ranges from as little 
as three weeks to several academic 
semesters or academic school years; 
participants are typically classroom 
learners and constitute a fairly 
homogenous social group
Korean Studies Summer Programs* Intensive language schools: held 
outside of the learners’ home 
country, typically in a country 
where the second language is spoken 
as a majority language; length of 
language training ranges from 
as little as two weeks to several 
months; participants are classroom 
learners and vary in terms of group 
homogeneity/heterogeneity
Guntermann (1995)
Hansen (2012)
Work and/or service-based stay 
abroad (e.g., Peace Corps): learners 
receive language training specific to 
the region to which they have been 
assigned; length of stay ranges from 
one to two years; participants are 
not typically classroom learners and 
vary greatly in terms of individual 
and social characteristics
Mougeon, Nadasdi, & Rehner (2010) Intensive immersion schools: held 
inside the learners home country; 
medium of instruction is the second 
language.
* Several institutions in the Republic of Korea have these programs. Web links to two examples are 
provided here: http://home.sogang.ac.kr/sites/esummer/Pages/default.aspx (Sogang University); 
http://summer.hufs.ac.kr (Hankuk University of Foreign Studies)
202 SECTION II: APPROACHES
Proficiency Interview have investigated the development of oral proficiency 
by learners traveling abroad (e.g., Foltz, 1991; Magnan, 1986; Milleret, 1991; 
O’Connor, 1988; Veguez, 1984). It is not surprising that study abroad continues to 
be a popular topic of research, yielding numerous articles, doctoral dissertations, 
and edited volumes (e.g., Collentine, 2009; Lafford & Uscinski, 2013). Over time 
the focus has shifted from proficiency to specific linguistic abilities (e.g., phonology, morphosyntax, pragmatics). For instance, while Segalowitz and Freed 
(2004) showed that second language learners abroad made greater gains in fluency than their at-home counterparts, Díaz-Campos (2004) found that at-home 
learners and study abroad learners made equal gains in pronunciation, and Collentine (2004) showed that the at-home group in his study appeared to make 
greater gains on grammatical performance than the study abroad group. The 
overarching question across such studies has often been whether study abroad 
is categorically beneficial for language learning, and, to this day, this question 
remains open for debate and additional research. Nevertheless, it does appear 
that there are certain, specific benefits when performance by learners who study 
abroad is compared to that of learners who remain in the at-home setting.
Although less numerous, we also find good research on variable structures 
in second languages that can serve as a strong point of departure for future 
work (e.g., Regan, Howard, & Lemée, 2009). The focus of the current chapter 
is to review this growing body of research on the acquisition of sociolinguistic competence in the study abroad context. Our discussion is organized by 
the grammatical characteristic studied, although these research studies could 
just as easily be grouped according to the types of study abroad experiences 
available to the participants in each study. In many cases we will see that the 
researcher’s focus is on the documentation of developing sociolinguistic competence, rather than comparing a group abroad to an at-home counterpart. 
In this sense, our overarching research question has changed from whether or 
not study abroad is superior to at-home learning toward an interest in whether 
learners can acquire sociolinguistic competence and, if so, how learner grammars develop over time to reach this state.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIOLINGUISTIC COMPETENCE 
IN THE STUDY ABROAD SETTING
Research on the development of sociolinguistic competence in the study abroad 
context has focused heavily on morphosyntax and nearly exclusively on learners of French and Spanish, usually with English as a first language. Despite that 
limitation, in the review that follows we will see that a wide range of variable 
structures has been examined. In general, this research supports the assertion 
that learners move toward native-like norms of use and also that there is a good 
deal of individual variation, even in the same learning context. Our review is 
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
organized by areas of the grammar; for each structure, we provide a brief summary of how the variable structure operates in the language of native speakers 
prior to exploring the research on its acquisition by second language learners. 
We conclude the chapter with a discussion of some of the additional factors that 
have been shown to influence this development in the study abroad context.
Morphosyntax
The first variable structure to receive serious attention in the study abroad literature was ne deletion in French (see Chapter Seven for additional details). Vera 
Regan (1995, 1996, 2004) examined whether a year abroad in France would have 
an impact on frequency of occurrence and patterns of use in the speech of second 
language learners. She followed seven English speakers from Ireland studying 
French in their home institution and abroad over three years. Regan’s findings are 
based on quantitative analyses of sociolinguistic interviews conducted with each 
learner at three different time points: before departing for the yearlong study 
in France (Time 1), immediately after their return (Time 2), and one year after 
their return (Time 3). From Time 1 to Time 2, Regan (1996) found that learners 
demonstrated striking change in rates of ne deletion, as they were not likely to 
delete at Time 1 (0.27) but much more likely to do so at Time 2 (0.72). Regan also 
found that learners, like the native speakers described in Ashby (1981), deleted ne
more in casual speech than in formal speech at Time 1 and Time 2. Interestingly, 
Regan found that ne deletion in casual speech did not differ much from Time 1 
to Time 2 in terms of likelihood of deletion (0.61 at Time 1 and 0.59 at Time 2), 
whereas in formal speech the likelihood of deletion increased notably (0.37 at 
Time 1 and 0.44 at Time 2). This led Regan to suggest that learners were indeed 
acquiring the stylistic differences associated with ne deletion, but they were also 
overextending ne deletion into contexts where it would not necessarily occur in 
native speech (formal or monitored speech). Regan also found that, like native 
speakers, learners delete ne more in main clauses, in lexicalized phrases, and 
when an object clitic pronoun is present. For the latter two variables, the strength 
of their influence on ne deletion increased after the yearlong stay abroad (i.e., 
the probability weights increased from Time 1 to Time 2). Finally, Regan found 
that learners had maintained approximately the same rate of ne deletion at 
Time 3 (one year after their return) as that found at Time 2 (immediately after 
their return). Collectively, Regan’s work lends support to the idea that the study 
abroad setting is particularly influential in the acquisition and continued use of 
known sociolinguistic phenomena in advanced, nonnative speech. This claim 
gains even greater ground if we compare the use of this variable structure by 
learners in the at-home classroom or immersion context (e.g., Dewaele, 1992, 
2004; Dewaele & Regan, 2002; Rehner & Mougeon, 1999; Thomas, 2004), who, 
in general, delete ne much less than native speakers of French.
204 SECTION II: APPROACHES
The alternation between nous and on (also described in detail in Chapter Seven) 
has also received attention in the study abroad literature (Dewaele, 2002; Lemée, 
2003; Regan, Howard, & Lemée, 2009; Sax, 2003). This body of research generally examines study abroad as an extralinguistic variable, rather than comparing 
learners before and after study abroad. The studies conducted by Dewaele (2002) 
and Sax (2003) reported that learners who had either previous experience studying abroad or extensive exposure via interaction with native speakers of French 
favored on in oral production. Dewaele’s (2002) study also examined this alternation in written productions of advanced level Dutch-speaking learners, revealing 
nearly equal frequency of on use as that observed in the learners’ oral productions (see also Chapter Seven). Sax’s (2003) study reported evidence of increasing 
native-like stylistic variation among learners as they progressed in instructional 
level. In related work, Regan, Howard, and Lemée (2009) report that after a year 
abroad, their 20 Irish learners patterned similarly to native speakers. Specifically, 
male learners favored use of on while females favored nous, on use was favored 
by middle-class learners, and on was used much more in informal speech. Their 
research also showed that knowledge of Irish strongly favored the selection of on
(0.989), whereas knowledge of German as a third language strongly disfavored on
use (0.204). From a larger corpus of 48 Irish-speaking learners, length of previous 
stays abroad correlated positively with increasing use of on (Lemée, 2003). With 
regard to the linguistic variables studied, specificity and restriction appeared to 
play a role in constraining learner alternation, with on favored by nonspecific and 
nonrestrictive referents (0.964) and highly disfavored by specific and restrictive 
referents (0.076). Thus, adding this to the research described on ne deletion, we 
see that, for Irish learners of French, the study abroad setting has been shown to 
facilitate the development of each of these two sociolinguistic variables.
Another variable structure examined by Regan, Howard, and Lemée (2009) 
is future time expression. Future time expression in French manifests itself as 
seen in Example 8.1, via use of the simple present (8.1a), the morphological or 
inflected future (8.1b), or the periphrastic future (8.1c).
EXAMPLE 8.1. Future time expression in French
a. Demain on nage à la piscine.
‘Tomorrow we’re swimming (lit. we swim) at the pool’
b. Demain on nagera à la piscine.
‘Tomorrow we will swim at the pool’
c. Demain on va nager à la piscine.
‘Tomorrow we are going to swim at the pool’
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
Variation in the expression of future time has been documented across varieties of French. The periphrastic future form is more frequent than the morphological future in Canadian French (Blondeau, 2006; Poplack & Turpin, 1999), 
whereas the rates of use in spoken Metropolitan French do not indicate that one 
variant is preferred over the other, even though it has been suggested that the 
morphological form is preferred in written French (Wales, 2002). Several factors 
have been shown to play a role in the expression of future time reference. Poplack 
and Turpin’s (1999) Ottawa-Hull data and Blondeau’s (2006) speakers from Montreal both showed that younger speakers demonstrated a lower rate of use of the 
morphological future, leading researchers to suggest that use of the morphological future is on the decline. Poplack and Turpin (1999) also observed that use 
of the simple present to express future time occurred with temporal adverbials 
(e.g., tomorrow, next year, etc.). In addition, Blondeau (2006) reported greater 
use of the morphological future in negative polarity utterances.
Lemée (2002, 2003) examined the acquisition of variable expression of 
future time reference by Irish learners of French who had spent a year abroad 
in France. In interview data, these learners demonstrated sensitivity to several 
constraints, with greater use of the morphological future associated with formal style, nonspecific adverbials, and negative polarity. In the case of temporal 
distance (i.e., how far the event is in the future), the simple present was preferred in distal events, whereas the periphrastic form was preferred for both 
proximal and indeterminate events.
Looking at English-speaking learners of Spanish, Kanwit and Solon (2013) 
compared the impact of two different study abroad contexts on the acquisition of variable future-time expression. Their learners were high school students participating in a seven-week immersion program in Valencia, Spain 
or Mérida, Mexico, each of whom completed a written contextualized questionnaire designed to manipulate temporal distance, presence of a temporal 
adverbial (e.g., mañana ‘tomorrow’, el año que viene ‘next year’), and clause 
type (i.e., whether the verbal predicate occurs in the main or subordinate 
clause). Because of the additional goal of comparing differences across study 
abroad sites, Kanwit and Solon also collected data from native speakers in 
each of the two regions using the same elicitation instrument (see Exam­ple 8.2 for a sample item in which the temporal distance is within a week, 
there is a temporal adverbial present, and the verbal predicate occurs in the 
main clause).
Kanwit and Solon (2013) found that after seven weeks, learners demonstrated selection rates comparable to those of the respective native speaker 
group for the region in which they were studying: like native speakers from 
Valencia, learners who had studied in Valencia demonstrated greater rates 
of selection of the morphological future than learners who had studied in 
206 SECTION II: APPROACHES
Mérida. The learners also showed movement toward native-like constraints 
on future form selection. Mérida native speakers’ future form selection was 
constrained only by clause type; the Mérida learners showed increased sensitivity to local norms in that, at Time 1, both presence of a temporal adverbial 
and clause type were significant predictors (with clause type, the direction of 
influence was reversed from the native speaker patterns). By Time 2, the learners dropped clause type and adverbial from the predictive model. The Valencia 
learner group’s model selected the same predictors (i.e., temporal distance and 
clause type) as the Valencia native speakers. By Time 2, they increased their 
factors’ weights toward the native targets.
In a related study, Geeslin, García-Amaya, Hasler, Henriksen, and Killam 
(2012) investigated the acquisition of the variable use of forms of past perfective time in Spanish by English-speaking learners. In Spanish, a completed 
action can be expressed with either the preterit or present perfect verb forms, 
as illustrated in Example 8.3.
In Peninsular varieties of Spanish, the present perfect has been described 
as moving into contexts normally reserved for the simple past, such as 
in hodiernal or today contexts (Burgo, 2012; Howe, 2006, 2013; Howe & 
Schwenter, 2003; Kempas, 2006; Schwenter, 1994a, 1994b; Serrano, 1994). To 
explore the acquisition of this geographic variation, Geeslin, García-Amaya, 
Hasler, Henriksen, and Killam (2012) studied 33 high school learners of Spanish 
EXAMPLE 8.2. Sample item from Kanwit & Solon (2013, p. 210)
Tu amigo Marcos te ve en el supermercado. Está haciendo preparativos para 
tener un evento en su casa. Él te dice:
‘Your friend Marcos sees you at the supermarket. He is making preparations for an event he is having at his house. He says to you:’
a. Voy a dar una fiesta mañana. ‘I am going to throw a party tomorrow’
b. Daré una fiesta mañana. ‘I will throw a party tomorrow’
c. Doy una fiesta mañana. ‘I throw a party tomorrow’
EXAMPLE 8.3. Preterit and present perfect forms in Spanish
a. bailé ‘(I) danced’ preterit
b. he bailado ‘(I) have danced’ present perfect
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
participating in an intensive, seven-week study abroad program. The learners 
lived with host families, attended classes on Spanish language and culture, and 
followed a Spanish-language-only code, which mandated the use of Spanish 
at all times. As in Kanwit and Solon (2013), the researchers recruited 24 native 
speakers to provide regionally appropriate comparison data. The data were elicited using a written contextualized task in which the linguistic factors known to 
constrain use of variable past time expression in Peninsular varieties of Spanish were manipulated. These factors included time of the event (an hour ago, 
today, one week ago, and a year or more ago), telicity (i.e., whether or not the 
predicate had a specific endpoint), anteriority (i.e., whether or not the predicate 
had “explicit consequences” for the present), and the presence or absence of 
background information in the linguistic context. The task was administered 
three times to the learners and once to the native speaker comparison group.
Geeslin, García-Amaya, Hasler, Henriksen, and Killam (2012) found that 
both the native and the learner participant groups selected the preterit more 
than the present perfect. In addition, the learners’ selection rates of the present 
perfect were higher than those reported for the native speaker group, regardless of time. This surprising finding meant that even though the variety with 
which learners had contact is associated with relatively higher rates of use of 
the present perfect, development for this learner group was seen in a decrease 
in rates of selection of the present perfect over time. The researchers also analyzed the constraints on use over the course of the stay abroad. One important 
change was the way in which the time of event constrained form selection; 
not only did the time of event become a significant predictor of selection, the 
greatest rates of selection of the present perfect came to occur in events that 
took place that day or one hour ago. The findings of the analysis on linguistic 
constraints across the three test times are summarized in Table 8.2.
In line with inquiry into the impact of the study abroad site on acquisition, Kanwit, Fafulas, and Geeslin (2011) explored the variable use of the Spanish present perfect as well as the copula contrast and the present progressive. 
In Chapter Seven we saw research conducted on second language learners of 
Spanish outside the study abroad context that focused on the variable use of 
the copula contrast (e.g., Geeslin, 2000, 2003) and the alternation between the 
simple present and the estar + V–ndo present progressive (e.g., Fafulas, 2010, 
2013; Geeslin & Fafulas, 2012). With the existing research on these three variable structures in the at-home context in mind, Kanwit, Fafulas, and Geeslin 
(2011) sought to assess whether the learners participating in a relatively short 
stay abroad were also able to move toward native-like patterns of use, and 
whether this path of development differed according to the variety of Spanish to which learners were exposed. As with Geeslin, García-Amaya, Hasler, 
Henriksen, and Killam (2012), the 46 learners of Kanwit, Fafulas, and Geeslin 
(2011) were English-speaking high school learners of Spanish participating 
208 SECTION II: APPROACHES
in a seven-week intensive study abroad program, either in Valencia, Spain, or 
San Luis de Potosí, Mexico. They also included a native speaker baseline group 
from each region for the sake of comparison. Using a written contextualized 
questionnaire, administered at the beginning (Time 1) and end (Time 2) of 
the seven-week period, the researchers found differing results for each variable structure. The analysis of the rates of selection of the preterit and present 
perfect forms revealed that the learners in Mexico moved away from native 
speaker norms (exhibiting higher rates of selection of the present perfect at 
Time 2 than at Time 1, both of which were higher than the native speakers’ 
norms), while learners in Spain moved toward native speaker norms by selecting the present perfect more at Time 2 (arriving at a rate similar to that of the 
native speakers). However, in terms of predictors of use, both learner groups 
moved toward the target language community norms. For example, selection 
of the present perfect in “today” contexts, which is heavily favored by native 
speakers in Spain but not by native speakers in Mexico, exhibited a reduction 
in importance for the learners in Mexico, but an increase in importance for the 
learners in Spain. The second analysis, focused on the copula contrast, showed 
that both groups moved away from their respective native speaker target groups 
in terms of frequency of use. In addition, the factors predicting selection of 
TABLE 8.2
Constraints on use of the present perfect by learners across 
time in Leon, Spain, in Geeslin et al. (2012)
Learners Native speakers
Time 1 Atelic predicates
Additional years 
of previous language study
Time 2 Atelic predicates
Background information absent
Additional years of previous 
language study
Improvement on level test
Time 3 Additional years of previous 
language study
Improvement on level test
Higher final scores on level test
Previous experience abroad
Time of action (those taking place 
on the same day)
Time of action (one 
hour ago and today)
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
estar for each native speaker group (they were the same for both regions) were 
largely in place for each learner group at Time 1. Lastly, regarding variable use 
of the simple present and the present progressive, Kanwit, Fafulas, and Geeslin found that learners in Mexico shifted away from the target norm in terms 
of frequency of use and learners in Spain did not demonstrate much change, 
maintaining rates of use above the respective native speaker norm. The predictors of selection for both learner groups demonstrated similar patterns, and 
each was distinct from their regional native speaker norm. Specifically, learners 
at each study abroad site selected the present progressive more with states and 
did not prefer the present progressive with frequentative adverbs (e.g., cada día
‘everyday’), unlike the patterns attested by the native speakers. This study demonstrates that not all variable structures are acquired at equal rates. Nevertheless, we also see that the move toward native-like use by learners is possible and 
varies according to the region in which the learners’ experience abroad occurs.
One last variable structure in the area of morphosyntax that has received 
attention in the research on the acquisition of Spanish in a study abroad context 
is the sociolinguistic phenomenon known as leísmo. Leísmo refers to the use 
of the indirect object pronoun le instead of lo or la to mark a direct object. In 
English, no such distinction between direct and indirect objects is marked, and 
all three of these forms could be translated as ‘it’, ‘him’, or ‘her’, depending on the 
referent. The variable use of these forms in Spanish is illustrated in Example 8.4. 
To be clear, regions where the use of object pronoun forms is variable do not 
all vary in the same way. For example, laísmo is the phenomenon through 
which gender is marked on indirect objects (i.e., the use of la instead of le for 
animate, feminine indirect objects). Leísmo has been attested in several varieties of central Spain and its use is conditioned by linguistic factors, such as the 
gender and number of the direct object, as well as extralinguistic factors such 
as social class (Klein-Andreu, 2000).
Geeslin, García-Amaya, Hasler, Henriksen, and Killam (2012) explored 
whether a stay abroad in a Spanish-speaking region where leísmo has been 
attested influenced learners’ rates and patterns of direct object form selection. 
The study employed a written contextualized task, administered to 33 Englishspeaking learners and 24 native speakers of Spanish in Leon, Spain. Each participant completed a different version of the same task during the first week of 
their stay (Time 1), again during their fourth week of the program (Time 2), 
EXAMPLE 8.4. Object pronouns in Spanish
a. No le vi ayer. ‘I didn’t see her/him yesterday’ (leísmo)
b. No la/lo vi ayer. ‘I didn’t see her/him yesterday’
210 SECTION II: APPROACHES
and finally during their last (seventh) week in the program (Time 3). The 
native speaker comparison group completed the task only once. The linguistic 
factors manipulated in the written contextualized task included the number 
of the referent (singular or plural), co-referentiality (whether the referent was 
accompanied by a co-referential a + NP), the gender of the referent, telicity, and 
the animacy of the subject. The analysis of the data collected from these abroad 
learners showed that their rates of selection of le(s) varied in a U-shaped trend 
from Time 1 to Time 3: 58.6% > 41.4% > 46.6%. It was only at Time 1 that 
learners demonstrated native-like selection rates for le(s) (54.4% selection of 
le(s) for native speakers). With regard to predictors of selection for the learner 
group, Geeslin and her colleagues found that by Time 3 the predictive model 
for the selection of le(s) was similar to that found for the native speaker comparison group. Specifically, by Time 3 the learners’ model came to include telicity and animacy of the subject, two factors that are present in the native speaker 
predictive model as well. Thus, it appears that the learners were moving back 
toward the native-like rates of selection, but, unlike at the first test time, this 
pattern of selection was also constrained by the appropriate linguistic factors.
Salgado-Robles (2011) also examined development of this variable structure by 40 learners studying abroad in Spain. A unique component of his study 
is the comparison of development of leísmo by learners in two different study 
abroad contexts, one in Valladolid, where frequency of le use is higher, and the 
other in Seville, where le is less frequent. He found that both learner groups 
moved toward their respective regional norms of le use, either increasing use 
of le (in Valladolid) or decreasing use of le (in Seville) in the sociolinguistic 
interviews and written tasks analyzed. In a related study, Salgado-Robles and 
Ibarra (2012) provided an additional look at the acquisition of leísmo by 20 
learners of Spanish studying abroad in Valladolid over a five-month period. 
The data were elicited through sociolinguistic-style interviews conducted with 
each participant, one before the stay abroad and the second one afterwards. 
The authors found that learners moved toward the native norm by increasing frequency of le(s) in contexts where a direct object clitic pronoun (i.e., 
lo(s), la(s)) is prescribed. This was also the case for predictors of le(s) selection, 
where all but one factor present in the native speaker model was reflected in 
the learner model by the time of the second sociolinguistic interview. Relating this finding more generally to the study abroad context, we see that learners do exhibit sensitivity to local norms during a stay abroad and, over time, 
are able to incorporate those norms into their own developing grammars.
Pragmatics
In Chapter Two, we identified pragmatics as one area of the grammar that can 
vary according to features of the speaker, including gender, age, social class, 
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
and geographic origin. It will be recalled that pragmatics generally focuses on 
speech acts, or utterances categorized based on the communicative function 
they serve, as in requests or apologies, but also includes work on politeness and 
forms of address. In fact, the survey of research on the acquisition of pragmatics in the study abroad context below covers a range of these topics, including 
politeness, requests and apologies, and use of forms of address.
We begin our discussion with a look at research, which often focuses on 
Japanese as a second language, exploring the impact of study abroad on politeness. A unique linguistic characteristic of politeness in Japanese and typologically related languages is the use of vocabulary and verb morphology to vary 
levels of politeness and formality in speech. Speakers of Japanese vary this 
morphological and lexical encoding of politeness and formality in response to 
aspects of the speech setting—for example, how they relate in age and social 
status to their interlocutor(s) and the social context in which speech is occurring (e.g., an informal context such as a gathering among friends or a formal 
context such as a business meeting or an academic lecture). This variable use 
of verbal morphology and lexical encoding to reflect politeness and formality 
is often referred to as the use of honorifics. Acquisition of the use of honorifics 
by learners whose first language does not encode politeness in the same way 
is notoriously difficult (e.g., Marriott, 1995), although there is empirical evidence demonstrating that such learners can indeed learn to express politeness 
in languages like Japanese in a native-like manner (e.g., Hashimoto, 1993).
Some of the earliest research to examine the acquisition of politeness in 
Japanese focused on Australian exchange students living and studying in Japan 
(Hashimoto, 1993; Marriott 1993, 1994). For example, Marriott conducted 
an oral proficiency interview with secondary level learners before and after 
an exchange, analyzing frequency of use of polite forms with other variants 
(e.g., plain form, omission of the predicate) by discourse type (e.g., conversation, picture description, role play). Marriott (1995) found that before going 
abroad, the eight learners used polite forms nearly exclusively. After their time 
abroad, learners increased use of the plain form, although the majority of 
those uses were deemed to be inappropriate. Omission of predicates, on the 
other hand, decreased from Time 1 to Time 2. Marriott also found that learners employed polite forms more in the role-play, which was designed to provide a context for the plain style of speech. Learners’ use of plain forms, on 
the other hand, was greater during the conversation portion of the interview 
and the picture description. Marriott noted that learners appeared to be using 
polite forms more during monitored speech than casual speech, where the 
plain style forms appeared more.
Ishida (2009) provides another example of research on sociolinguistic competence in Japanese as a second language through her Conversation 
Analysis Approach to the study of the use of the Japanese particle ne by an 
212 SECTION II: APPROACHES
English-speaking learner, Fred, studying abroad in Japan for nine months. 
Pragmatically ne is used in ways similar to the tag question ‘right?’ Ishida 
conducted eight conversations with Fred and found that he increased his 
use of the particle ne from zero instances in the first two conversations to 22 
instances in the seventh recorded conversation and 13 instances in the eighth. 
She further showed an increase in the types of uses, contrasting his early use 
of ne to introduce a topic or align his response to facilitate turn-taking in conversation with later use of ne to demonstrate alignment to his interlocutor’s 
utterance and to express agreement. Ishida concluded that Fred’s experience 
abroad not only facilitated use and subsequent repertoire of use of ne, but also 
his increasing participation in social interaction.
Studies on the development of pragmatic competence have also investigated 
the impact of study abroad on requests and apologies. With regard to requests, 
studies have been conducted with English-speaking learners of French (Cohen & 
Shively, 2007), English-speaking learners of Spanish (Cohen & Shively, 2007; 
Rodríguez, 2001; Shively & Cohen, 2008), English-speaking learners of Russian (Owen, 2001), German-speaking learners of English (Schauer, 2004), Irish 
English-speaking learners of German (Barron, 2003), and Japanese-speaking 
learners of English (Cole & Anderson, 2001). Studies contributing to the discussion of the impact of context of learning on the development of apologies 
are fewer and include investigations of English-speaking learners of French 
and Spanish (Cohen & Shively [2007] for both; Shively & Cohen [2008] for 
Spanish only) and Japanese-speaking learners of English (Kondo, 1997). We 
will focus our discussion on the most recent of those studies.
Schauer (2004) examined the pragmatic development of requests by 12 
German adult learners of English studying abroad for an academic year at a 
British university. The task employed in Schauer’s study was the Multimedia 
Elicitation Task (MET), which elicits requests via the presentation of 16 scenarios manipulated for interlocutor status and degree of imposition. Learners 
completed the task after their arrival, halfway through the academic year, and 
again before their departure. Schauer found that lexical downgraders, such as 
‘maybe’, were used earlier than syntactic ones, although learners’ use of syntactic downgraders, such as ‘it would be really nice if . . .’, increased over time. 
Schauer also reported some individual variation.
In related work, Cohen and Shively (2007) investigated the combined effect 
of pedagogical intervention and a semester-long study abroad experience on 
the acquisition of requests and apologies in French and Spanish by Englishspeaking learners.1
 They elicited data from 67 learners of Spanish and 19 learners of French using a written discourse completion task. In this task, learners 
were presented with portions of specific, contextualized dialogues and asked 
to complete them in writing. The discourse completion task was manipulated 
to vary social status, social distance, and either how severe the infraction was 
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
(for apologies) or the extent of imposition (for requests). The learners in each 
study abroad group were randomly assigned to either the control group, which 
did not receive instruction, or the experimental group, which received pedagogical intervention. The pedagogical intervention group completed three 
tasks. First, they read Maximizing Study Abroad: A Student’s Guide to Strategies for Language and Culture Learning and Use (Paige, Cohen, Kappler, Chi, & 
Lassegard, 2002). Second, learners in this group attended a pre-study abroad 
orientation meeting to discuss the guide and receive an overview of speech 
acts in Spanish or French. Finally, each learner in the pedagogical intervention 
group submitted seven electronic journal entries related to their experiences 
abroad and their use of the guide. In their analysis, Cohen and Shively (2007) 
showed that there was significant improvement in speech act performance for 
both study abroad groups. There was no statistical difference in speech act performance between the group that received pedagogical intervention and the 
group that did not. Collectively, the findings of Cohen and Shively’s study suggest that experience abroad alone was enough to facilitate positive pragmatic 
development of apologies and requests.
In a follow up study, Shively and Cohen (2008) traced whether learners of 
Spanish studying abroad for a semester moved toward native-like norms of 
use of requests and apologies. They analyzed the data elicited by the same 
written discourse completion task in Cohen and Shively (2007) from the same 
67 English-speaking learners of Spanish. Overall, learners’ use of requests and 
apologies moved toward native-like norms after a semester abroad. There 
were, however, uses that demonstrated a move away from native-like norms. 
For example, in requests learners demonstrated nonnative-like use of head 
act strategies (e.g., ¿Me podría dar . . .?) and supportive moves (e.g., muchas 
gracias . . . muy amable.) in some dialogues after their time abroad. Likewise, 
with apologies, learners moved away from native-like norms of use in terms 
of “acknowledgement of responsibility” for the dialogue in which they, as students, had to apologize for missing a meeting with a “distinguished” professor 
for the second time. This research shows that learners do modify their request 
and apology strategies during a stay abroad and also that even following an 
extended stay abroad there remain differences between native speakers and 
learners.
Another area of acquisition of pragmatics that has been investigated in 
the study abroad context is use of address forms. Barron (2003) examined 
the impact of a 10-week study abroad experience on 33 Irish learners’ use of the 
German second-person singular pronouns. In German, the second-person 
singular pronoun you has two forms, du and Sie, the first characterized as 
“intimate/simple” and the second “polite/distant”. Sie is used with interlocutors for whom the speaker would use the interlocutor’s surname along with 
a title, whereas du is used with interlocutors with whom the speaker is on a 
214 SECTION II: APPROACHES
first-name basis. Barron’s participants completed a free-discourse completion 
task at the beginning, middle, and end of their time abroad. The task presented 
six scenarios detailing aspects of a situational and social context, and learners 
wrote a complete dialogue for each scenario. From Time 1 to Time 3, learners 
decreased the rate at which they switched between du and Sie in contexts where 
the switch did not fulfill a pragmatic function, especially in informal contexts. 
Additionally, in scenarios requiring reciprocal use of du and reciprocal use 
of Sie, learners demonstrated more target-like reciprocity in address behavior 
from Time 1 to Time 3. In sum, learners showed that they were acquiring more 
native-like patterns of use, but had not yet reached the target.
Finally, research has addressed learners’ awareness of pragmatic variation 
in the target language. Kinginger and Farrell (2004) measured learners’ metapragmatic awareness of the French forms of address tu and vous, as well as the 
impact of a semester-long study abroad stay in France on developing awareness 
and use of these forms. Meta-pragmatic awareness was elicited by means of a 
Language Awareness Interview, where learners chose the appropriate address 
form—tu or vous—for a series of interpersonal situations (six in total) presented to them, and then explained that choice. Kinginger and Farrell found 
that with the exception of two participants, learners demonstrated knowledge 
of use of tu and vous by interlocutor age and formality of the speech setting 
before going abroad. The two learners who did not do so were able to select 
appropriately after the stay abroad. Additionally, in the hypothetical situation involving a classmate, the researchers found a positive effect of the study 
abroad stay on changing learners’ selection from vous to tu between the pretest and post-test. From this research and others like it (e.g., Schauer, 2009), 
we see again the positive impact of the study abroad setting on sociopragmatic 
competence, both production and awareness.
Taken together, the studies on the development of pragmatic abilities in 
the study abroad context generally provide support for the assertion that time 
spent abroad is beneficial for the acquisition of pragmatic abilities, such as 
the use of honorifics and the formulation of speech acts such as requests and 
apologies. Specifically, these investigations document development in learner 
grammars toward native norms during a stay abroad, while simultaneously 
noting areas of difference between natives and learners, even at the end of the 
stay abroad. Thus, the general tendency found for the acquisition of variable 
morphosyntactic structures also holds for pragmatics.
Production and Perception of the Second Language 
Sound System
As we move away from the fields of morphosyntax and pragmatics, we find 
that other areas of sociolinguistic competence examined in the study abroad 
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
context have received less attention. For example, only a handful of studies 
exist that investigate the role of the study abroad setting in the production or 
perception of the second language sound system as it relates to the acquisition 
of sociolinguistic competence. There are good studies of the impact of study 
abroad on speech perception, for example, but these do not address second 
language variation (e.g., Mora, 2008). Likewise there are good examples of 
research on the relationship between discourse style and Type I variation in 
the study abroad context. One such study, Díaz-Campos (2006), examined the 
role of discourse style in the acquisition and use of four groups of segments 
by English-speaking learners studying abroad in Alicante, Spain. The groups 
of segments included were word initial /p t k/ (e.g., perro ‘dog’, té ‘tea’, cama
‘bed’), intervocalic /b d g/ (e.g., lobo ‘wolf ’, lado ‘side’, lago ‘lake’), the palatal 
nasal /ɲ/ (e.g., niño ‘child’), and the lateral /l/ in syllable final position (e.g., 
clavel ‘carnation’). Díaz-Campos conducted a Goldvarb analysis of read-aloud 
and interview data for each of the four segments under examination, finding 
that the interview style did, in fact, lead to more accurate production. A second interesting finding was that the study abroad group outperformed the athome group on only two of the four segments (/p t k/ and /l/) examined, and 
the at-home group actually outperformed the abroad group on one (/b d g/). 
Thus, this study calls into question the assumption that study abroad always 
leads to more accurate production across structures. Nevertheless, these studies do not examine the second language acquisition of sociolinguistic competence (i.e., Type II) variation, to which we now turn.
In a study of sociolinguistic variation in speech production and the impact 
of study abroad, Regan, Howard, and Lemée (2009), examined the deletion 
of word final /l/ in French by the same group of Irish learners described earlier for morphosyntactic variable structures. Regan and her colleagues (2009) 
analyzed tokens extracted from the same sociolinguistic interviews described 
previously. The analysis showed that with a deletion rate of 33%, the learners 
were far below the native norm reported in previous literature (nearly categorical deletion for il in Armstrong, 1996; 88% deletion of impersonal il in 
Ashby, 1984; and 94% deletion of impersonal il in Laks, 1980). Regarding the 
factors favoring /l/-deletion, the researchers found that female learners were 
more likely to delete /l/, and all learners favored /l/-deletion for impersonal il
(e.g., Il est difficile de courir cinq miles ‘It’s hard to run five miles’). The results 
for gender are consistent with the findings reported by Armstrong (1996) for 
native speakers, leading the authors to conclude that, similar to morphosyntactic variation, the study abroad setting appears to facilitate acquisition of 
phonological variation. This study also demonstrated that learners are able 
to acquire both linguistic and social constraints on variable structures in the 
sound system, even in cases where the rates of use differ significantly from 
native speakers.
216 SECTION II: APPROACHES
In a related study, Henriksen, Geeslin, and Willis (2010) examined the development of intonation in declaratives, absolute interrogatives, and pronominal 
interrogatives during a seven-week intensive immersion stay in Leon, Spain. 
The authors investigate the modifications made to each utterance type by four 
English-speaking learners over the course of the immersion program. They 
elicited data using a contextualized response reading task, which provided a 
meaningful context, and asked participants to read a response that would be 
spoken by one participant in a dialogue. The task allowed the researchers to 
control for the phonetic characteristics of each utterance while at the same 
time creating a more meaning-based task. Henriksen, Geeslin, and Willis analyzed the F0 contours and boundary movements2
 in 96 target utterances produced at the beginning and end of the immersion stay and characterized the 
most frequent intonation strategy for each learner at both measurement times 
as well as the degree of variability found in each learner’s strategies. Because 
native speaker data on the same task are also available (Henriksen et al., 2010), 
it was possible to determine that learners were able to modify their intonation strategies over time and that they were moving in the direction of the 
native speaker target, by modifying their most frequent strategies and their 
final boundary tone inventory over the course of the immersion program. The 
reason that this study is important for research on second language variation is 
that the native speaker target toward which learners were moving is that which 
native speakers exhibit in Leon, Spain, on this type of task, but not necessarily 
what would be predicted by prior theoretical accounts. In other words, learners are able to modify their intonation patterns in accordance with local norms 
that may reflect both formality of the context as well as geographic location. 
More research of this kind in particular is needed, given the wide range of variability present in the prosodic systems of native speakers cross-dialectally (see 
also Henriksen, 2013).
Research on the second language acquisition of sociolinguistic variation 
in the sound system is still limited. Nevertheless, the studies to date suggest 
that the study abroad experience does indeed foster development of Type II 
variation. Given the growing interest in speech production and perception in 
second languages, it is likely that this will represent an area of exciting future 
growth.
Individual Differences and the Study Abroad Experience
In this section we turn to nonlinguistic characteristics and their impact on 
developing sociolinguistic competence. Many of the studies cited thus far have 
examined some aspect of learners’ external or social characteristics either to 
explain the individual differences observed in reported findings or to identify 
those external or social characteristics of the study abroad setting that may 
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
facilitate greater access to native input and, subsequently, increased development in the second language. In this sense, the division may be seen as somewhat arbitrary because many of the studies reviewed below also focus on a 
particular aspect of the developing second language grammar. Nevertheless, 
the studies reviewed here have a central focus on the way in which factors 
related to the learner, the study abroad setting, or the patterns of language use 
during study abroad influence the acquisition of sociolinguistic competence in 
a second language. We divide these broadly into characteristics of the learner 
and characteristics of the learning context.
Individual Differences: Characteristics of the Learner
There are several learner characteristics that are known to have an impact 
on language learning in general. These range from biological characteristics, such as learner gender; to cognitive characteristics, such as measures of 
reading time or working memory; to social characteristics, such as identity 
(for an overview of the factors mentioned here, as well as several others, see 
Dörnyei, 2005, 2006; Ellis, 2004; Robinson, 2002; and Skehan, 1989). Nevertheless, in the context of study abroad, these differences are less widely studied 
and, when limited to research on the acquisition of sociolinguistic competence in the study abroad setting, the findings are quite limited. However, a 
handful of studies do point to the importance of examining these traits. One 
such characteristic, the learner’s second language proficiency, has generally 
been of interest for determining the relative phase at which variable structures 
come to emerge and to be constrained by relevant linguistic features. Findings 
related to proficiency that are exhibited in several studies include the greater 
rates of use of variable structures among advanced learners (e.g., ne deletion in 
Regan et al., 2009; Knouse, 2012). It is often difficult to examine the emergence 
of sociolinguistic variation and distinguish it from developmental variation, 
which is present at earlier stages (e.g., Geeslin, 2000, 2003; Gudmestad, 2012; 
Rehner, 2002). Despite this difficulty, however, research on second language 
variation in general suggests that sociolinguistic competence is acquired only 
after a certain level of proficiency has been achieved. What is more, even highly 
advanced learners may demonstrate differences from native speaker patterns 
of use on the same elicitation task (e.g., Geeslin & Gudmestad, 2011b). This 
finding appears to hold true in the study abroad context as well.
The role of a second learner characteristic, gender, has been examined in 
the context of the acquisition of a variable that acts as a sociolinguistic marker 
in the native speaker speech community. Examples of this type of sociolinguistic variable include ne deletion, the nous/on alternation, and /l/-deletion in 
French (Regan, Howard, & Lemée, 2009). For these three structures in particular, what emerges regarding the role of gender is that male and female learners, 
218 SECTION II: APPROACHES
like native speakers, demonstrate different patterns of variation. In the case of 
each variable structure under study, female learners (like their native speaker 
counterparts) preferred the more prestigious or conservative variant by demonstrating greater retention of ne, greater frequency of use of nous, and greater 
retention of word final /l/. More research is needed, of course, on other second 
languages and on a wider range of variable linguistic structures, but for now 
these studies offer compelling evidence for the continued examination of gender, as well other social characteristics of learners.
Learner identity has also been investigated in the context of study abroad, 
although in this case, research generally focuses on how the study abroad experience influences the development of learner identity in the second language. 
Nevertheless, because of approaches such as the Identity Approach (a social 
approach to second language acquisition discussed in Chapter Four of this 
volume; see, for example, Norton Peirce, 1995), we know that learner identity 
does, in turn, affect the development of second language competence and, for 
this reason, it is included in the present chapter. This body of work is best represented by the work of Aveni (2005). Aveni opens her volume by stating that 
language acquisition is the result of language in use for the purpose of communication. Furthermore, she notes that the way learners use language is related to 
how they see themselves or how they conceptualize their identity(ies). Aveni’s 
research on the experiences of learners of Russian in St. Petersburg has been 
important for bringing to light the factors affecting learners’ construction of 
their self-identities, and how the learner’s self is often developed and later reconstructed in the second language learning setting. Aveni examined factors related 
to the learner that included their attitudes toward their own second language 
communication abilities, how they compare themselves to others participating 
in the abroad learning experience, and familiarity with their interlocutors, to 
name a few. She also examines factors related to the external social context—for 
example, the attitudes of learners’ caretakers, the nature of feedback and correction provided to their speech in the second language, and the physical appearance and persona of others participating in the learning context. These factors 
do not work in isolation; rather, together they shape learners’ interaction with the 
learning context and, further, how learners come to present themselves within 
that context. Opportunities for use of and interaction in the second language 
largely depend on the interplay of learner identity and external environment, 
both understood to be socially constructed phenomena. Although this work 
does not address sociolinguistic competence directly, the factors under examination in this work undoubtedly influence its development and merit future study.
Other characteristics of the learner that have received attention in the general study abroad literature include attitudes, motivation, personality, and 
quantity and quality of contact and interaction with native speakers (e.g., 
Brecht, Davidson, & Ginsburg, 1995; DeKeyser, 1991; Freed, 1990; Freed, 
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
Segalowitz, & Dewey, 2004; Isabelli-García, 2006; Marion, 1980; Polanyi, 1995; 
Segalowitz & Freed, 2004). These characteristics have yet to be the focus of 
detailed, empirical studies examining the impact of the stay abroad on acquisition of sociolinguistic competence. Nevertheless, there are some promising 
models for examining the influence of these extralinguistic factors during the 
stay abroad. For example, Isabelli-García (2006) conducted an in-depth analysis of four American learners’ attitudes and social networks before, during, and 
after a semester-length stay abroad in Buenos Aires, Argentina. She specifically wanted to relate these qualitative measures to potential gains observed 
in Spanish oral communication as demonstrated by their performance on an 
ACTFL-style Simulated Oral Proficiency Interview before and after studying 
abroad. To examine attitudes, she analyzed weekly journal entries completed 
by each learner. Learners’ social networks were examined via analysis of weekly 
network logs where learners indicated with whom they interacted and the 
potential relation among those interactants. Her analysis revealed that learners’ attitudes indeed had an impact on their desire and motivation to build and 
sustain social networks with native speakers in the target language community. 
This was particularly the case for one learner, Jennifer, whose negative attitudes toward the target language culture directly influenced her willingness to 
make friends with Argentines. Jennifer further demonstrated no development 
in overall oral proficiency after the time spent abroad. The social networks of 
another learner, Tom, were more complex and afforded more opportunities 
for interaction with native speakers in the target language community. Tom 
also showed improvement in overall oral proficiency after the study abroad 
program, moving from intermediate to intermediate high on the ACTFL oral 
proficiency scale. One aspect of Isabelli-García’s findings worth highlighting is 
that not all learners’ attitudes remained stable over time. This was particularly 
evident in her analysis of the learners’ weekly diary entries, where attitudes 
fluctuated in the face of situation-specific challenges in the study abroad setting. Further research that connects individual characteristics with sociolinguistic variation is imperative, particularly in order to highlight qualitative 
differences in learners’ experiences abroad, as well as how opportunities for 
interaction in the second language community may differ from one learner 
to the next. Patterns of language contact have been particularly important for 
supporting the assertion that simply being in the study abroad setting is not 
enough (e.g., Freed, 1995), and this is likely true for the acquisition of sociolinguistic competence during the stay abroad as well.
Individual Differences: Characteristics of the Abroad Context
We now turn our attention to the characteristics of the study abroad setting
and the development of sociolinguistic competence. Despite growing interest, 
220 SECTION II: APPROACHES
one of the only characteristics that has been examined is the nature of the 
living accommodations while abroad. For example, one of the independent 
variables in Knouse (2012) was whether study abroad learners participated in 
a homestay (i.e., stayed with a native-speaking host family). The inclusion of 
this factor reflected her hypothesis that the greater exposure provided in a 
homestay, as compared to residence in an apartment or dormitory, would lead 
to greater acquisition of the target speech segment under study, the Spanish 
/θ/. Knouse found that learners who stayed in a homestay environment produced [θ] more than those who stayed in dormitories (83.3% versus 16.7%, 
respectively), although this factor was not selected as a significant predictor variable for use of [θ] by learners. Thus, it does appear that the type of 
residence was at least weakly related to the acquisition and use of this geographically indexed variable.
Despite the limited empirical findings about the characteristics of the study 
abroad context related to the development of sociolinguistic competence, 
there are several assumptions generally held about the nature of the study 
abroad setting. Each of these constitutes an important area of future research. 
For example, Lafford (2006) notes that in comparison to the at-home learner, 
we generally believe that study abroad learners share several characteristics. 
The characteristics (and our underlying beliefs) are summarized in Table 8.3.
We have seen recent growth in studies that aim to empirically address the 
impact of these characteristics on gains in the second language, most notably 
in the areas of phonetic, grammatical, and overall proficiency development 
(Alvord & Christiansen, 2012; Freed, Dewey, Segalowitz, & Halter, 2004; Lafford, 2006). Furthermore, recent progress in the development and analysis of 
materials used in the qualitative study of these issues (cf. Friedman, 2012) will 
provide new resources for this field of inquiry. The area of research on the 
TABLE 8.3
(Assumed) characteristics of study abroad learners (Lafford, 2006)
We assume that study abroad learners:
• Are exposed to a greater variety of authentic, discourse-level input
• Are exposed to a greater variety of registers and speech styles in the 
second language
• Interact with a greater variety of native speaker interlocutors (e.g., 
friends, family, service employees, etc.)
• Demonstrate greater use of communication strategies to assist in 
breakdowns in communication
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
relationship between the characteristics of the study abroad context and the 
development of sociolinguistic competence promises to be a challenging but 
profitable endeavor.
The Effect of Dialect Exposure
A final area of research related to sociolinguistic competence and experience 
abroad is the role of dialect exposure in developing second language grammars. One such study, Schmidt (2009), investigated the impact of dialect 
familiarity on listening comprehension in second language Spanish. Specifically, she examined whether a short-term stay abroad in the Dominican 
Republic positively affected learners’ performance on listening comprehension tasks. The participants of her study were 11 English-speaking learners of 
Spanish, ranging in language proficiency (self-rated using a nine-point Likert 
item assessment task) from low intermediate to near-native. The study abroad 
program lasted three weeks, and participants engaged with readings related 
to Dominican literature and culture (the majority written in English) as well 
as various interactions. Their exposure to Dominican Spanish came in a variety of forms, including face-to-face interactions with Dominican residents at 
local markets and shops, listening to the TV and radio, and attending guest 
lectures and guided tours given in Spanish. Learners did not receive explicit 
instruction on dialectal features of Dominican Spanish, with the exception of 
one lecture where an invited scholar presented aspects of Dominican vocabulary and syntax and also played speech samples representative of Dominican 
phonology.
To test the impact of dialect familiarity on listening comprehension, 
Schmidt (2009) had participants complete three listening comprehension 
tasks one week prior to leaving for the Dominican Republic and two days 
after their return to the US. The first task was a word comprehension task, 
where learners listened to a spoken word and then wrote down what they 
heard in Spanish, followed by its meaning in English. The format of the second and third tasks were the same, except learners had to listen to a phrase 
or entire sentence and write down what they heard, again followed by the 
meaning in English. Schmidt found significant improvement in the comprehension of spoken words and phrases by learners after just a three-week stay 
abroad.3
 She also reported an effect for task; learners performed significantly 
better on the word-level task than the phrase-level task. Schmidt noted that 
difficulty above the level of the word in listening comprehension may be 
due to prosodic differences in Dominican Spanish (e.g. Willis, 2010). Lastly, 
Schmidt (2009) reported that although learners improved significantly in listening comprehension overall, there were specific segments that appeared to 
cause more difficulty in listening comprehension than others. For example, 
222 SECTION II: APPROACHES
/s/-deletion (e.g., los lunes ‘on Mondays’ [lo.'lu.nes]) and lambdacism (e.g., 
puerta ‘door’ ['puel.ta]), in particular, proved difficult in the listening comprehension tasks, perhaps due to differences in allophonic distribution in 
English (i.e., [Ø] is not an allophone of /s/, nor is [l] an allophone of the 
English rhotic, but these features constitute part of the Dominican Spanish phonological system). In contrast, /d/-deletion (e.g., hablado ‘spoken’ 
[a.'βlao]) and /n/-velarization (e.g., pan ‘bread’ [paŋ]) posed fewer difficulties in listening comprehension, a finding Schmidt suggests is likely due to 
learners’ previous familiarity with these phonological processes (intervocalic 
/d/ is already weakened across many dialects of Spanish and /n/-velarization 
categorically occurs when followed by a velar consonant, such as /k/ or /g/). 
Further support for the positive effect of dialect familiarity is reported in 
Schmidt (2011), where she finds that learners’ perception of /s/-aspiration in 
Spanish correlates with previous study abroad experience in an /s/-aspiration 
dialectal region (see Chapter Seven).
The acquisition and use of the Spanish /θ/ by English-speaking learners 
had generated attention even before its empirical investigation. Occasionally, some of the learners who spend time studying abroad in the central to 
northern region of Spain adopt the use of the voiceless interdental fricative /θ/ 
(e.g., cazar ‘to hunt’ [ka.'θaɾ]), which is used instead of the voiceless alveolar 
fricative /s/ (e.g., casar ‘to marry’ [ka.ˈsaɾ]) for the graphemes z, ci, and ce. The 
adoption of this phoneme by second language learners serves as a direct example of how dialect exposure impacts the second language system—in this case, 
the second language sound system. Why some learners choose to adopt this 
phoneme in their second language sound systems, and others do not, is not 
thoroughly understood. In fact, it appears that only a small portion of second 
learners make this choice (e.g., Geeslin & Gudmestad [2011a] found that of 
the 130 learners in their study, only nine of those who had spent time abroad 
in Spain used [θ] in their speech). There are a few examples of research exploring the second language acquisition of this geographically indexed phoneme.
Two recent examples of research on the second language acquisition of the 
interdental fricative /θ/ are Knouse (2012) and Ringer-Hilfinger (2012), each 
of whom investigated the impact of the study abroad experience on the use 
of this dialectal variant. Both studies followed a group of English-speaking 
learners studying abroad in Spain, either in Salamanca for six weeks (Knouse 
2012) or in Madrid for an academic semester (Ringer-Hilfinger, 2012). 
Ringer-Hilfinger found that after a semester abroad, learners’ awareness of 
the contrast between /s/ and /θ/ (i.e., a phenomenon called distinción ‘distinction’) increased (as compared to two learners in the at-home setting), 
but use of the variant [θ] did not. Through an analysis of data elicited using 
a matched-guise test and an open-ended question on language use, RingerHilfinger showed that many of the study abroad learners were hesitant to 
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
adopt this phoneme because of their preference to speak like their friends or 
extended acquaintances that were native speakers of other varieties of Spanish. Similarly, Knouse (2012) encountered minimal use of /θ/ among her 
study abroad participants. Only a little over half of the participants (seven 
out of 15) employed the interdental fricative at least one time in the speaking 
tasks she administered (reading a passage and responding orally to a series 
of open-ended questions) after their time abroad. Unlike Ringer-Hilfinger’s 
(2012) study, Knouse (2012) sought to determine the linguistic and social 
factors predicting use of /θ/ by learners. With regard to the linguistic factors, she found that the study abroad learners were more likely to employ /θ/ 
when the grapheme was a z. In terms of the social factors, Knouse found that 
beginner and intermediate learners (as compared to advanced learners) and 
Spanish majors or minors favored use of the interdental fricative. The finding 
for beginning and intermediate learners was exactly the opposite found by 
Geeslin and Gudmestad (2011a), who found that rates of use of /θ/ increased 
with proficiency and was only observed in advanced speakers with study 
abroad experience.
From this review it is clear that more research is needed on the effect of 
dialect exposure on the acquisition of sociolinguistic competence. Replication 
studies will help us to sort out inconsistent findings. Likewise, studies on other 
second languages and with learners from a variety of different first language 
backgrounds will provide important avenues of expansion.
STUDY ABROAD AND THE ACQUISITION OF SECOND 
LANGUAGE SOCIOLINGUISTIC COMPETENCE
Overall the findings from research conducted on the impact of the study 
abroad experience on the second language acquisition of sociolinguistic competence mirror, in a sense, what we know about the impact of study abroad 
on learners’ linguistic abilities more generally. We see benefits of study abroad 
across areas of the grammar with a need for considerably more research on the 
role of the characteristics of the individual and the study abroad setting on the 
development of second language sociolinguistic competence. More research 
in this area is also needed in the acquisition of vocabulary—particularly colloquial vocabulary—as demonstrated by the work of Dewaele and Regan (2001). 
Although the use of colloquial vocabulary and lexical expression by Dutch 
and Irish learners of French increased after a year abroad, frequency of use 
remained considerably lower than that observed in the native speaker control 
group. It is likely that as we start to develop and investigate these questions, 
we will turn to frameworks that allow us to examine in greater depth and with 
greater sophistication these important connections between social factors, 
individual factors, and linguistic development.
224 SECTION II: APPROACHES
READING BEYOND THE TEXT
a. Allen, H. (2010). Language-learning motivation during short-term study 
abroad: An activity theory perspective. Foreign Language Annals, 43, 27–49.
b. Aveni, V.P. (2005). Study abroad and second language use: Constructing the 
self. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
c. Cohen, A.D., & Shively, R. L. (2007). Acquisition of requests and apologies in Spanish and French: Impact of study abroad and strategy-building 
intervention. The Modern Language Journal, 91(2), 189–212.
d. Kinginger, C. (2008). Language learning in study abroad: Case studies of 
Americans in France. The Modern Language Journal, 92(s1), 1–124.
e. Regan, V., Howard, M., & Lemée, I. (2009). The acquisition of sociolinguistic 
competence in a study abroad context. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters.
f. Warga, M., & Schölmberger, U. (2007). The acquisition of French apologetic 
behavior in a study abroad context. Intercultural Pragmatics, 4(2), 221–251.
COMPREHENSION AND APPLICATION
A. Comprehension
1. In the early research on study abroad, such as Magnan (1986), what 
measure was used to test development abroad?
2. What overarching question is at the heart of variationist studies of 
development abroad?
3. What evidence did Regan (1996) find for development of native-like 
ne deletion by learners abroad? What evidence did she find for learner 
differences in comparison to native speakers? What did Regan (2004) 
find with respect to ne deletion for learners who were analyzed one 
year after returning from study abroad?
4. What differences did Regan, Howard, and Lemée (2009) report according to 
speaker gender for study abroad learners expressing nous and on in French?
5. According to Regan, Howard, and Lemée (2009) what linguistic factors favored the use of the morphological future? How did Kanwit and 
Solon’s (2013) two learner groups in Spain and Mexico differ in terms 
of selection of the morphological future after seven weeks abroad?
6. What development did Geeslin, García-Amaya, Hasler, Henriksen, and 
Killam (2012) note at Time 3 with respect to the role of linguistic factors on the selection of le? What difference did Salgado-Robles (2011) 
reveal between learners who had studied in Seville and those who had 
studied in Valladolid, with respect to use of le?
7. What was Marriott’s (1995) finding with respect to the speech style 
that favors the use of polite forms following study abroad in Japan?
THE ROLE OF STUDY ABROADg
8. According to Schauer (2004), what did German-speaking learners of 
English use earlier: lexical downgraders or syntactic downgraders?
9. In Shively and Cohen (2008), what evidence is provided of learner 
movement toward native-like use of requests and apologies?
10. What possibility does the study of Henriksen, Geeslin, and Willis 
(2010) demonstrate for learners who have studied abroad?
11. What learner characteristics have been shown to be important with 
respect to development abroad?
12. In Schmidt (2011), what correlated with learners’ perception of /s/-
aspiration? What differences between awareness and use of [θ] did 
Ringer-Hilfinger (2012) report?
B. Application
1. The current chapter presented study-abroad programs that contained 
numerous differences. What are some ways in which programs differ? 
After considering these differences, make a list of the qualities that you 
consider to be ideal for study abroad programs. Justify why each of the 
choices that you made is better than the alternative(s), drawing from 
the literature reviewed in this chapter and from any pertinent personal 
experiences.
2. During your study abroad, were there certain variables that you realized demonstrated regional variation? What were they? Once you were 
aware that local native speakers produced a form in a certain way, did 
you adopt that form? Why or why not? What effect did this have (or 
would it have had)? What benefits or risks were there in adopting the 
form? (If you have not studied abroad, then apply information from 
this chapter to a site where you would like to study.)
3. “Language learners usually sound more formal than native speakers”. 
First, use evidence from the current chapter to support this claim. 
Next, connect your own experiences as a learner (or those of someone 
you know) to further illustrate this point.
4. “Language learners usually sound more formal than native speakers”: 
perhaps you also noticed counterevidence to this claim in the current 
chapter. Provide evidence from this chapter to refute this statement. 
Then, connect your own experiences as a learner to shed further light 
on this idea.
5. With respect to regional language use, what sort of information that 
you did not possess would have been helpful for you before you studied abroad? Imagine that you are going to be preparing a group of 
learners to live in that location (or the locale of your choice). Make a 
list of linguistic essentials that will enable these learners to best fit in 
linguistically.
226 SECTION II: APPROACHES
6. Pool together what you learned from reading about Marriott (1993, 
1994, 1995), Ishida (2009), and Hashimoto (1993). Based on these 
studies, what would you to do to prepare a group of learners about to 
depart for study abroad in Japan?
NOTES
1. Four of the participants in Cohen and Shively’s (2007) study did not speak English as a first language. The first languages of these participants include Bosnian, 
French, Hmong, and Russian.
2. F0 refers to fundamental frequency, which is a quantitative measure of pitch. 
Boundary movements are changes in intonational melodies at the edge of a phrase. 
Measuring the F0 at different locations, such as the beginning and the end of a 
phrase, tells us about changes in F0 over the course of the phrase. These changes 
indicate differences as to utterance types (e.g. interrogative, declarative, etc.) (Henriksen, 2013, p. 168).
3. Schmidt (2009) reported only the results for the word comprehension task and the 
phrase comprehension task in this study.
Section III
Implications of Research on the 
Acquisition of Sociolinguistic 
Competence in Second Languages
This page intentionally left blank
9
Norms and Targets
Now that we have a clearer sense of which social factors are at play in second 
language acquisition and how they might impact language learning and use, 
we turn our attention to the implications of the findings from research on language variation for second language instruction. One of the most immediate 
implications is that awareness of linguistic variation makes us consider more 
carefully how we define “target” in the second language classroom. Perhaps 
even more broadly, we might ask what an appropriate goal is for second language learners. Thus, we begin here with a discussion of what might constitute 
a reasonable norm (or range of reasonable norms) for classroom instruction 
and how this might be identified. We will see that for some second languages, 
such as English, French, and Spanish, there is a wealth of analysis of the appropriate norms for instruction, whereas for other second languages the issue has 
been largely ignored. As the reader may now expect, knowledge of sociolinguistic variation suggests that the way in which we define norms should be 
directly linked to the specific language learning context in which instruction 
takes place.
The process of identifying an appropriate target for second language learners through an exploration of norms and standards further leads us to reconsider some of the ways in which this might impact the language classroom. For 
example, explicit grammar instruction may now be seen from a different perspective, one in which language variation is taken into account. Likewise, the 
instruction of Heritage speakers might be improved, in the sense that we may 
make the examples of language in the classroom more directly connected to 
their own language learning experiences and their professional and personal 
goals. Ultimately, the goal is to raise the consciousness of language instructors 
so that the process of selecting pedagogical materials and designing classroom 
activities is more closely allied with the development of sociolinguistic competence than would otherwise be the case. In sum, the goal of the current chapter 
230 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
and the one that follows is to make the connection between the research on 
second language acquisition and learning in previous chapters to the practical 
issues faced by language instructors on a daily basis.
‘STANDARDS’, ‘NORMS’, AND ‘TARGETS’
Phrases such as “standard language”, or even more specifically “Standard English”, “Standard Spanish”, and the like, abound in contemporary speech. These 
phrases are often used to refer to what ought to be spoken, what we ought to 
teach, or even more simply, what is acceptable language. Nevertheless, it is 
actually quite complex to define the term standard. If we agree that standard 
language is what ought to be spoken in formal, educated contexts, we are still 
faced with questions such as who might decide this and how we know when we 
see examples of this standard. The answers to these questions may have to do 
with geopolitical boundaries, social distinctions, ethnic differences, or other 
individual characteristics.
One of the most basic definitions of standard language denotes any variety 
of a language that has gone through the process of standardization and been 
codified (see also Chapter Two for more about languages and varieties). In 
other words, standard language has been identified as a form through which 
business of all sorts (government, commerce, education, religion, news casting, etc.) should be conducted and has been codified, or described in written form, in dictionaries and/or grammars of that language. Simply put, this 
standard is seen in written government documents, trade documents, formal 
correspondence between important, powerful or respected people, and so on. 
This often also implies that it becomes prescribed for use in formal domains, 
such as schools, and is deemed to be “correct” or “proper” (e.g., Goldstein, 
1987; Llamas & Stockwell, 2002). However, knowing what we know about linguistic variation, we are likely to have many questions. For example, which 
government identifies the standard? Can a single language have several standards? Why do some highly respected people use the standard while others 
do not? Clearly, the sociolinguistic knowledge we have developed over the last 
nine chapters allows us to explore this definition in greater depth.
There are many issues associated with the identification of a standard language, and discussion of these issues has filled volumes across centuries of 
scholarship (Hudson, 1996; Trudgill, 1992; Wardhaugh, 2010). For example, 
we might ask whether a standard must be defined as a binary option whereby 
language is either standard or nonstandard, or whether there are one or more 
options between the two (see Villa [1996] for discussion). Or we might consider how urban centers play a role in identifying standard language and how 
this might be linked to migration in and out of cities and to connections 
between urban centers across geopolitical lines; we might also consider how 
NORMS AND TARGETSg
this urban/rural distinction might interact with other relevant social factors 
(see Hidalgo [1990] for discussion). We may further wonder whether each 
urban center has its own standard (e.g., standard Spanish of Cuzco, standard 
English of New York, etc.) or whether there is a single, pan-national standard 
for a given language (see Auger [2002a] for an interesting discussion of Quebec French as well as Lipski [1983] for a cross-dialectal comparison of radio 
broadcasting in Latin American Spanish). Exploring the notion of standard 
language also raises issues of diachrony (studying a language over time) and 
synchrony (looking at language here and now). For example, can a standard 
change over time? In the case of some languages, like English, we might even 
wonder if a standard requires native speakers of that language—or perhaps, 
what exactly a native speaker is. Questions like these arise from the study of the 
global spread of English to locations where English as well as at least one other 
language are politically supported and where a language such as English would 
be learned by children, but, at the same time, would never be the first language 
of those speakers (Bolton, 2006; Bolton & Kachru, 2006; Crystal, 2003; Kachru, 
1982, 1985, 1986, 1991; Thumboo, 2001). What is clear is that the definition of 
the term standard is widely discussed and remains controversial.
It is precisely because of the difficulties associated with the term standard
that few linguists employ this term in their own work. Instead, linguists are 
interested in norms, a term taken to describe the most frequent forms used 
by a certain group in written or spoken language. Unlike a prescriptive norm 
(i.e., what ought to happen), the norm of interest to linguists is a descriptive norm. This means that it refers to how things actually happen, rather 
than what ought to be produced. In other words, the pursuit of linguists is to 
describe language, not to evaluate it in terms of its quality. The way in which 
a particular group speaks (or writes) is also known as a sociolect, as opposed 
to an idiolect, which refers to the speech of a single individual. The key difference between norms and standards is that norms are contextualized and 
refer to the patterns of language for a given group in a given context. We can 
quickly infer that some contexts require more formal language than others, 
and even that some sociolects will be stigmatized, whereas others will meet 
with certain prestige. As mentioned in earlier chapters, one of the central 
pursuits of sociolinguistics is, in fact, exploring the attitudinal correlates of 
language forms. In other words, sociolinguists seek to understand whether a 
given form meets with prestige or stigma as well as the linguistic and social 
contextual features that are associated with the use of that form. In sum, linguists seek to describe language as it occurs, and sociolinguists seek to understand the connection between language and other factors such as attitudes 
or social characteristics. Figure 9.1 contains a list of questions that illustrate 
how we might explore the degree to which a given variety meets with prestige 
or stigma.
232 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
As we examine the list of questions in Figure 9.1 it becomes quite apparent that many different factors are involved in identifying the prestige variant. In an interesting discussion of Chicano Spanish (and English), Galindo 
(1995) notes the importance of examining speakers’ attitudes toward their 
own varieties of a language and toward other varieties of the same language. 
Additionally, in bilingual communities, attitudes toward the dominant (or 
minority) language interact with the process of identifying the standard for 
a given speech community. These attitudes, in turn, are influenced by factors 
such as gender, ethnicity, and social class. In Galindo’s study, speakers noted 
that certain varieties were not appropriate for girls, for example. In fact, all of 
the sociolinguistic variables examined in earlier chapters are intricately related 
to the variety of a language we choose to speak and to the linguistic norms of 
a given speech community. In particular, Galindo notes that there are both 
intraethnic attitudes and interethnic attitudes, and in order to understand the 
norms for a given community we must consider both of these. For the purposes of the language instructor, what matters most is that we understand that 
norms for a given sociolect are not arbitrary but rather a reflection of our 
attitudes toward that group as a result of numerous social factors.
Before we move to the norms for the language classroom, it is reasonable 
to briefly consider why it is the case that any group or individual would opt 
to speak in any way other than following the norms for prestige. Put differently, why doesn’t everyone always seek to employ the prestigious variety of 
a language? The answer to this question lies in the identity of the speakers 
themselves. We don’t all want to sound like college professors (even those of us 
who are college professors don’t choose to sound that way all the time!). This is 
because not every speaker shares that identity and, in fact, those of us who do 
don’t usually have a single identity, but rather we speak according to the context 
• Has the variety been standardized and codified institutionally?
• Are there living speakers of the variety? 
• Do the speakers have a sense of the long history of their variety?
• Do the speakers consider their variety to be “autonomous”?
• Do the speakers use the variety for all social functions? Are the contexts 
of use or scope of usage reduced?
• Do the speakers consider their variety “pure” or a “mixture” of other 
forms?
• Are there unofficial rules of the variety even where there is no codified 
grammar book; is there a sense of a “good” and “bad” form?
FIGURE 9.1 List adapted from Bell (1976) to examine prestige
NORMS AND TARGETSg
in which we find ourselves. In other words, language allows us to express our 
identity and to respond to a given speech context. This would be impossible if 
we only employed the prestige variants all the time. Language also allows us to 
connect with others who share certain characteristics. Early in this section we 
posed the question of why even some highly educated and influential people 
do not choose to use standard language. Several current politicians come to 
mind in this case, and it is likely that these individuals have selected the forms 
of the community of voters with whom they hope to identify, despite having 
a different individual background. In any of these instances, we use the term 
language loyalty to refer to a speaker’s willingness to project an identity that is 
not associated with the prestige variety. This loyalty explains why non-prestige 
varieties are used and maintained, even in the face of institutional pressure to 
conform to the prestige norms. It is important as we explore the application of 
these terms to the language classroom that we keep in mind the role of nonprestige varieties in expressing certain social, ethnic, and individual identities.
Now that we have discussed the difference between standard language and 
norms for a given speech community, we turn our attention to the issue of 
exactly what the target for second language learners might be. Target is a term 
that was defined in Chapter One as the second language being acquired by the 
second language learner. We now see that this definition must be clarified to 
include an understanding of the many varieties of each language that exist. 
McGroarty (1996) notes that there is a certain tension between the way linguists view norms, as the most frequently used forms, and the way the general 
public views them, as language that is codified in grammars and dictionaries. 
In fact, this contrast means that linguists often turn their attention to registers, or language used for a given purpose or in a given context, whereas 
the general public has particular interests in mind when thinking of language 
learning. In particular, the assumption is that schools serve the function of 
teaching written language, and, thus, teachers must be defenders of prescriptive linguistic norms. Likewise, Hidalgo (1987) explores this idea and notes 
that because standard language is an idealization, the goal of education (in the 
eyes of the general public) is to eradicate variation. Train (2002) expands on 
this idea, noting that standards are actually defined through variation in opposition to a standard, but that standardization does indeed seek to institutionalize a set of beliefs about variation. Clearly, the issue of which variety to teach is 
more complicated than the age-old debates such as whether to teach American 
English or British English, for example. Instead, the conversation about what 
the norms for instruction should be must take into account both national 
standards and acceptable local features of all levels of the grammar, along with 
their history and their connection to geography, politics, and economics.
Research on sociolinguistic variation makes it clear that language learners 
will necessarily confront a range of varieties of a language; thus, a view of the 
234 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
target as monolithic is not appropriate. What is more, even a single “variety” 
of a language contains forms that are in variation with one another for a single 
speaker. This makes determining the target for instruction especially complex. 
The norms for instruction are often referred to as pedagogical norms, and 
entire volumes have been written to discuss the process of selecting an appropriate classroom target (e.g., Blyth, 2002; Gass, Bardovi-Harlig, Magnan, & 
Walz, 2002). Even before he first used this term, Albert Valdman (2002) 
explored the idea of the pedagogical norm as a solution to dealing with variation in an instructed setting. In their introduction to a volume in his honor, 
Bardovi-Harlig and Gass (2002) aptly note that pedagogical norms involve 
research into the norms of actual language use and that the implementation of 
those norms for pedagogical purposes has wide-sweeping implications ranging from designing textbook materials to creating daily classroom activities. 
Magnan and Walz (2002) trace the development of the pedagogical norm 
from the times of contrastive analysis (see Chapter One for a brief review), 
during which the norms and sequences of instruction were based nearly 
exclusively on a comparison of the first and the second languages, to the present day. The interest in the 1970s in linguistic variation led instructors to recognize that the standard enjoyed prestige for political, economic, and social 
reasons, rather than linguistic superiority of any sort (Bardovi-Harlig & Gass, 
2002). Later developments led to the adoption of multi-norm models and 
the understanding that norms represent different groups in different social 
circumstances (Magnan & Walz, 2002). In one of his more recent accounts 
of the information that should be taken into account when determining the 
pedagogical norm, Valdman (2002) identifies three factors that should be used 
to identify the norm for approximation to a target language: linguistic, sociopsychological, and acquisitional (p. 61). Thus, we see that the grammar of a 
language and the field of sociopragmatics are integrated by accounting for 
a range of authentic communicative situations and texts thereby reflecting 
a functional use of the language. This stands in contrast to approaches that 
offer the planned discourse of educated native speakers as the goal for language learners. In fact, Valdman notes that this is especially inappropriate for 
beginning and intermediate learners. The third factor that Valdman addresses 
is the acquisitional factor; in so doing, he successfully addresses the orders of 
instruction of forms and the selection of forms for instruction while accounting for the instructed learning context. Valdman notes that some forms are 
acquired more easily than others and the goal of language instruction should 
be to teach those forms that are not only functionally important and a reflection of actual language use, but also those that are manageable for learners at 
a given level of proficiency. He uses question formation in French to illustrate 
these ideas, noting that sociolinguistic research reveals that while fronting 
NORMS AND TARGETSg
and in-situ question forms are the most frequently used among middle-class 
speakers, inversion is hardly ever used in neutral conversations (Behnstedt, 
1973; Coveney, 1996). Using acquisitional data, however, he explains that 
although inversion is quite complicated for learners to produce, given the 
number of exceptions to its formation, fronting is generally more straightforward for second language learners and, thus, sociolinguistics and acquisition 
converge to identify fronting as the appropriate starting point for second language instruction. He recommends that instruction about question formation 
using est-ce que follow that which introduces fronting, and that inversion be 
taught as a characteristic of writing at slightly later stages of development. 
This analysis of question formation and the pedagogical norm is summarized 
in Table 9.1. It is important also to note that several other means of question 
formation exist, but these options are selected for the functions they fulfill, 
their ease of processability, and their ability to assist learners in developing 
functional competence.
An important aspect of the conversation about pedagogical norms is the 
metalinguistic knowledge that it brings to the classroom (in addition to acquisition of linguistic forms themselves). Valdman addresses this specifically in his 
2002 formulation of the pedagogical norm, but the awareness of norms of use 
is inherent in earlier treatments as well. Classic works such as those by Keller 
(1982) remind the reader that the goal of (bilingual) education ought to be a 
consciousness-raising campaign through which learners become aware that all 
speakers control a vernacular and that these vernaculars are not only acceptable 
but are, in fact, essential in certain situations. What is more, learners must come 
to recognize that no single vernacular is superior to another. Train (2002) notes 
that the goal of second language instruction should be a critical awareness that 
allows learners to see variation as inherent to all languages and that explores the 
link between language attitudes and beliefs and the construction of individual 
identities through language. The discussion of pedagogical norms is equally 
relevant for the norms for instruction of Heritage speakers of Spanish (in the 
US classroom). For example, over thirty years ago scholars noted that learners 
ought to be made aware of the many social functions of language, acquiring the 
ability to fulfill these functions by making use of several varieties of a language, 
and that we might avoid a prescriptivist (and sometimes racist) approach 
through sociolinguistic training, including critical evaluation of norms set by 
dominant social groups (e.g., García-Moya, 1981; Sánchez, 1981; Valdés, 1995). 
These ideas remain relevant today, and, as Valdman (1988) noted, the range of 
norms we select for the classroom ought to be a function of second language 
proficiency as well as general linguistic sophistication of the learners. These 
themes will be explored in the second half of this chapter as we examine the 
implications of pedagogical norms for classroom instruction.
236 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
TABLE 9.1
French question formation and the pedagogical norm
Question 
type
Example Sociolinguistic 
patterns
Acquisitional 
patterns
Recommendation 
for instruction
Fronting Où tu vas? More 
frequently 
occurring but 
stigmatized; 
does not share 
all functions 
with in situ
Easily learned 
(Valdman, 
1975, 1976) 
and seems 
like easiest 
variant to 
process
Early instruction 
for oral 
production (and 
comprehension)
In situ Tu vas où? More 
frequently 
occurring but 
stigmatized; 
does not share 
all functions 
with fronting
Likely easily 
learned, 
since 
syntactically 
less complex
Include in input 
so that receptive 
abilities develop for 
oral production
Est-ce que Où est-ce 
que tu 
vas?
Subject to 
wide variation; 
more neutral 
than inversion 
and less 
stigmatized 
than fronting 
and in situ
Likely easily 
learned 
and used 
(based on 
contrastive 
analysis)
Include for 
instruction at 
a later stage for 
oral production 
(and even later for 
comprehension 
and production in 
writing)
Inversion Où vas-tu? Relatively rare 
in spoken 
French 
(especially 
in informal 
interactions)
Subject 
to many 
syntactic 
constraints; 
acquired late
Include only for 
written mode; later 
than instruction 
with fronting
HOW ARE NORMS RELATED TO LANGUAGE VARIATION?
In the first several chapters of this book we examined basic facts of language 
variation and, especially, the ways in which language variation is important 
in considering the process of acquiring sociolinguistic competence. Returning to the definition proposed by Canale and Swain (1980) (see Chapter One 
NORMS AND TARGETSg
for details), we will recall that this ability refers to the capacity to take into 
account the context of interaction in order to properly interpret or produce 
the social messages that accompany a linguistic form. More simply put, this 
means that we hope that our second language students will develop the tools 
to respond appropriately to the social (interactional) situations in which they 
find themselves. In this sense, we seek to help learners acquire a second language grammar that includes linguistic variation. This may contrast somewhat 
with a portion of the research cited in the previous section in which “standards” 
or even “norms” are viewed as unchanging for a given speech community. For 
example, selecting a linguistic standard may have been viewed as “picking the 
right variety”, rather than the right variants for a given circumstance. In some 
cases this has even been reduced to purely geographical considerations, ignoring social characteristics completely. Likewise, even if norm is taken to refer to 
the most frequent form used by a given speech community, we might mistakenly decide that we simply need to identify that “most frequent form” and use 
that as our pedagogical model. Nevertheless, what is important to consider is 
that the norm itself includes variable structures. If some forms are used most 
often, this implies that others are also used. If we return to the idea of sociolinguistic competence, we can easily see that our target for acquisition must be 
a variable target. Otherwise, second language learners will not be able to demonstrate precisely the linguistic variation that native speakers use to respond 
to differing situations.
There are several concepts related to sociolinguistic variation that will be 
useful to recall as we explore the implications of selecting a target for language instruction. For example, it is important to consider that language varies across a range of characteristics. Geography, for example, is likely what we 
think of first when we think of language variation. We know that languages 
are spoken in slightly different ways from one location to another. In cases like 
Spanish, English, Portuguese, and French, where different nations on different continents all speak the same language, the differences are easily noticed 
by all speakers. That said, selecting US English as the target of second language learners in the US, or Canadian French for second language learners 
of French in Canada, is not likely to attract attention. In contrast, when we 
explore the variants associated particularly with men or with women, those 
that vary according to social class or those that vary with age, we enter into a 
more subtle conversation about the target for language learners. The selection 
of a single non-variable target for all contexts and all learners is likely to lead 
second language learners to speak like highly educated, upper-middle-class 
women in a formal situation. This works well if these social characteristics 
apply, but not so well, for others. What is more, even speakers who do fit that 
social description need to be able to sound more or less formal depending on 
the context of their interactions. Thus, it is important to remind ourselves that 
linguistic variation is not limited to geography and, in fact, there are several 
238 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
other social factors that must be accounted for in selecting an appropriate target
(or range of targets) for second language classrooms.
Another important fact about language variation is that we vary our speech 
from one setting to another. For native speakers, this has been explored as a 
function of the formality of the context as well as a function of the audience of 
our utterances (see Chapters Two and Three for details). For second language 
learners, we often see evidence of task-based variation. This has been explained 
as a function of attention paid to the task, the demands of the task (cognitive, 
time pressure, etc.), as well as a host of other factors (see also Chapter Seven). 
In both cases what is important to recognize is that an important part of using 
a language to communicate effectively includes precisely this type of variation. Although it may prove quite difficult to represent all combinations of all 
social factors equally well in a language classroom, and one might even assess 
the disadvantages of doing so, it is, in fact, quite simple to include a variety 
of tasks for interaction in the language classroom. Once we begin to deliberately design tasks to represent a range of social situations and provide students 
with tools to respond appropriately, we are on our way to helping students 
to develop communicative competence. Practical ideas for how this might be 
accomplished will be explored in greater depth in the next chapter, but the key 
issue for the current conversation is that we must connect the target we select 
for language instruction to social variation, geographic variation, and also to 
situational (or task) variation.
A final important concept to bear in mind is that language variation affects 
all levels of the grammar. In Chapter Two we explored examples of variation 
in lexical choices, variation in morphosyntax, variation in the sound system, 
and variation in pragmatic aspects of the grammar. As far as linguistic analysis 
goes, there was little difference to be seen: all of these variants were a function of the confluence of social, situational, linguistic, and individual factors. Nevertheless, there are likely some important differences between levels 
of the grammar as we explore the selection of a target for language learners. 
For example, whether one uses the word durazno or the word melocotón for 
‘peach’ in Spanish is not likely to attract a great deal of attention. In contrast, 
we tend to expect that there is a “correct” form for a given verb tense and 
this may lead us to consider the importance of pedagogical norms differently 
for different features of the second language grammar. This idea will also be 
explored in greater depth in the discussion that follows.
HOW DOES THE IDENTIFICATION OF LINGUISTIC NORMS 
AFFECT THE SECOND LANGUAGE CLASSROOM?
We began this chapter with a discussion of the notion of standard language, 
the linguist’s pursuit of identifying speech norms for a given community, 
NORMS AND TARGETSg
and the language instructor’s task of clarifying the target for second language 
learners. Next, we identified some of the facts about language variation in general that might be most relevant when considering targets and language learning. Our goal for the remainder of the chapter is to explore some of the areas 
of instruction that are likely to be most directly connected to the selection of 
a pedagogical norm. It may be helpful as we explore these areas of instruction to bear in mind the research reviewed in earlier chapters. For example, 
Nagy, Blondeau, and Auger’s (2003) study of Anglophones in Montreal connected the degree of classroom instruction and contact outside the classroom 
to the acquisition of subject doubling, a linguistic feature associated with the 
French spoken in Quebec. Their study contrasted learners who participated in 
French as a foreign language class, those who were part of French immersion 
programs, and those who attended schools in which French language was the 
medium for all instruction. They developed an integration index to reflect the 
degree to which speakers were involved in the Francophone community outside the context of instruction. Their results showed that the integration index 
was indeed related to the rates of use of subject doubling but that other factors were also important. For example, these learners were sensitive to several 
(but not all) of the linguistic factors that determined use for native speakers in 
the region. Additionally, the analysis showed that a speaker’s recent environment had an important effect on rates of subject doubling, such that speakers 
who used French at work (currently) were more likely to have higher rates of 
use. Finally, they cautioned that their results might be indicative of incomplete 
acquisition or of attitudinal factors and that only further research would be 
able to distinguish between these two effects. Returning to the discussion of 
pedagogical norms and targets, these results demonstrate that regional variants can be acquired, that this appears to be done through interaction, and 
that this is likely an important part of developing competence that allows one 
to function outside the classroom in the target language. Finally, although 
the learners who had less interaction with native French speakers outside the 
classroom tended to show lower rates of use of this form, the positive upshot 
is that they, too, had acquired some use of this form. The purpose of the current chapter is not to assess how one might accomplish the goal of providing 
the instruction necessary for the development of sociolinguistic competence, 
which will be addressed in Chapter Ten, but rather to discuss some of the bigger issues related to pedagogical norms which ought to further motivate us to 
use our knowledge of language variation to improve classroom instruction.
Grammar Instruction
In Chapter One we discussed the importance of the role of input, regardless 
of the theoretical model to which one subscribes. This means that a good 
240 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
instructional model provides plenty of input (language in context). Nevertheless, when we think of the type of instruction that takes place in the language 
classroom, we also call to mind the study of the grammatical rules that govern 
a given language. The discussion in Chapter One also explored the limits of 
metalinguistic knowledge on developing grammars but identified some specific ways in which a focus on grammatical forms might positively influence 
learner grammars. If we take as a starting point that acquisition proceeds as 
learners connect form(s) to meaning(s), then we can also imagine that one 
of the central roles of the language classroom is to foster this connection 
formation. To be sure, these connections will be imagined to take differing 
forms depending on the theoretical model one follows. Nevertheless, theoretical models ranging from neural networks (e.g., Connectionism) to parameter resetting (e.g., Universal Grammar) recognize that the evidence provided 
through formal instruction of grammatical points can be of some value. Thus, 
leaving aside the debate over the specific role that metalinguistic knowledge 
plays, if we assume that it is of some benefit, we can then consider the connection between instruction of grammatical forms and the identification of a 
pedagogical norm.
One of the first issues that arises as we consider instruction focused on 
forms of a grammar is the very definition of grammaticality. If we think of 
traditional definitions of standard language, then a grammatical form is one 
which is “correct” or “proper”, but if we move toward an understanding of 
norms of speech, our target for language learners will include variation. This 
means that there may be more than one correct form and that certain forms 
may enjoy varying degrees of acceptability. In other words, we move away from 
a binary definition of “correct” and “incorrect” and toward an understanding 
that some forms are acceptable in some contexts, and, in some cases, there is 
simply more than one acceptable form. It is important to caution the reader 
that we do not intend to advocate for an “anything goes” approach. Instead, in 
teaching grammar, as with other aspects of the language, we need to invoke the 
concept of variation such that “appropriateness” is context-dependent. Before 
we explore this idea further, it may be helpful to exemplify these degrees of 
acceptability. Table 9.2 below contains a list of utterances, some of which are 
widely acceptable and others of which are widely unacceptable. As you read 
through these utterances, consider ranking them on a scale of 0–10 where 0 is 
completely unacceptable and 10 is completely acceptable.
As you rated each sentence, it is likely that some forms struck you as completely incorrect or ungrammatical and others are fully acceptable. The cases in 
between, however, are the most relevant for the current discussion. In the cases 
where an utterance was ranked somewhere between 0 and 10, you may have 
thought about when it would be appropriate to use a given form, who might 
use that form, or where it might be used appropriately. In these instances, our 
NORMS AND TARGETSg
knowledge of sociolinguistic variation tells us that there are several factors that 
determine just how widely acceptable a form is, and it is precisely these factors 
that might guide our instruction of grammatical forms. For example, some 
forms are informal but appropriate for use by speakers regardless of individual 
characteristics. Other forms are less widely used, but this is because they are 
geographically limited in their extension. In both of these cases, the forms are 
likely quite appropriate for inclusion in the language classroom and ought to 
be presented along with information regarding the factors that govern their 
use. Relating this back to the selection of a pedagogical norm for a given classroom environment, we might consider whether the form in question is widely 
used in the community that represents the best target for that set of learners. Certainly a form that is widely used in the target speech community is 
a better candidate than a form that is perfectly acceptable but only used in 
a geographic region with which learners have little contact. Thus, one clear 
guideline for the instruction of grammatical forms as it relates to pedagogical norms is that among forms which are generally acceptable but might not 
share the same frequency of use across speech communities (e.g., those that 
are limited geographically in extension), those that are the best candidates for 
instruction are those that are most likely to be heard by the learner in future 
TABLE 9.2
Acceptability ratings
Examples How acceptable?
0 (unacceptable)–10 (acceptable)
How do you like them apples?
It ain’t over until I say so.
Marla is the woman I spoke to.
Bret, Jordan, and myself are going to a 
concert.
He don’t have no time.
Where are you at?
You coming along?
The fact was evidenced by later 
research.
A classmate asked me to help them 
with their homework.
242 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
interactions. To be sure, for some foreign language environments the implication is actually that a range of forms should be taught precisely because learners may encounter speakers from several different geographic regions in their 
future interactions.
Another important consideration has to do with forms that vary in acceptance rates by social class and, therefore, carry a degree of social stigma in some 
circumstances. In such cases, the learner might benefit from exposure in the 
input to such forms, but these forms are not likely to be the best candidates 
for formal instruction at early levels of proficiency. Second language learners 
tend to acquire non-variant forms first (i.e., those that enjoy a one-to-one connection between form and meaning) and this is likely also true for forms that 
vary according to social factors. Thus, although we can certainly see room for 
inclusion of these features at higher levels of proficiency, learners are likely 
best served through formal instruction of the most widely accepted forms at 
early levels of development. The degree to which this is true is also likely to be 
a function of the area of the grammar taught. In Chapter Three we saw that 
variation in lexical items tends to carry less stigma and is often a function of 
geography. In contrast, variation at the level of morphosyntax is generally less 
widely accepted. For example, Rickford (1996) notes that variation in phonology and syntax enjoy less acceptance than that at the lexical level in a given 
language. Even as we explore variation in morphosyntax we see that certain differences, such as variation between two existing forms (e.g., future time forms 
in Spanish: voy a hablar ‘I’m going to speak’ and hablaré ‘I will speak’), may be 
less stigmatized than variation that includes an innovative form (e.g., dijistes in 
Spanish: ‘you said’, where the ‘s’ morphology associated with second-person 
singular forms is extended to the preterit form, which prescriptively would 
be dijiste; see Chapter Two for details of research by Barnes [2012] on this 
issue). In general it is likely that variability is less tolerated at the level of morphosyntax than in other areas of the grammar, and these degrees of acceptance 
of variability might also guide our selection of forms for focused instruction.
Thus far we have noted firstly that even variable forms differ in their range 
of acceptability across speech communities. We have further noted that when 
there is a clear target community for language instruction it is precisely the 
variants used by this community that make sense to include in formal grammar exercises. Likewise, those forms that share a lesser degree of social stigma, 
particularly at the level of morphosyntax, where variation appears to be less 
tolerated than in other areas, are good candidates for formal instruction at 
lower levels of proficiency. Nevertheless, it is important to end here with a word 
of caution: while clearly one can err by including forms that are stigmatized 
and failing to provide learners with sufficient information to use these forms 
in appropriate contexts, it is equally possible to err in some cases on the side of 
hyper-formal language. Even if we tend to expect second language speakers to 
NORMS AND TARGETSg
be slightly more polite than native speakers, learners who are too formal might 
also be viewed as off-putting to native speakers of the language. For example, 
the use of preposition-stranding in English, while technically incorrect, is so 
commonplace in US speech that failure to do so in some contexts sounds stifled 
or even snobbish. For most speakers, it would be quite odd to hear someone 
pose the question “to whom are you speaking?” as opposed to “who are you 
talking to?” in informal conversational exchanges. It is easy to imagine similar 
parallels in the context of learning Spanish in the Southwestern US or learning 
French in Canada, where use of a form from Peninsular Spanish or European 
French could alienate the listener (see Auger, 2002b; Gutiérrez & Fairclough, 
2006; and Villa, 1996). In these cases, sensitivity to regional norms is essential 
so that learners have the tools to initiate and continue the interactions that will 
provide them with additional input and allow them to further their development in the language. At higher levels of ability, use of excessively prescriptive 
grammatical forms may impede a learner’s ability to express their individual 
identity as well. Interesting research out of New York City, for example, has 
shown that second language learners of English do not always identify with the 
same ethnic groups and that the language they acquire differs not according to 
their classroom instruction but rather based on the social groups with which 
they most identify (Eisenstein, 1986). To this end, focus on form(s) should not 
entail subscription to a single target for all learners. Instead, it will be important to consider the degrees of acceptability of grammatical forms as well as 
the proficiency of the learner and to create instructional materials accordingly. 
The earlier discussion of question formation in French is an excellent example 
of how these factors interact to determine appropriate forms for instruction 
(e.g., Valdman, 2002). At the outset we mentioned that teaching grammar in 
context is an appropriate way to provide input as well as maximize the benefits 
of formal instruction. It should be clear from the discussion thus far that this 
approach to formal grammar instruction allows us to provide the additional 
information regarding use of a form essential to the successful communication 
on the part of the learner. Furthermore, it enables us to contextualize tasks and 
assessments in order to include variables such as speaker and setting in those 
measures. Thus, regardless of the theoretical framework or the pedagogical 
approach employed, we can see that when considering the pedagogical norm 
for instruction of second language grammar, providing forms in context—
linguistic and social context to be exact—will provide learners with the tools to 
use these forms effectively in the future.
Heritage Speakers
Another important consideration related to the selection of a pedagogical 
norm is that of instruction for Heritage speakers of a language. Although there 
244 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
is some debate, a Heritage speaker is generally understood to be an individual 
who learns a language through interactions with one or more family members 
in a home environment from a very early age. Such speakers are often characterized by their native-like comprehension despite limited access to formal 
varieties of the language or formal education in that language. Although in 
the US one of the most numerous groups of Heritage speakers includes those 
who learn Spanish at home (see La Corte & Canabal [2002] and Potowski 
[2013] for reviews), the term should be understood to include speakers of any 
language that is not the medium of communication or formal instruction outside the home. In some geographic areas there are enough speakers with the 
same Heritage background to offer classes with curriculum and materials specifically designed for Heritage learners. In other cases, Heritage learners enroll 
in the same language classes as learners without this background. No matter 
the learning context or the number of Heritage speakers of a given language 
in that context, the issue of pedagogical norm is central to providing quality 
instruction to all learners.
It can also be important to reflect on the impact of Heritage speakers on 
language education in a given institutional context. For example, in assessing the impact of Spanish Heritage speakers in the US, Potowski and Carreira 
(2004), note that the extent to which this group has influenced Spanish language education is not a trivial matter. Although the US has the greatest number of Spanish speakers worldwide, the historical and cultural aspects related 
to this language have not necessarily enjoyed a prominent role in US history 
and culture. This has facilitated a Spanish educational context in the US that 
aims to integrate Spanish speakers into (more often than not) English-speaking 
learners’ Spanish language courses, rather than the integration of Heritage 
speakers and second language learners into courses suitable to their respective 
linguistic and cultural backgrounds (Potowski & Carreira, 2004, p. 422). This 
reality carries important implications for the examination of learner goals, 
particularly for Heritage speakers.
Generally speaking, the goal of most language learners, Heritage or not, is 
to acquire the ability to communicate effectively in a given language. By this 
we do not simply mean enjoying a nice conversation, but rather possessing the 
necessary written and oral skills to achieve one’s goals (social, professional, 
economic, academic, etc.) across a range of contexts and situations. In other 
words, communicative competence requires a learner to function in formal 
and informal settings both in written and oral modes. This means that students who do not have exposure to a language outside of the classroom must 
have access to informal registers, to regional varieties, and to a range of social 
and professional interactions. When viewed in this way, Heritage speakers can 
be seen to have similar goals. The key distinction is that Heritage speakers 
are likely to have access to informal situations with greater frequency than 
NORMS AND TARGETSg
formal situations, and the role of classroom instruction is to provide access to 
formal registers in writing and speaking. It should be clear that if we view the 
goal of instruction as developing communicative competence and we recognize that the pedagogical norm ought to include a range of forms along with 
information about when such forms are appropriate, this information might 
guide language teachers toward effective course materials for both Heritage 
and non-Heritage learners alike. This idea is echoed by some of the leading 
practitioners in the field, and textbooks for intermediate learners have been 
designed to meet the goals of diverse learner populations by following precisely this interpretation of target (cf. Potowski, 2013).
A second important consideration when thinking of Heritage speakers, 
whether in separate or combined classes with non-Heritage learners, is the 
message we send about language attitudes. As we mentioned briefly in the 
previous section, using a variety of a language that does not correspond with 
local speech communities may unnecessarily alienate local speakers. Additionally, failure to use the local variety of a language as the basis for instruction may 
send the message that this variety is somehow inferior to others or reinforce 
use of dominant, non-local language variety (cf. Leeman, 2005, 2012). Villa 
(1996) notes this by suggesting that the community variety should be the basis 
for classroom instruction while at the same time serving as a springboard for 
developing respect for formal written standards that likely enjoy more transgeographic distribution. Gutiérrez and Fairclough (2006) provide an excellent 
discussion of the case of US Spanish in the language classroom in Texas. They 
provide several good arguments in favor of incorporating US Spanish in the 
classroom. First, they note that the professional goals of all students, Heritage 
or otherwise, are likely linked to economic success that comes from the ability 
to use Spanish in the workplace. Obviously, an inability to use the local variety 
will thwart one’s success in this area. Second, they note that the very selection 
of pedagogical materials reveals information about the language attitudes of the 
course designers, such that a failure to include the local variety of Spanish may 
send an unintended message about prestige (see also Leeman, 2012). Research 
has documented both that language instructors often have negative attitudes 
toward local (contact) varieties (Valdés, González, López García, & Márquez, 
2003) and that Heritage speakers are aware of negative attitudes toward their 
own language varieties (Bernal-Enríquez & Chávez, 2003). McGroarty (1996) 
explores the relationship among motivation, attitude, and learner outcomes 
and notes that the degree to which studying a second language and/or studying sociolinguistics impacts general language attitudes is influenced by the 
length of study and the quality of that instruction. Leeman (2012) has shown 
us how prevailing language ideologies impact not only the pedagogical materials selected (see also Leeman & Martínez [2007] for discussion of language 
ideologies present in Spanish Heritage language textbooks), but also which 
246 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
varieties may be considered in creating and revising educational policy and 
curricula, how learners are assessed, and even who the preferred instructor is. 
With regard to assessment, a particular challenge educators and researchers 
face is the development of placement exams that account for the variation 
present in Heritage speakers’ linguistic knowledge and, thus, place them in 
appropriate instructional courses (e.g., Beaudrie & Ducar, 2012; Fairclough, 
2006; Potowski, Parada, & Morgan-Short, 2012). Regardless of whether or not 
an institution offers courses for Heritage speakers, an implication is that these 
high-stakes exams should directly respond to the variation present between 
the home variety and the academic variety of the Heritage speakers within 
each individual institutional context. As language instructors and/or program 
administrators, one of our primary goals should be to instill a respect for the 
diversity of varieties that exist, as well as the competence required to understand the norms of use in a wide range of contexts (cf. Potowski & Carreira, 
2004). Again, the position of the authors cited here is not that the local variety 
ought to stand in for all instructional purposes but rather that part of acquiring a second language ought to be developing an understanding of language 
variation and with that understanding, an awareness of the value of both local 
varieties and formal written and oral varieties.
Second Dialect Acquisition
A final area of discussion that is intricately linked to geographic variation and 
to Heritage speakers is that of second dialect acquisition. This construct refers 
to the addition of another variety of a language. This variety may differ by 
register (more or less formal), by geography, by ethnicity, or any of the other 
social factors examined in earlier chapters. In many instances this term has 
been used to describe the appropriate pedagogical goals for Heritage speakers 
(e.g., Martínez, 2003; Valdés, 1997), but it is also equally applicable to varieties that differ by ethnicity or geography. For example, classroom learners of 
German who find themselves in Austria, learners of French who spend time in 
Montreal, or learners of Spanish who study abroad in the Dominican Republic 
are all likely to encounter a variety of the language that is different from most 
of the input to which they were exposed in the classroom setting. The purpose of raising this issue as part of the discussion of targets for acquisition is 
twofold. First, it is helpful to remember, as was mentioned above, that several 
varieties might have a valid place in the classroom. The second is to make the 
connection with research reported in recent chapters regarding the acquisition 
of social variation, particularly in the study abroad environment. From the 
review of that literature, we saw that learners are, indeed, quite capable of adding the variants of an additional variety to their linguistic repertoire. Moreover, they are able with time to acquire the constraints on use that influence 
NORMS AND TARGETSg
TABLE 9.3
Summary of evidence for second dialect acquisition
Language Region of study Variant(s) acquired
French France (e.g., Regan, 
Howard, & Lemée, 2009)
Ne deletion
Nous/on alternation
Word final /l/-deletion
Future-time expression
Japanese Japan (e.g., Ishida, 2006; 
Marriott, 1995)
Use of discourse marker 
ne
Alternation of polite and 
casual forms
Spanish Dominican Republic 
(Schmidt, 2009)
Spain (Geeslin, 
García-Amaya, Hasler, 
Henriksen, & Killam, 
2012; Knouse, 2012; 
Ringer-Hilfinger, 
2012)
Cross-regional 
comparison (e.g., 
Kanwit, Fafulas, & 
Geeslin, 2011; 
Kanwit & Solon, 2013; 
Salgado-Robles, 2011)
Multiple variants 
associated with the DR
Spanish /θ/
Leísmo, future-time 
expression, present, 
copula contrast, 
simple present/present 
progressive alternation, 
simple past/present 
perfect alternation
both frequency of occurrence of a form and the contexts for that use. The 
acquisition of features from a new variety extends across areas of the grammar 
as well. Table 9.3 provides a summary of evidence of the ability of learners to 
acquire a second dialect.
The research summarized in Table 9.3 demonstrates that learners at a range 
of proficiency levels are able to acquire the features of additional varieties of 
a language. This appears to be true for learners whose previous experience 
was relatively mono-dialectal and for learners who likely received input from 
a range of varieties of the second language over their years of study. Returning, then, to the idea of pedagogical norms, the implication is that there is 
no single appropriate starting point for second language acquisition. One can 
define “target” according to community, learning context, learner goals, and 
248 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
the like, and learners will be able to acquire additional varieties as their needs 
and circumstances dictate. What is more, we can also make a case for the value 
of including sociolinguistic variation in the classroom from the start so that 
learners are aware that linguistic variation is, in fact, an important part of any 
language.
Materials Selection and Development
As we have explored the tradition of identifying linguistic standards, norms 
of use, and appropriate pedagogical norms for a given classroom setting, we 
have made the point that knowledge of sociolinguistic variation is helpful for 
language instructors and for language learners. What is more, the inclusion 
of language across registers, dialects, and social groups in the language classroom provides benefits to learners which include the ability to initiate and 
continue conversations, to connect with those in the community as well as 
those beyond, to use language in formal work place environments, and to view 
language variation as a natural and essential part of all languages. Generally 
speaking, language teachers readily accept these ideas but may find themselves 
uncertain of exactly how to create a classroom environment in which such 
goals are met. In fact, Pérez-Leroux and Glass (2000) perceive this need and 
demonstrate how the use of scenarios in which instructors confront the overly 
prescriptive use of language in textbooks in order to explore these issues can 
be useful in teacher training. In the next chapter we will find more specific 
instructional guidelines, but in light of having explored the selection of appropriate targets for language instruction, we conclude this chapter with some 
guidelines for the selection and development of classroom materials.
Find an Audience
Learners come to language classes with goals ranging from earning a good 
grade, to meeting an academic requirement, and to learning to speak to a distant family member. It would be quite rare for all learners in a given classroom to have identical goals. Nevertheless, communicative competence entails 
effective language use in context. Language teachers who can identify relevant 
contexts and provide learners with the tools to communicate with relevant 
audiences will foster communicative competence.
Know About Naturally Occurring Input
For many second language learners, sources of input in the target language 
abound. This might include local communities, previous language instructors, 
study abroad opportunities, or access to language through technology or print 
NORMS AND TARGETSg
media. In every case, instructors should seek to identify the input to which a 
learner has access. Doing so allows a teacher to maximize available resources 
and foster a diversity of experience by compensating for input that is not readily available (by providing access to additional varieties and/or contexts of use).
Recognize Unspoken Messages
Given the importance of language attitudes in second language acquisition, 
motivation, and expression of individual identities, language instructors must 
understand that the materials provided for classroom instruction send a message to students. Classroom materials that include examples of many varieties of a language along with a sociolinguistic analysis of norms of use send 
the message that language variation is an important part of communication, 
rather than something that must be eradicated.
Get Personal
Part of learning a language is making connections between linguistic forms 
and social meanings. These meanings can be personal in terms of experience, 
interest, and identity. Rickford (1996) notes that the dialects of teachers and 
students matter, and that part of gaining competence in language rests on 
understanding the variability in our own language. The successful instructor 
is one who can demonstrate the connections between language and experience, and there is no better set of examples than our own experiences. There 
is no correct set of experiences and no best variety of a language. Thus, one of 
the best resources that language instructors have is their own personal interest 
and knowledge.
Shake It Up a Bit!
If we are to provide students with the opportunities to develop sociolinguistic 
competence, this entails creating a range of contexts for interaction, providing exposure to different types of speech and to a wide range of speakers, and 
providing some knowledge of the factors that influence the linguistic forms we 
choose in those diverse situations. In addition to holding our students’ interest, we would do well to explore the resources available to us through existing technologies and to integrate new samples of language into the classroom. 
Auger (2002a, 2002b) provides a detailed exploration of how film or music 
might be integrated into the language classroom as a means for representing 
regional dialects. Several new language texts also include links to websites that 
assist with this endeavor. In sum, a little exploration is likely to uncover exciting new examples of language from which our students can benefit.
250 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
HOW ARE CLASSROOM LEARNERS DIFFERENT 
FROM NATURALISTIC LEARNERS?
The guidelines above for selecting materials after appropriate targets and pedagogical norms have been identified demonstrate that the second language 
classroom generally differs from naturalistic contexts of learning in several 
ways. An awareness of these differences as they relate to pedagogical norms 
and material development is a good starting point for improving classroom 
instruction. First, we note that classroom learners have access to a reduced 
range of language varieties and to contexts for interaction. In the case of Heritage speakers, this often means exposure to informal situations in the local 
variety of a language (or the variety spoken by family members) rather than 
broad exposure to formal language from a wider range of speakers. For nonHeritage learners, this means access to largely formal contexts of use and a 
general lack of access to any local variety. In both cases, an awareness of this 
on the part of the instructor can serve as a useful guide in providing a broader 
range of input and contexts for interaction. McGroarty (1996) referred to this 
as the diversification of opportunities to produce appropriate language, and 
this appears to be an essential part of building competence for all groups of 
learners.
A second difference is that classroom learners may lack a personal connection to the second language. In naturalistic settings the language learner 
may view the target language positively or negatively (see discussions of the 
work by Norton Peirce, for example, in Chapter Four), but through direct 
contact learners have a personal relationship to the target. A second language 
classroom, however, does not necessarily allow students to make a personal 
connection with speakers of the language. In order for learners to acquire 
multiple functions of a language, it will be important to explore the ways in 
which learners might personalize their experience with the language. This is 
likely most connected to individual student goals and a consideration of the 
audience(s) for language use.
A third key distinction is that classroom second language learners may have 
more shallow contact with a broader range of varieties, particularly those with 
different geographic associations. For example, many native speakers or naturalistic learners of a given language specialize in one and only one geographic 
variety of a language. In contrast, classroom learners of a language may have 
instructors from different geographic regions for each course they take, may 
study abroad in a completely different location, and may have access at the 
same time to textbook materials representing several additional varieties. To 
be sure, this is a positive characteristic of classroom learning, but one that can 
catch an instructor unprepared for questions such as “Which variety should 
I study?” or “Which variety is the best one?” Thus, as we recognize these 
NORMS AND TARGETSg
multiple points of contact, we must necessarily redefine “target” as something 
that encompasses several varieties and we must advocate for representation 
of a variety of groups of speakers in order to best prepare students and also 
to establish positive attitudes toward linguistic variation. Auger (2002b) notes 
that the goals for immersion learners and for foreign language learners differ, 
but even in contexts with a multi-norm target such as the typical foreign language classroom, the study of a particular regional variety will show learners 
that language is not monolithic, will better prepare them for all interactions, 
and will provide them with the essential tools to understand an additional 
sociolinguistic situation. Each of these benefits exists even in cases where the 
student in question does not interact with speakers of that variety of the language on a regular basis.
We conclude with one final distinction between second language learners 
and native speakers, and perhaps even between classroom learners of a second 
language and naturalistic learners—that is, the expectations of native speakers 
regarding the forms that nonnative speakers should use in a second language. 
We have seen in earlier chapters that there are cases where nonnative speakers 
appear to overshoot the target norm in their use of the informal variant (e.g., 
–in vs. –ing; Adamson & Regan, 1991). Likewise, we have identified benefits 
of acquiring informal registers for second language learners, such as making 
connections with target communities and fostering personal relationships 
that allow for continued interaction and acquisition. Nevertheless, research 
has documented cases in which nonnative speakers were perceived as impolite 
because they did not master native strategies (e.g., Tanaka, 1988). In fact, it 
may be the case that use of slightly more mitigation or slightly higher degrees 
of politeness compensates for other nonnative features in the grammar. Thus, 
it is important to bear in mind that it may also be quite possible that certain 
variants, even those that are widely used by certain speakers in the target language, will not serve a nonnative speaker well in his or her efforts to make 
personal connections. Again, the central theme remains that learners benefit 
from awareness of sociolinguistic variation, and this is true even in cases where 
the expectations for nonnative speakers differ from those for native speakers 
of a language.
SUMMARY
In this chapter we explored the ways in which sociolinguistic variation might 
be accounted for within the pedagogical norms we select for second language 
instruction. We noted that linguists seek to describe the norms of use for a 
given community, including those norms that vary across speakers, linguistic 
contexts, and interactional contexts, and that language learners will develop 
communicative competence through an understanding of and exposure to 
252 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
these same facts. It was suggested that the second language classroom materials should be a reflection of the local communities of practice, of the goals 
and potential audience of the learners, and of the personal experiences of the 
language instructor. Our focus throughout has been on the establishment of 
an understanding of linguistic variation and a positive attitude toward multiple varieties of the target language. This chapter has served to explore the 
philosophical considerations and big-picture decisions a language instructor 
must make, and the chapter that follows will connect these ideas to practical 
suggestions for implementation.
READING BEYOND THE TEXT
a. Galindo, D.L. (1995). Language attitudes toward Spanish and English varieties: A Chicano perspective. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 17,
77–99.
b. Gutiérrez, M., & Fairclough, M. (2006). Incorporating linguistic variation 
into the classroom. In R. Salaberry & B. Lafford (Eds.), The Art of Teaching 
Spanish (pp. 173–191). Washington: Georgetown University Press.
c. Nagy, N., Blondeau, H., & Auger, J. (2003). Second language acquisition 
and “real” French: An investigation of subject doubling in the French of 
Montreal Anglophones. Language Variation and Change, 15(1), 73–103.
d. Poplack, S., & Dion, N. (2009). Prescription vs. praxis: The evolution of 
future temporal reference in French. Language, 85(3), 558–587.
e. Valdman, A. (2002). The acquisition of sociostylistic and sociopragmatic 
variation by instructed second language learners: The elaboration of pedagogical norms. In C. Blyth (Ed.), The Sociolinguistics of Foreign-Language 
Classrooms: Contributions of the Native, the Near-Native, and the NonNative Speaker (pp. 57–78). Boston: Heinle.
COMPREHENSION AND APPLICATION
A. Comprehension
1. How is “standard” language defined? What term do linguists now use 
more commonly than “standard”?
2. What is the difference between prescriptive norms and descriptive 
norms?
3. What is a sociolect?
4. What do sociolinguists seek to understand, with respect to social characteristics?
5. List three questions that may help to determine whether a variety is 
awarded prestige or stigma.
6. What is language loyalty?
NORMS AND TARGETSg
7. According to Train (2002), what is the relationship between variation 
and standardization?
8. What three factors did Valdman (2002) state should be used to identify 
target norms?
9. According to Behnstedt (1973), Coveney (1996), and Valdman (2002), 
why does it make sense to teach question fronting first in second language French?
10. What does Keller (1982) say should be the goal of bilingual education?
11. In Nagy, Blondeau, and Auger (2003), what factors were associated 
with subject doubling in French?
12. What characteristics are generally associated with Heritage speakers? 
Do some characteristics vary from one Heritage speaker to another 
more than others?
13. What is second dialect acquisition?
14. What are three ways in which classroom and naturalistic learners differ?
B. Application
1. Given what you have read about sociolinguistic variation thus far, how 
has your concept of what should be taught in the classroom changed? 
If you are a teacher, how does this affect what you might teach? If you 
are a student, how does this affect what you might learn?
2. Do you use any lexical items (i.e., vocabulary), phrases, morphosyntactic structures, or pronunciations that are not considered “standard”? 
What is the effect when you use this item/these items? How do people 
react? How does that make you feel? Do you ever use certain items 
for a specific effect or in a certain context? Are there are any contexts 
in which you would not use such items? If you don’t think that you 
ever use any “nonstandard” language, then think of someone you know 
who does and respond from that perspective.
3. Think of a common prescriptive norm for English or another language 
that you speak. Write out this norm and then rewrite it as a descriptive 
norm, thinking about how speakers actually use that form, along with 
other possible variants. (For example, “In English, double negatives are 
never permitted and are grammatically incorrect in all contexts.”)
4. Do you think speakers find some of the following items more “acceptable” than others?
1a. Oh, just put it in the ice box. (for ‘freezer’)
1b. That river is full of crawdads. (for ‘crawfish/crayfish’)
1c. The child threw a hissy fit. (for ‘tantrum’)
2a. He ain’t got a clue.
2b. I was just axin’ a question.
2c. I might could meet you after class.
254 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
Use the conclusions of Rickford (1996) to inform your response. 
Then, come up with examples of your own from English or another 
language you know.
5. Using the guidelines for material selection and development from the 
current chapter, create a sample lesson plan in which you indicate your 
audience, account for naturally occurring input, demonstrate how you 
will recognize unspoken messages, show evidence of getting personal, 
and use an activity to shake it up.
10
Integrating Sociolinguistics Into the 
Second Language Classroom
One of the overarching goals of this volume is to acquaint the language instructor or curriculum developer with the basic facts about sociolinguistics and the 
acquisition of sociolinguistic variation in second languages. This knowledge, in 
turn, should positively impact the learning environment and the outcomes of 
learners who seek to develop communicative competence in a second language. 
In addition to the big-picture implications of knowing about sociolinguistic 
variation, such as an informed process of target norm evaluation and selection 
(see Chapter Nine), an understanding of language variation should impact daily 
lesson plans and material selection. We begin this chapter with a few scenarios 
that demonstrate that sociolinguistic variation is present in every lesson simply because the language used will represent some, but not all, speakers of a 
language. Thus, even when these decisions are not conscious, we decide which 
speakers are represented in our classrooms through our selection of materials 
that provide input to learners, through our explanations of grammatical phenomena, and through our articulation of learning objectives for each lesson we 
teach. The following examples of classroom events and interactions demonstrate scenarios in which a teacher’s knowledge of sociolinguistic variation can 
serve as a tremendous support. We begin with the example shown in Scenario 1.
Although the first response in Scenario 1 is not incorrect, it lacks important 
details. First, it does not correctly identify the sound that the learners heard, 
and it does not identify the linguistic contexts in which that sound occurs. This 
information is essential for improving learner comprehension of that variety; 
it is especially important if learners intend to spend time in Spain at some 
point in the future since they are likely to come into contact with such speakers again. Finally, if the instructor does not address the question of the ‘lisp’ by 
noting that this speech community is able to produce ‘s’ in other contexts, the 
learner may develop a less positive view of this variety of Spanish, believing 
that what they do is strange or substandard in some way.
256 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
SCENARIOg
The context: Students are engaged in a Spanish listening comprehension 
activity using pre-recorded materials supplied by the textbook company. 
Students are to listen carefully to decide whether Susana does or does not 
like certain activities.
Student question: Why does the man lisp?
Possible response: He’s from Spain.
Sociolinguistically informed response: Speakers from Spain use the 
sound ‘th’ (called a ‘theta’) in words where the letters ‘ci’, ‘ce’, and ‘z’ 
appear. These speakers have no trouble producing the ‘s’ sound as well, 
and they do so in words such as ‘sala’. This is an example of geographic 
variation.
SCENARIO 2A
The context: Students at the very beginning of French study are learning 
how to talk about things they do alone and things they have in common 
with all of their classmates, using the forms je ‘I’ and nous ‘we’ along 
with the appropriate verb forms, according to the meaning they wish to 
express.
Student comment: My French-speaking boyfriend says on ‘one’, not nous
‘we’.
Possible response: That’s informal French.
Sociolinguistically informed response: Actually, in conversational French 
there is a change taking place in which the pronoun on ‘one’ is being used 
more instead of nous ‘we’. This is more common in spoken French, especially in informal settings, such as in conversations among friends, but it 
is becoming even more frequent for many speakers.
As with Scenario 1, the possible response given in scenario 2A is correct, but 
it does not cover some important territory. Without defining informal, learners 
may assume this means “incorrect” or “uneducated”. Also, the identification of 
on as a pronoun that is being used in a specific linguistic context (that where nous
used to occur exclusively) gives learners the information they need to understand sentences that are formed with on rather than nous and to know how to interpret this 
INTEGRATING SOCIOLINGUISTICSg
SCENARIO 2B
The context: A continuation of the conversation in Scenario 2a. After the 
teacher provides a response, the student asks a follow-up question.
Student question: Does he say that because he speaks Canadian French 
instead of real French?
Sociolinguistically informed response: There are actually many kinds of 
“real” French, including that spoken in France, Canada, and Africa. Each 
type of French has characteristics that are unique, and each shares certain basic rules so that all three have quite a bit in common. The use of on
instead of nous is actually found in both France and Canada.
meaning, both linguistically and socially. Finally, the detail about the increasing frequency of this usage is important so that learners know that this is not 
a “strange” thing to do, but rather quite acceptable across speech communities.
You don’t need to be an expert on sociolinguistics to respond appropriately 
to the student’s question in Scenario 2b. No matter what language you teach, 
you’ve dealt with language prejudice extensively enough to know that encouraging stereotypes and fostering disparaging views of any variety of the language 
you teach has no place in the classroom. Still, what sociolinguistics helps us to 
do is add concrete information to our response by providing specific facts about 
whether or not a certain phenomenon is found in all varieties or only in some. 
This allows teachers to present technical information and give students the concrete facts necessary for them to also see the value of each variety of a language.
HOW MUCH DOES A TEACHER NEED TO KNOW 
TO INTEGRATE SOCIOLINGUISTICS?
We imagine that those who take the time to read this book are aware of the 
importance of sociolinguistic variation in learning to use a second language 
and also have an interest in using this information in daily classroom activities. Nevertheless, the thought of doing so can be overwhelming, especially in 
contexts where classroom materials do not support this type of innovation. A 
question that often arises is how a language instructor without a background 
in sociolinguistics can successfully reach the goal of integrating a multi-norm 
model into his or her classroom. Put another way, one wonders just how much 
an instructor needs to know about sociolinguistics to achieve this goal. The 
objective of the remainder of this chapter is to summarize the most basic concepts about language variation and to provide ideas for incorporating this 
knowledge into the second language classroom. Like every other classroom 
258 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
innovation, those that work best involve the gradual development and integration of quality materials and activities and take into account the factors unique 
to the specific classroom. In this sense, we seek to provide ideas as a starting 
point for the application and inclusion of sociolinguistic variation in such a 
way that new developments are balanced with the genuine logistical concerns 
of classroom teachers who may have limited time (or freedom) for broadsweeping changes.
To this end, the remainder of this section is devoted to the summary of 
basic facts about linguistic variation in second languages tailored specifically 
to language instructors. These are likely ideas that language instructors already 
know and most certainly they are concepts covered in the present volume. This 
knowledge can serve as a cornerstone for the integration of sociolinguistically 
informed materials and activities in the second language classroom.
All Speakers Vary Their Language
One of the greatest detriments to developing sociolinguistic competence is the 
idea that “good” speakers of a language use “correct” forms all of the time. In 
fact, good language users are able to respond appropriately to a broad range 
of speech contexts. This response is a function of the identity of the speaker, 
the characteristics of the hearer(s), the topic of interaction, the context of the 
interaction, the relationship between the speakers, and, equally important, 
the linguistic characteristics of the utterance itself. By recognizing that language variation is a natural part of communication—and, thus, necessary for 
communicative competence—and that variation is a complex skill that takes 
time to develop, language instructors become better equipped to help learners 
develop these abilities in the classroom setting. This basic knowledge means 
that we understand that variation is systematic (i.e., governed by a range of 
factors). In short, knowing that variation exists and that it is governed by a 
system of constraints is an important step and it does not entail knowing every 
detail of variation for a language with a broad range of speech communities.
Language Varies at All Levels of the Grammar
Language instructors must also remember that variation occurs in the sound 
system, in the morphosyntax of a language, in the norms for politeness, and in 
the lexical items chosen during diverse interactions. It may well be the case that 
variation at some levels of the grammar more directly affects certain communicative abilities. For example, variation in the sound system may make certain 
speakers more difficult to understand for second language learners who have 
no previous exposure, whereas variation at the level of a single lexical item 
may pose less of an immediate complication. Likewise, some variation at the 
INTEGRATING SOCIOLINGUISTICSg
level of morphosyntax is more widely restricted to certain social groups than 
variation at other levels. A basic understanding of the fact that variation affects 
all levels of a grammar is important as we move toward integrating variation 
into the language classroom because this knowledge helps us determine which 
examples make better pedagogical tools for exposing learners to variation and 
improving their overall communicative ability. What is more, it helps us avoid 
reducing variation to a phenomenon limited to vocabulary choice across geographic regions (e.g., the ‘soda’ vs. ‘pop’ debate).
Our Language Choices Reflect Who We Are
It is likely the case that second language learners first recognize linguistic variation as a function of geography and, likely, one related to the sound system. 
In our first language it is contact with people from other regions who sound 
different to us that first brings this issue to light. For second language learners, 
not only might a speaker sound “different”, they might also present a new challenge for comprehension during early encounters. Nevertheless, it is important that language instructors (and really all speakers) know that variation 
reflects not only where we are from but also who we are. When one speaks, one 
reveals information about gender, level of education, social class, and ethnicity, in addition to geography. To be sure, understanding this fact about variation is not the same as knowing the patterns of use for every single linguistic 
variant in the way a sociolinguist researching the topic would. Nevertheless, 
the idea that the language we produce reflects our identity (in both conscious 
and unconscious ways) is the cornerstone for bringing effective examples of 
variation into the language classroom.
We Use Language Differently in Different Contexts
Perhaps the most important type of variation for language learners to acquire 
is the ability to modify the language they produce from one context to another. 
This ability entails designing language for a particular audience, such that we 
do not speak the same way with strangers as with friends, or with members 
of our own speech community, as we do with those outside our community. 
Much of the research reviewed in earlier chapters has shown that Heritage 
learners often need additional exposure to more formal contexts and second 
language learners often lack the ability to reflect the informality of a situation. 
In both cases, there are important functions of language that cannot be fulfilled. As language instructors, the understanding of this type of variation will 
encourage our creativity and our efforts to design activities that allow learners 
to use language in a range of contexts. Even beginning with a basic contrast 
between formal and informal contexts will support the development of this 
260 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
type of variation. Language instructors who bear in mind the type of variation 
that occurs across contexts will be able to provide varied opportunities for 
interaction and a wider range of input even in the classroom setting.
Being Polite Is About Varying Our Language Appropriately
Even instructors who are new to the world of sociolinguistic variation are likely 
experienced in teaching learners how to be polite in certain situations. For 
example, although it is rare to see a full treatment of pragmatic variation when 
teaching a given speech act, such as a request, language teachers do indeed provide at least lexical means for expressing politeness (e.g., “please”) when making a request. Thus, it may be helpful to remember that “being polite” is really 
just another case of language variation. We modify verb forms, lexical items, 
and discourse structure according to the level of imposition of our request and 
our relationship to the person from whom we are requesting something, making politeness a great example to demonstrate variation at more than one level 
of the grammar as well as a response to the characteristics of the listener. What 
is often missing, however, is that “becoming less polite” is an equally important 
case of language variation. Certainly learners who do not know how to express 
solidarity with a hearer will not build friendships effectively and will be denied 
future opportunities for interaction. The language instructor who takes the 
notion of politeness and connects it to language variation, both in the direction of increased formality and decreased formality, is likely to be able to call 
upon a great deal of existing knowledge and provide a range of meaningful 
examples of linguistic variation in the classroom.
SUMMARY
This section is intentionally brief and absent of references to specific research 
studies. Although in-depth knowledge of how linguistic and extralinguistic 
factors constrain the use of a given form at any level of the grammar for native 
speakers of a language can be useful, the integration of sociolinguistic variation does not require this level of expertise from all instructors. Instead, it is 
much more important that language instructors understand the basic facts 
upon which such research is built. For example, variation is an inherent and 
systematic part of natural languages and, what is more, the ability to vary one’s 
language is essential to effective communication. Likewise, it is important to 
know that language varies as a function of identity, geography, formality of 
the context, and inherent characteristics of the speaker and that this variation 
occurs at all levels of the grammar. In other words, knowing how sociolinguistic variation works is more important than having expertise regarding specific 
cases of sociolinguistic variation. Taking this as a starting point, the remainder 
INTEGRATING SOCIOLINGUISTICSg
of the chapter is dedicated to an exploration of how language instructors 
might begin to show such knowledge of linguistic variation in their planning 
and implementation of classroom activities.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SECOND LANGUAGE INSTRUCTION
We turn now to some practical suggestions for increasing the linguistic variation in the language classroom. As will be seen, the manner in which this is 
accomplished and the degree to which it is done will vary according to the proficiency of the learner. Likewise, learner goals and learning contexts will differ, 
and this, too, will influence pedagogical decisions. The following suggestions 
are intended to initiate language instructor reflection on this issue and encourage exploration of new instructional goals while at the same time meeting the 
existing demands—logistic, personal, and academic—of the student populations instructors serve.
Be Aware of the Process of Target Selection
The previous chapter explored the issue of selecting norms for instruction 
in depth. We noted earlier that language instructors and curriculum developers must recognize that they have tremendous influence on language attitudes 
and the evaluation of linguistic varieties. The target they select will be viewed 
as “correct” and a “good model” of language for a given learner group. This 
means that there is a great deal of responsibility associated with determining 
appropriate course materials; the process of selection delivers an unspoken 
message. The very first step toward integrating linguistic variation in the classroom is to recognize these facts. In so doing, we can consciously explore the 
process of selecting materials. This, in turn, will help us to determine whether 
we have represented several different speech communities in our classroom 
materials. For example, when we bring materials in to provide examples of 
written or spoken input, do they come from different sources? Do we include 
male and female speakers and writers? Do the topic and purpose of communication range from formal to informal? When we ask our students to complete 
tasks or assessments, do we include contextual, speaker-specific information 
in the instructions to guide their production? Recalling from Chapter One 
that two key elements in fostering acquisition are provision of input and the 
opportunity for interaction, an effort to increase the types of input and types 
of interactions is likely quite consistent with most all existing course goals.
Moving immediately beyond the general considerations of representation, there are likely also some important learner-specific characteristics that 
might influence the selection of input sources in the classroom. For example, learners in a region where the target language is spoken by a local group, 
262 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
whether large or small, are likely to profit tremendously from inclusion in the 
classroom of the local variety along with other varieties that are likely found in 
existing textbook materials. This is consistent with recommendations made by 
Auger (2003) for Canadian French and by Gutiérrez and Fairclough (2006) for 
US Spanish. Other relevant factors might be slightly less obvious but equally 
important. For example, some secondary schools may make an annual trip to 
visit a country or city where the target is spoken, some universities may sponsor study abroad in a limited number of target regions, and some language 
learners may have professional goals that are tightly linked to the ability to 
speak a given variety of a second language. In all of these cases, representation 
of the appropriate speech communities will foster communicative abilities that 
are essential for that learner population. There may also be individual student 
considerations that influence the selection of course materials. For example, a 
student with a relative from a given speech community might encourage an 
instructor to seek examples of the variety of language spoken by that group.
It bears mentioning that it is equally important to include a variety of types 
of input, even those that do not correspond directly to learner goals. This is 
because it will foster learners’ ability to comprehend a wide range of speakers, 
and it will further encourage the view of language variation as something natural and inherent in language. Table 10.1 provides a checklist or rubric that can be 
used to evaluate the degree to which linguistic diversity has been represented 
in the classroom. It is aimed toward including linguistic variation along geographic, social, and formal lines so that the ability to vary speech across contexts 
is accessible to learners. The rubric can be applied to evaluate an entire textbook 
or a single day’s lesson plan. When used on a smaller scale, the expectation would 
not be to meet all of these criteria but rather to see them vary from one day to 
the next. In this way, the rubric might be used to keep track of the materials used 
each day and could be tabulated at the end of an academic term to provide an 
overview of coverage. What is more, if the answer to most of these questions is 
negative based on an evaluation of existing course materials, then innovation 
can begin with a single additional opportunity for input or interaction.
In sum, with the support of a checklist such as the one in Table 10.1, instructors can begin by determining whether they are representing several speech 
communities in their instructional materials. If they find that a good range of 
speakers and contexts is not already present in the instructional materials they 
use, they may evaluate who their students are in order to best expand the examples of input already present and to diversify the types of interactions in which 
students already participate. This should include not only geographic variation 
but also examples of male and female, old and young speakers, as well as formal 
and informal settings. Once a need for expansion is identified, new sources of 
input can be identified and incorporated into the classroom. In order to complete this next step effectively, we can follow several of the suggestions below to 
INTEGRATING SOCIOLINGUISTICSg
create additional activities or materials that support the acquisition of sociolinguistic competence and make good use of these new sources of input.
Creating Effective Course Materials
Leaving aside the issue of linguistic variation momentarily, there are several characteristics of effective course materials that remain constant. Good 
TABLE 10.1
Rubric for evaluating linguistic diversity in classroom materials
Did the input in my classroom 
(today, this week, this academic term, 
etc.) include examples of language 
produced (written or oral) by. . . .
[evaluating range of speakers and 
contexts]
males and females? _______ Yes _______ No
speakers of several age groups? _______ Yes _______ No
speakers from more than one region? _______ Yes _______ No
speakers in casual, intimate contexts? _______ Yes _______ No
speakers in formal contexts? _______ Yes _______ No
speakers commenting on serious 
issues, such as politics and 
sociocultural problems (in multiple 
modes)?
_______ Yes _______ No
speakers commenting on light topics, 
such as entertainment or events (in 
multiple modes)?
_______ Yes _______ No
[evaluating group-specific traits] _______ Yes _______ No
a speaker from a local community? _______ Yes _______ No
a speaker from our study abroad target? _______ Yes _______ No
a speaker from the same region 
to which at least one student is 
personally connected?
_______ Yes _______ No
speakers from a variety of regions? _______ Yes _______ No
264 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
learning activities take into account learner goals. This means that the same 
materials may need to be modified across learner populations and across 
learning contexts. It also means that certain goals, such as developing the ability to communicate, are likely to be the same for all. Likewise, good activities 
provide input to the learner. Clearly the field of second language acquisition 
is home to a wide range of theories of learning, but none claims that acquisition proceeds without input. In fact, although the role of input is believed 
to be different across theories, its importance is constant. To be clear, input 
means samples of language, rather than explanations of how language works. 
It should be recalled that there is considerable debate about whether metalinguistic knowledge can directly impact the developing learner grammar. While 
some accounts posit that this is possible, most adopt an intermediate position 
that allows for metalinguistic knowledge to assist learners in noticing a gap in 
their developing grammars, noticing a form, and then making the connection 
between that form and its meaning(s), using a form with increasing facility, 
and so on. To our knowledge, there is no account of second language acquisition that claims that metalinguistic knowledge alone is sufficient for acquisition. This means that good materials do more than deliver explanations of 
how a structure works. Finally, good learning activities include opportunities 
to interact with input in a variety of ways. This may include speaking with others or working with a written text or a recording of speech to comprehend the 
content delivered. Interaction also implies activity on the part of the learner 
such that a response of some sort is required. In other words, learners must do 
something with the information in the input as well. These facts about effective materials should be held constant when working to include materials that 
incorporate linguistic variation in the classroom, just as they would be with 
any other pedagogical goal in mind.
Once we have selected our source for input, perhaps, as suggested by Auger 
(2003), a pop music sample from a given speech community, the next step is to 
determine how this input connects to existing classroom goals. For example, 
a colleague of mine once shared the lyrics to a song by Ricardo Arjona, who 
resides in Mexico City and sings about life in that city. The song “el Taxista” is 
about a taxicab driver who picks up a wealthy woman who is crying. The song 
includes a narrative about the events of that evening, all recounted using the 
preterit and imperfect past tense forms in Spanish. We came to use this song 
as a way to afford students input that was germane to developing the aspectual contrast between the preterit and imperfect. Students listened to the song 
while noting the past time forms (e.g., by marking them as they heard them or 
filling in blanks with the forms they heard). The song itself has some regional 
vocabulary and, of course, is sung by a male from a particular geographic region 
(Arjona is Guatemalan), but the focus of the lesson may remain on the grammatical form under study. In this way, the song adds to the classroom materials 
INTEGRATING SOCIOLINGUISTICSg
but does not supersede the existing curricular goals. What is more, different 
approaches might require learners to respond to this input in different ways. 
Some might focus on comprehension, others on noticing the verb forms, and 
still others on the narrative structure itself. In all cases, the song provides input 
that can serve as the basis for these activities. What is especially important to 
note is that bringing diverse forms of input into the classroom does not entail 
excessive explanation about the variation contained in it. Instead, it simply 
provides an example of real language used in a real-life context. The inclusion 
of a single pop song serves the goal of bringing authentic input, with all of its 
inherent linguistic variation, to the language classroom. Its value, however, is 
not only in the input it provides but in the contrastive input it provides when 
juxtaposed with materials from other speakers and other speech communities.
It is also possible that the goal of an activity of the sort described above 
is indeed to develop an understanding of how language varies across speech 
populations. Taking for example the phenomena of “g-dropping” (runnin’ vs. 
running) in English, of variation in future time reference forms in Spanish 
(voy a caminar vs. caminaré), and of first-person plural pronominal forms in 
French (on vs. nous), in all cases the first form in the pair is extremely widespread and the second form might seem excessively formal in certain contexts 
or certain speech communities. In all cases, the key difference from one context 
to another, one speaker to another, and one situation to another is one of rates 
of use of each form. Thus, it is quite possible to design a classroom activity 
around the exploration of differences in frequency of use of these forms across 
contexts. This might entail comparing pop songs from different regions, movie 
clips with different settings, or a dialogue between two friends as compared to 
two strangers. In such cases, learners might analyze the ways in which these 
forms are used and grow to associate each with certain sociolinguistic facts as 
well. Nevertheless, this should be an additional goal, secondary to continually 
providing input for language development and opportunities for learners to 
interact with that input, rather than replacing those goals with goals based 
exclusively on analyzing linguistic variation. The finding that second language 
learners do not acquire sociolinguistic variation in the traditional classroom 
setting is nearly always attributed to lack of exposure in the input rather than 
lack of additional explanations of variation. Thus, even when one of the goals 
of a classroom activity is to foster the development of sociolinguistic knowledge in a second language, it is essential to hold constant the facts about effective classroom materials and activities.
Setting Reasonable Expectations
As should be clear from the two preceding sections, integrating linguistic 
variation into the second language classroom involves a conscious decision 
266 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
to diversify the input to which students have access and a continued commitment to employ best practices in the second language classroom. Once such 
input has been identified and selected, the next step must be to decide what 
students should do with that input. This requires a careful consideration of the 
appropriate goals for learners with different levels of ability in the second language. It is likely that nearly all sources of input can work well for all levels of 
learners, but this is only true if the expectations placed on students vary from 
one ability level to another. Failure to consider not only the input source but 
also the classroom activities designed to guide students’ interaction with the 
input may lead to frustration on the part of the learners and, unfortunately, 
to the inaccurate conclusion that students simply “aren’t ready” for linguistic 
variation.
It was mentioned earlier that new sources of input should be connected to 
existing curricular goals. One way in which proficiency level should mediate 
these connections has to do with the types of variation that are present (or 
explored) in a given input sample. We recall that linguistic variation occurs 
at all levels of the grammar, from the sound system to lexical choices. What is 
more, some types of variation are largely representative of geographic differences between speech communities, while others are more complex indicators 
of other social factors. Taking these facts into account, we can see that at lower 
levels of proficiency it might make best sense to include input that exemplifies 
geographic variation and, most likely, variation at the level of the lexicon or 
the sound system. This is because learners at this level can benefit maximally 
from simple exposure to the geographic differences they will encounter as 
they travel or meet different speakers, even in purely academic settings. What 
is more, features that vary geographically still represent a simple one-to-one 
connection such that use of a given variant (e.g., a particular word or a given 
realization of a phoneme) can be connected with the region from which a 
given speaker hails. At early levels of proficiency, the focus of the activity will 
not likely be a discussion of linguistic variation and, thus, incorporation of 
geographic features is unlikely to decrease students’ ability to complete the 
planned activity.
With more advanced learners, it is possible to explore variation at other 
levels of the grammar and variation that is conditioned by more than one factor (e.g., geography). For example, intermediate learners are able to begin to 
employ various forms for pragmatic ends. This means that the introduction of 
lexical items and verb forms that are used to express politeness, for example, 
can be included in input and may even be the focus of classroom activities. 
Students at this level are able to begin to understand the role of factors like 
the degree of imposition of a request and the closeness of the relationship 
between speakers. Activities might be as simple as deciding whether a speaker 
is requesting something from a friend or a teacher based on oral or written 
INTEGRATING SOCIOLINGUISTICSg
prompts that include differing lexical items and/or verb forms. To be sure, 
this does not mean that regular classroom activities which focus on provision 
of additional input should be replaced with extensive metalinguistic explanations. Additionally, it does not mean that learners must be able to produce 
each of these forms. As with other structures, a focus on providing input and 
beginning with comprehension are good practices.
Finally, the most advanced language learners should have access to input 
that varies not only along geographic lines but also along social lines. Depending on the language and the learning context, this might include input samples from local Heritage speakers or samples from various ethnic groups and 
should most certainly include examples of formal and informal speech produced by males and females of various ages. At this level it is also appropriate 
to expect learners to begin to produce utterances that vary according to context. For example, learners at this level are likely to benefit from interactions 
with a variety of input sources: classroom activities that mirror a range of 
interaction goals and contexts and curricular goals that span the levels of the 
grammar and include variation that is both geographic and social. Of course 
a learner who has had exposure to varying input sources since the early levels 
of study is well poised to make the most of these opportunities. Although at 
this level a certain amount of explanation of how a structure varies can prove 
useful, it should not supersede the importance of input and interaction.
In the remainder of this section we provide three sample activities (Examples 10.1, 10.2, and 10.3) for the same input source in order to demonstrate 
how this might work. The activities are second language neutral, in the sense 
that they should work with any language, and, thus, instructors can adapt 
these to the languages they teach. The examples are given in English below 
only to serve as a model, and in order to implement this activity, the materials should be recreated in the target language. The input source for all three 
EXAMPLE 10.1. Sample activity for lower proficiency
Instructions: According to the radio advertisement, which products are on 
sale at the pharmacy? Mark all that apply.
1. ___ Toothpaste
2. ___ Make-up
3. ___ Shampoo
4. ___ Cold medicine
5. ___ Bandages
6. ___ Potato chips
268 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
EXAMPLE 10.2. Sample activity for intermediate proficiency
Instructions: As you listen, identify the commands in the radio advertisement.
At PharmaDrug we have all your medical needs covered—and more! Come 
in today for great deals on over-the-counter medications, personal care 
products, and more! Now, for a limited time, new customers have the opportunity to enroll in our money-saving frequent shopper club at no additional 
cost. Don’t miss out on this great offer—hurry up and shop today!
EXAMPLE 10.3. Sample activity for advanced proficiency
Instructions: Based on the advertisement, decide whether the following sentences are true (T) or false (F).
1. ___ Purchasing two boxes of FluMed is a better deal than purchasing one 
box of MediFlu.
2. ___ For a quick snack, a box of cookies gets you more for your money.
3. ___ If you don’t mind the price, Claudette mascara is the best because it 
doesn’t run.
4. ___ The bandages that are on sale are better for kids.
5. ___ Someone with dry hair should purchase Salon shampoo.
6. ___ You normally have to pay to join the frequent shopper club, so signing 
up now is a good deal.
7. ___ Dentbright toothpaste makes your teeth whiter than any other toothpaste.
activities comes from internet radio and includes examples of several radio 
commercials. These should be readily accessible to all instructors and, because 
radio broadcasts are in the public domain, these are budget-friendly additions 
to the language classroom. The reader may modify the content to fit the radio 
announcements that are most readily available to them in the language they 
teach. These examples provide a reasonable goal for each of three different 
levels of learners. Furthermore, with any single input source, instructors can 
design several activities that are appropriate for a range of abilities.
These examples show that that, when using the same (or similar) input 
source, what changes across levels of proficiency are the curricular goals and 
the ways in which learners are asked to interact with the input, rather than the 
INTEGRATING SOCIOLINGUISTICSg
input source itself. The reader might correctly note that the suggestions above 
resemble ideas for integrating authentic materials into the classroom, rather 
than suggestions for teaching linguistic variation. This is because if instructors 
make a conscious decision to incorporate linguistic diversity in the language 
classroom, and from there, continue to use their expertise to create interactionrich, appropriate classroom activities that are linked to immediate curricular 
goals1
—as well as the overarching goal of fostering the development of communicative competence—then the activities that are designed to increase 
students’ access to examples of linguistic variation should fit seamlessly into 
existing materials. In other words, what changes is the type of oral or written texts (both from traditional textbooks and from one instance to another), 
rather than the types of activities in which learners participate.
Maximizing the Range of Varieties in the Language Classroom
It has been stated throughout this chapter, as well as in earlier ones, that regardless of theoretical approach, the key ingredient for second language development is input. Thus, each authentic text provides important information to 
the language learner. What is more, as these texts differ from one another by 
the speech community each represents, they share a comparative value that 
allows learners to develop knowledge of how the second language varies from 
one context to another. In this sense, one of the key activities of language 
instructors and curriculum developers should be the identification of appropriate examples of language in use for the classroom. In order to make this 
manageable for those who have not previously attempted to integrate a variety 
of input sources into the language classroom, we end with some suggestions 
about how to go about finding such texts. One excellent source of inspiration 
is personal experience. Each of us as language learners and language instructors has a variety of points of contact with the language we teach. These points 
of contact range from media sources to travel to friendships, and each is a valid 
connection to language use. By bringing in language sources that are familiar 
to us, we are likely to also share our enthusiasm for the experiences that language learning can bring. This might include a radio clip from a location that 
we have visited, a quick recording of a friend reading a passage or telling a personal narrative, a movie clip set in an area we have lived, and so on. Although 
the ultimate goal is to bring in several different examples of language in use, it 
makes good sense to begin with what we know.
Along these same lines, there are other ways to identify useful input sources 
for the language classroom. Our own students may also have personal experiences or strong interests in a certain speech community or a geographic region, 
and this can guide our search for new materials as well. Likewise, there are 
often world events that take center stage and are related to the target language. 
270 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
For example, a country that speaks the target language may be the upcoming host of the Olympic Games, may have experienced an unusual natural 
disaster, or may be the location of political change. In all cases, these events 
are likely to be actively reported in newspapers and on television and radio 
broadcasts throughout the world. Not only do they provide good sources of 
input, but they also have the added benefit of educating learners about the 
political, economic, and cultural context of a region where the target language 
is spoken. A final strategy to help in the quest for varied input sources, and 
one that has the added practical benefit of saving precious time on the part 
of the instructor, is to look for textbooks that list web links to new sources 
of input. Many new textbooks include useful links to additional readings or 
recordings in the target language, and these can be used to their fullest (e.g., 
García-Serrano, Grant Cash, & De la Torre [2011] for Spanish, and Kay & le 
Fleming [2008] for Russian). What is especially nice about this last option is 
that it is quite likely that these links are already directly tied to course goals. 
This means that an instructor should still assess the degree to which various 
speakers are being represented, but the course activities and curricular goals 
are already intact.
KEEPING CURRENT PEDAGOGICAL PRACTICES IN MIND
The suggestions above should serve to help language instructors and curriculum developers to integrate authentic materials representing a broader range 
of speech communities and contexts into their language classrooms. In order 
to maximize the positive impact of this endeavor, however, it is important to 
keep current best practices and the most recent research findings in mind. As 
was stated earlier, introducing extensive explanations of how variation works 
into the language classroom is unlikely to foster the development of communicative competence. For this reason, it is important to bear in mind the following tips when moving forward with the development of new course activities. 
As a mentor once told me, there is no need to throw the baby out with the 
bathwater. The implication is that we know quite a bit about how second languages are learned; thus, seeking to assist learners to develop all types of competence, including sociolinguistic competence, entails adding new dimensions 
to the classroom, rather than replacing existing effective practices. The following suggestions help to contextualize the integration of new materials into the 
second language classroom.
Remember the Basics
When trying something new, it is always a good idea to build upon what we 
already know. We need to remember all of the facts about language teaching 
INTEGRATING SOCIOLINGUISTICSg
that we have studied, learned from experience, or just implicitly know from 
our own language learning history. For example, we know that more is not 
always better. The gradual integration of new input sources can be a very positive endeavor, but flooding learners with multiple examples before developing 
appropriate support materials—or, worse still, taking one example and pairing 
it with excessively detailed explanations of language variation—is not likely 
to bring about the desired outcomes. We know that good examples can provide foundations upon which to build, that metalinguistic knowledge may not 
directly impact the developing system (and may actually do harm in the event 
that it replaces meaningful input), and that learners do well when we teach 
one thing at a time. Thinking back to the suggestions for lower level learners, 
we noted that starting with geographic variation (one-to-one connections) 
and focusing on constant curricular goals was a good practice. In sum, what 
we know about language learning should also apply to linguistic variation in 
the classroom.
Keep Learner Goals in Mind
In general our goal for all language learners is to support the development of 
communicative abilities in both written and oral modes of communication. 
This includes grammatical competence as well as the abilities to use language 
in socially appropriate ways and to build discourse according to languagespecific norms. When individual factors, such as proficiency level or individual 
or professional goals, are taken into account, this general goal may be further 
specified to suit the learner population. Nevertheless, the purpose of this volume has been to demonstrate that linguistic variation is a natural, inherent 
feature of language, and varying language appropriately is essential to effective 
communication. The direct implication of this fact is that knowledge of sociolinguistic variation should make us better able to help students meet their 
goals more than it entails a change in those overarching goals.
Focus on Communication
It is worthwhile to connect the goal of developing communicative competence with our knowledge of the importance of input and interaction in the 
development of second language abilities. The focus in the language classroom should be on communication; we know that communication fosters 
language learning and our job as instructors is to provide opportunities 
to communicate or, more specifically, to interact with input in a variety of 
ways. It is essential not to replace opportunities for communication with 
metalinguistic information about how language works. To many of us, this 
is most certainly important and interesting information, but few would 
272 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
argue that knowing how a language works is the same as being able to use 
that language in a real-world context.
Provide Opportunities to Develop All Aspects of Competence
Just as we have spent time exploring the idea of increasing input sources in the 
second language classroom, thereby ensuring that several speech communities 
were represented and that linguistic diversity was present in the classroom, it 
is equally important to represent a range of language skills in the classroom. 
In other words, our view of competence should be multifaceted, and our classroom activities should provide opportunities to develop all aspects of competence. For example, learners must comprehend and produce, they must do so 
in written and oral modes, and they must develop the abilities to use grammatical rules accurately, to vary structures appropriately, to organize discourse 
differently based on communicative goals, and so on. In sum, introducing new 
sources of input does not mean a drastic shift toward listening comprehension 
activities at the exclusion of all else. Instead, we must continue to balance our 
focus on development of all of the skills involved in language use.
Pay Attention to Individual Learning Styles
Language instructors are well aware that not all learners respond in the same 
way to all pedagogical materials and activities. This is true regardless of the 
curricular goals in focus in a particular activity. In order to continue to teach 
effectively, it is important to pay attention to the types of instructions and 
materials that work best for a diverse learner population. It is highly unlikely 
that all students in a given classroom share the same learning styles and preferences. Thus, we must respond to learner differences by offering a variety 
of opportunities for development and balancing the demands of a range of 
learning styles.
Apply Existing Practices to New Goals
We have spent a great deal of time cautioning against major changes in current 
practices as one integrates additional sources of input into the language classroom. Thus, we end with a note of encouragement that one also ought to try 
using existing practices to find new ways to teach communicative competence. 
This means that although it has not yet been tested, we might explore the degree 
to which effective methods for teaching grammatical competence might be 
applicable to sociolinguistic competence. If we take, for example, the method of 
using input processing to foster the development of form-meaning connections 
(VanPatten, 2004), we have a method of instruction that has proven effective 
INTEGRATING SOCIOLINGUISTICSg
with multiple second languages and across a range of grammatical structures. 
Th e basic function of this method is to allow learners to make form-meaning 
connections by bringing a particular form into focus and, in the instructional 
activities, making that form essential for completion of the required tasks. In 
this sense, it may also be possible to create an activity that brings a fact about 
language variation into focus. Example 10.4 is an input processing activity 
designed to help learners make the connection between gender and direct 
object pronouns in Spanish. Th ese forms are diffi cult for English-speaking 
learners because no such gender distinction is made in the fi rst language, and 
these forms are processed later than content words, given their lesser impact 
on global meaning overall. 
 Taking this model of instruction and applying it to sociolinguistic variation, 
we might imagine an activity where learners are to listen for clues as to whether 
a situation is formal or informal, to whom a request is directed, or the age of a 
given speaker. Example 10.5 shows how this might be applied at very early levels 
of profi ciency, simply to help learners identify the interdental fricative (theta) 
with Peninsular Spanish. It will be recalled that at the outset of this chapter 
EXAMPLE 10.4. Sample processing instruction activity
Instructions: Indicate what these people are doing in each of the following 
pictures.
_____ Emilia lo come. _____ José y Silvia lo comieron.
 Emilia eats itMASC Jose and Silvia ate itMASC
_____ Emilia la come. _____ José y Silvia la comieron.
 Emilia eats itFEM Jose and Silvia ate itFEM
Sources: http://www.illustrationsof.com/439337-royalty-free-cake-clipart-illustration 
(for illustration, left)
http://vectors/design/vector-of-a-cartoon-couple-of-kids-sharing-pizza-outlined- 
 coloring-page-by-ron-leishman-21810 (for illustration, right)
274 SECTION III: IMPLICATIONS
EXAMPLE 10.5. Processing instruction activity for sociolinguistic competence
Instructions: Listen to the following sentences and decide whether the 
speaker is from Spain or Mexico.
César estudia la química.
‘César studies chemistry’.
_____ Spain _____ Mexico
Cecilia quiere ir al cine.
‘Cecilia wants to go to the movies’.
_____ Spain _____ Mexico
Vamos a hacer un viaje a Valencia.
‘We’re going on a trip to Valencia’.
_____ Spain _____ Mexico
Mis zapatos nuevos son muy 
bonitos.
‘My new shoes are very pretty’.
_____ Spain _____ Mexico
Me gusta comer cerezas.
‘I like eating cherries’.
_____ Spain _____ Mexico
Francisco trabaja en una tienda de 
música.
‘Francisco works in a music store’.
_____ Spain _____ Mexico
Carla cena con sus amigos.
‘Carla’s eating dinner with her friends’.
_____ Spain _____ Mexico
we suggested that a student question about the “lisp” in this variety of Spanish 
created a pedagogical opportunity to teach learners about language variation. 
Thus, the activity that follows is merely an application of existing classroom 
practices to that same curricular goal. The proposed activity requires students 
to listen to a speech sample while reading along and decide whether the 
speaker is from Mexico or Spain. This activity could be easily repeated with 
the phenomenon of aspiration of syllable final /s/, and learners could be asked 
to decide whether a speaker was from Mexico or the Dominican Republic, 
for example.
As stated earlier, there is no research evidence to suggest that this task is 
an effective way to help students develop sociolinguistic competence. Nevertheless, we know that input fosters second language development and we 
know that input processing is one effective means of fostering the development of grammatical competence. These two facts taken together suggest that 
this is at least one reasonable avenue for development. Certainly within other 
approaches, both theoretical and pedagogical, there are other well-established 
and effective practices. The idea is that if we build on what we know, it is likely 
that we will find continued success while at the same time helping language 
INTEGRATING SOCIOLINGUISTICSg
learners develop an essential component of communicative competence that 
is generally neglected in the language classroom.
CONCLUSION
It is not controversial to state that our language varies according to the context 
in which we find ourselves. Additionally, sociolinguists have established that 
this is a natural and systematic part of language use. In light of these facts, 
language instructors generally see that part of developing communicative 
abilities in a second language must also include sociolinguistic competence. 
Nevertheless, the incorporation of practices that would help to foster these 
abilities in the language classroom can be more controversial. In workshops 
on this topic, voices of concern range from those who worry that studying a 
variety that is not in the textbook is a distraction to those who simply believe 
students are unable to handle linguistic diversity. Nevertheless, the reality of 
the requirements for use of language professionally or interpersonally beyond 
the classroom demonstrates that these abilities are indeed quite necessary. We 
hope to have struck a balance in this concluding chapter between expanding 
the sources of input in the language classroom (and secondarily the curricular goals) while at the same time maintaining current effective practices and 
meeting existing curricular goals. More importantly, we hope that by using 
the suggestions and models contained here, individual language instructors 
will feel comfortable beginning the journey of this expansion and can, at the 
same time, use the multiple skills and knowledge they already possess to do so.
