Hello everybody. I want to talk about some of these... wait did I screw up? Oh I did.
I want to talk about some settings in Vim, some spell check settings. I'm going
back through my old videos. I use them for reference sometimes because I have a
terrible memory and I've noticed their quality is quite poor. So I'm gonna
either redo them or do better versions of them and this is a part in my Vim
series. I guess I can call it about spell check because spell check is great
and everyone should use it and I'm gonna show you how without installing any
plugins because everyone on the internet if you go and Google Vim spell
check they'll sell you a spell check and that spell check sucks. So we're just
gonna do our own. Let's say I have this sentence. This is a very good sentence.
So if I have these two sentences you can tell by the way I've saved the file that
nothing looks different between them except of course for the vowels that are
missing that I removed. However if I go into my VMRC I can add this very unique
feature. Can I make this bigger? Yes I can have this very awesome feature
which is set spell and then I do spell lang which is three L's because it's
spell and lang not separated by a space or underscore equals in the UTF language
of the library or I guess dictionary I want to utilize. So I'm gonna do English
US because that's the UTF setting I want to utilize. You can make this whatever
UTF setting is available to you. You can check that that's outside the scope of
this video but you can check that in multiple ways. So let's look at that file
again we just created and now we see three things highlighted in red and white
right. God is not and that's obviously something we can talk about which we
will in a moment. That not being corrected but you can see this and
very in sentence were obviously corrected. So I'm gonna show you first how to deal
with this in a file and then I'm gonna show you how to kind of adjust these
colors to your own liking. Actually let me give you a spoiler already. I'm
sitting here thinking about how I'm gonna spoil this the God thing. It's just
you can't deal with that. If the words in the dictionary and it doesn't come up
incorrectly you have to just reread your work to figure that out. So I'll just go
ahead and correct this now because oops there's not gonna be something I can do
with with Vim to fix that. Either way I'm up here. I'm up here you can see I'm at
the very front of the line 7. I will even highlight it to make sure everyone
knows. So I'm on line 7. This is a very good sentence. If I hit back bracket it
looks like this. Let me go ahead and that symbol. If I hit that symbol I just
echoed and then S it seeks to the next misspelling. So you see I'm on THS hit it
again VRY then again SNTNCE. Let's do one more time to loop back. Okay so we're
back at THS. That's how you search for misspellings in a file in Vim whenever
spell is enabled. If I want to change it I can do Z equals Z equals which brings
up a list of suggestions. These suggestions you will find that in 95% of
the cases number one is correct. So I'm going to hit enter one enter again. It
changed THS to this. However because this is so common you can normally hit just
one Z equals. So here I am on VRY one Z equals and auto corrects it for you
because I mean I could hit two Z equals and get the second one but that's not
likely to be the answer to my solution. The Vim spell check is quite good. It's
been tempered by programmers who are horrific misspellers. So it's somewhat
good. There are situations like the one I came across with with good in God where
you just can't fix it. Vim is not sophisticated enough. Its spell check is
not sophisticated enough to present to you where you're using a word you
shouldn't be using if it's spelled correctly. However it is sophisticated
enough to do something like this. Now what's happening there? Well you can't
see it because the coloring is horrific but what it's saying to me is the word
metalhead what it's saying to me there is that it's incorrect but you notice it's
not misspelled like if I misspell let's misspell some random word. So these are
two different things. Now why are they different? It's because under the spell
check feature in Vim not a plug-in again they are different things right? Very
different. Now because this one is so horrific to read you might wager that my
next move is going to be to adjust my VimRC to fix the way these look which I
will do. So in your main VimRC or your main VimConf it's probably an Etsy VimRC
or Etsy slash Vim slash VimRC or something like that. All these things are
defined but on a user level excuse me you can redefine them by
clearing them first. So I'm going to do highlight which is HI that's the shortcut
for highlight spell bad which is the red and white we saw earlier. I'm sorry I'm
going to do highlight clear spell bad which is the red and white we saw earlier
and then I'm going to do highlight spell bad C term BG oh god equals let's just do
dark gray and then C term FG equals black. So when we do that you see at the
very end the ASDF which is an obvious misspelling of something actually let's
see I don't even know what that would equal. What does it think it equals? Oh
there's literally no suggestion okay oh there they are acid acid okay well
none of those so it's got you. Anyway so I've changed the background of that to
gray and black as you can see there but this still has not changed and that's
because this is not a misspelling this is something else that spell check is
identifying so what could it be let's figure that out. Well it turns out spell
check in again or spell I should say this feature here. Spell and Vim that has
four different I guess features you would call it or things it calls out that
you can identify and one of them is spell bad which of course is a misspelling
but the other ones are spell cap which would be for things that are
capitalizing correctly. Spell local which is that's something that it checks
outside of the language or the dictionary you've identified to see if
it's also in the first part so EN but not the second part so for example
something in English United States English that is not the same in British
English those are two places that speaking which if you don't know and then
there is of course spell rare which I don't even know what that checks I don't
have a clue with that checks but I know it's helped me in the past so let's
identify what's going on here because here oh I've actually I've already
cleared it so now it's not showing up anymore so one of these things that we
adjust is going to re-highlight metalhead which is a this is a very
American phrase I think maybe the British use it as well so maybe it's not
fair but let's maybe let's try that first let's try local and see if that
actually is the the culprit here
ah there we go it is so if you were paying attention if you were watching
the screen what I did was I added to the C term local I'm sorry the spell local
attribute in them was to underline in the terminal where a word that is not
meet the local requirements appears and you can now see metalhead went from
being un-underlined to underlined now this is interesting because now you're
able to see we can adjust very specifically what rules do to certain
words based on the rule they violate whether that be spell bad which is of
course just a bad spelling spell cap miscapitalization spell rare or spell
local we can adjust this to there's a number of you can find these online I
don't know if it's inside the scope of this video to try to address them but
there are several different features that you can update so I'm just doing
here you'll see I'm changing just to highlight how different they can be the
foreground and background of these these settings and so you see there to just
those in that way you can change these to whatever you want of course they don't
have to be this they can be as simple as this they can actually be just
underlined or I think they can even be italics let's let's try that actually see
term is it italics or is it maybe might be emphasized italic is what it is and
there you see word that is spelled incorrectly from the local region is
italicized these are all things you can add into them and they don't require a
plugin and they're very useful and I've realized now that's all I have to say
thank you
