Teleological Closure

Recents

Brain-Inspired Credit Assignment Algorithms in Neural Networks

18-Year Calendar with Elemental Animals

Mapping Emotion Semantics Across 2,500 Languages

Critical Cultural Analyses in "We're In Hell" Podcast

Escape from Gethsemane

The Drying Paint Saga

Alphabetized List of Obscure Terms

Words Between "Virtual" and "Visual"

View all

Free plan

NG

Help & support

Brain-Inspired Credit Assignment Algorithms in Neural Networks

NG

BRAIN-INSPIRED MACHINE INTELLIGENCE: A SURVEY OF NEUROBIOLOGICALLY-PLAUSIBLE CREDIT ASSIGNMENT Alexander Ororbia Rochester Institute of Technology Rochester, NY 14623 ABSTRACT In this survey, we examine algorithms for conducting credit assignment in artif i cial neural net- works that are inspired or motivated by neurobiology. These processes are unif i ed under one possible taxonomy, which is constructed based on how a learning algorithm answers a central question underpinning the mechanisms of synaptic plasticity in complex adaptive neuronal sys- tems: where do the signals that drive the learning in individual elements of a network come from and how are they produced? In this unif i ed treatment, we organize the ever-growing set of brain- inspired learning schemes into six general families and consider these in the context of backprop- agation of errors and its known criticisms. The results of this review are meant to encourage future developments in neuro-mimetic systems and their constituent learning processes, wherein lies an important opportunity to build a strong bridge between machine learning, computational neuroscience, and cognitive science. Keywords Credit assignment · Brain-inspired computing · Neuro-mimetic learning · Synaptic plasticity 1Introduction One of the central goals that underpins research in biologically-inspired, or neuro-mimetic, machine intelligence is to create a complete theory of inference and learning that emulates how the brain can learn complex functions from the environment. Such a theory would be one that is not only biologically-plausible but also one that makes sense from a machine learning point-of-view [38]. Consequentially, this theory would be credible from both neuro- science and statistical perspectives on learning, and as a result, could be empirically tested and validated from both perspectives. Furthermore, progress in this burgeoning line of scientif i c inquiry could serve as a central basis for the grander goals of neuro-mimetic cognitive architectures [90, 330, 362, 315, 380, 42] and the type of embodied brain-inspired machine intelligence behind the more recently cast “NeuroAI” initiative [359, 337, 470, 288]. A challenging aspect in constructing the aforementioned theory centers around the development of a plausible mechanism for conducting credit assignment – in support of optimizing a behavioral scoring function(s) – within computational neural systems. Credit assignment itself refers to the act of assigning “credit” and/or “blame” to individual processing elements, e.g., neuronal units, within a complex adaptive system based on their contribution to i nal behavioral output(s). With respect to networks of neurons, credit assignment is particularly diff i cult given that the impact or effect of early-stage neurons depends on downstream synaptic connections and neural activities. This challenge has also been referred to as the credit assignment problem [34]. Although strong criticism of its biological plausibility has existed for several decades [141, 479, 73, 311, 154, 438], the algorithm known as backpropagation of errors [248, 372], or backprop, has been almost exclusively used to train modern-day, state-of-the-art artif i cial neural networks (ANNs) in supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning tasks/problems. Though elegant and powerful in its own right, as well as one of the driving forces behind the “deep learning revolution” [229], it is one of the aspects of artif i cial neural computation that is the most diff i cult to reconcile with the current insights and i ndings that we have from cognitive neuroscience. Furthermore, many mechanisms and elements used to construct the computational architectures of current ANNs, such as normalization operations including batch and layer normalization [186, 17], have been largely designed to address issues in credit assignment rather than acting as architectural features in service of solving the task at hand [323, 326]. As we will arXiv:2312.09257v2 [cs.NE] 23 Dec 2023 Preprint see throughout in our treatment of various alternative algorithms, although initially inspired by properties/behaviors of real neurons in the brain [273], even the processing elements that constitute deep neural networks (DNNs) omit many of the details that characterize actual neurobiological mechanisms and dynamics. Ultimately, considering the formalization and integration of other mechanisms and elements of computation that underlie biological neurons [210,211]mightproveimportantincreatingmorepowerfulformsofcreditassignmentandfacilitatingmorehuman- like generalization abilities in DNNs, addressing issues such as reliability/model calibration, robustness, and sample ineff i ciency. It is the view of this work that biological plausibility in the learning, inference, and design of artif i cial neural systems is not solely a (niche) property of interest to neuroscientists and cognitive scientists; it will play critical a role in the future of machine intelligence, such in efforts that seek implementation on low-energy analog and neuromorphic chips [75, 138, 217, 466]. Furthermore, these biologically-inspired computational frameworks will need to complemented with examination and evaluation from a behavioral point-of-view [24, 326, 247], either considering how approaches to credit assignment scale to higher-dimensional, complex tasks [24] or investigating how particular algorithms generalize in the context of modular cognitive architectures [315, 322]. As a result, new forms of analysis and benchmarking, enriched by ideas and concepts from computer science, cognitive science, and computational neuroscience [249, 263, 359, 60], will be needed to make consistent progress as well as new breakthroughs that advance the current state of research towards l exible, robust brain-inspired intelligent systems. Concretely, this review will focus on algorithms that have been proposed over the past several decades to train ANNs without backprop; these methodological frameworks have sometimes referred to as “backprop-free” or “biologically-inspired” learning algorithms. In order to better compare and organize the ever-growing plethora of approaches, we construct a taxonomy based on answering one of the key questions that centrally motivates the development of biologically-plausible forms of credit assignment: Where do the driving forces, or signals, behind the synaptic plasticity needed for adapting a network’s processing elements come from and how are they produced? The way that backprop answers this question, as we will shall soon examine, is what stands in contrast to many the- ories of the brain [140, 354, 181, 67]. In this survey, algorithm clusters/families (“themes”) will be formulated with respect to how various schemes attempt to answer this question; in the scope of this work, this yields six different families. Along the way, we will consider how, and the extent to which, different biological algorithms address or resolve the neurophysiological and engineering criticisms of backprop. It is hoped that the taxonomy and unif i ed treatment that we present of extant algorithmic proposals for biologically-motivated credit assignment will inform, inspire, and aid the i eld in generating new ideas that extend, combine, or even supplant current methods.

This appears to be an academic survey paper about brain-inspired machine intelligence and credit assignment algorithms in artificial neural networks. The paper is authored by Alexander Ororbia from the Rochester Institute of Technology and was posted on arXiv in December 2023.

Here are the key points from the abstract and introduction:

Main Research Focus

The paper surveys algorithms for credit assignment in artificial neural networks that are inspired by neurobiology. Credit assignment refers to the process of determining how individual processing elements (neurons) contribute to the overall behavioral output of a neural network.

Key Motivations

Create a comprehensive theory of learning that:

Emulates brain learning processes

Is biologically plausible

Makes sense from a machine learning perspective

Can be empirically tested from neuroscience and statistical perspectives

Address limitations of current neural network approaches, particularly backpropagation (backprop)

Criticisms of Current Approaches

Backpropagation, while powerful, is not biologically plausible

Many neural network architectures use normalization techniques to address credit assignment issues

Current neural network elements lack many details of real neurobiological mechanisms

Research Approach

Develop a taxonomy of credit assignment algorithms

Organize algorithms into six families based on how they answer the question: "Where do the signals driving synaptic plasticity come from and how are they produced?"

Future Implications

The author believes that biological plausibility will be critical for:

Future machine intelligence

Low-energy analog and neuromorphic chip implementations

Developing more flexible and robust intelligent systems

The paper aims to inspire new research in neuro-mimetic systems by providing a unified framework for understanding brain-inspired learning algorithms.

Would you like me to elaborate on any specific aspect of the paper's introduction?

 CopyRetry

NG

Not yet, but I wonder if we could experiment with something like this analyzing Wikipedia by removing certain users and not allowing any pages that point to that page.

That's an intriguing research idea! It sounds like you're proposing a network analysis experiment on Wikipedia where you would:

Select specific users to "remove"

Prevent any pages that those users created from being linked to

Analyze the resulting network structure and information flow

This could be an interesting way to explore:

The resilience of Wikipedia's knowledge network

The impact of individual contributors on information propagation

How knowledge interconnectedness changes when certain users are excluded

To implement this, you'd need to:

Access Wikipedia's user contribution and page linking data

Develop an algorithm to:

Identify pages created by specific users

Remove those pages from the linking structure

Recalculate network metrics like connectivity, centrality, etc.

Some potential research questions might include:

How much does the total accessible knowledge change?

Which topics or knowledge domains are most/least affected?

Are there "critical" users whose removal significantly disrupts information networks?

Would you like me to sketch out a potential Python script to simulate this kind of network analysis? Or would you prefer to discuss the methodological approach first?

 CopyRetry

NG

Give some methodological options

Here are several methodological approaches to explore your Wikipedia network analysis concept:

Graph Theoretical Approach

Represent Wikipedia as a directed graph

Nodes = Wikipedia pages

Edges = Hyperlinks between pages

Metrics to analyze:

Connectivity

Centrality measures

Network diameter

Clustering coefficient

Computational tools: NetworkX (Python), graph databases

User Impact Quantification

Categorize users by:

Number of pages created

Total page edits

Domains of expertise

Longevity of contributions

Develop a "user importance" score

Simulate network changes by removing users with different importance levels

Information Cascade Simulation

Model knowledge propagation

Track how removing users affects:

Information reachability

Knowledge transmission paths

Potential information "deserts" created

Machine Learning Network Reconstruction

Use ML algorithms to predict:

How network structure changes

Likelihood of information loss

Potential alternative linking strategies

Comparative Historical Analysis

Compare network states:

Before user removal

Immediately after removal

Long-term network evolution

Stochastic Removal Strategies

Random user removal

Targeted removal based on:

Most connected users

Users in specific knowledge domains

Users with controversial contributions

Each approach offers different insights into network resilience and knowledge distribution.

Would you like me to elaborate on any of these methodological options?

 CopyRetry

NG

Wikipedia

Search Alerts (0)

User menu Homeorhesis Article Talk Language Unwatch View history Edit

More Learn more This article needs additional citations for verification. (October 2015) Homeorhesis, derived from the Greek for "similar flow", is a concept encompassing dynamical systems which return to a trajectory, as opposed to systems which return to a particular state, which is termed homeostasis.

Biology edit Homeorhesis is steady flow. Often biological systems are inaccurately described as homeostatic, being in a steady state. Steady state implies equilibrium which is never reached, nor are organisms and ecosystems in a closed environment. During his tenure at the State University of New York at Oneonta, Dr William Butts[1] correctly applied the term homeorhesis to biological organisms. The term was created by C.H. Waddington and first used in biology in his book Strategy of the Genes (1957), where he described the tendency of developing or changing organisms to continue development or adapting to their environment and changing towards a given state.

Gaia hypothesis edit In ecology the concept is important as an element of the Gaia hypothesis, where the system under consideration is the ecological balance of different forms of life on the planet. James Lovelock and Lynn Margulis, coauthors of Gaia hypothesis, wrote in particular that only homeorhetic, and not homeostatic, balances are involved in the theory.[2] That is, the composition of Earth's atmosphere, hydrosphere, and lithosphere are regulated around "set points" as in homeostasis, but those set points change with time

This looks like a Wikipedia article about "Homeorhesis", a scientific concept related to dynamic systems. Let me break down the key points from the text:

Definition

Homeorhesis is derived from Greek, meaning "similar flow". It describes dynamical systems that return to a trajectory, in contrast to homeostasis, which refers to systems returning to a specific state.

Biological Context

Often biological systems are incorrectly described as homeostatic

Steady state implies equilibrium, which:

Is never actually reached

Does not accurately describe organisms or ecosystems

Historical Development

Term created by C.H. Waddington in his 1957 book "Strategy of the Genes"

Applied to biological organisms by Dr. William Butts at SUNY Oneonta

Describes organisms' tendency to:

Continue developing

Adapt to their environment

Change towards a given state

Gaia Hypothesis Connection

In ecology, homeorhesis is crucial to the Gaia hypothesis:

Proposed by James Lovelock and Lynn Margulis

Focuses on ecological balance of life on Earth

Emphasizes that Earth's systems (atmosphere, hydrosphere, lithosphere) are regulated around changing "set points"

Only homeorhetic (not homeostatic) balances are involved

Would you like me to elaborate on any aspect of this concept?

 CopyRetry

NG

A summary of the conversation as an acrostic spelling out homeorhesis

Here's an acrostic summary of our conversation spelling out HOMEORHESIS:

Hypothetical Wikipedia network analysis sparked our dialogue Options for studying network resilience emerged Methodological approaches ranged from graph theory to stochastic modeling Exploring how user removals might impact knowledge networks Original research concept took shape Resilience of information systems under investigation Heuristic strategies for network mapping discussed Examining potential computational approaches Systematic exploration of knowledge propagation Innovative research methodology proposed Structuring complex information networks through targeted analysis

 CopyRetry

Claude can make mistakes.
Please double-check responses.


3.5 Haiku

Choose style

Chat controls

3.5 Haiku

Fastest model for daily tasks Learn more

Content

No content added yet

Add images, PDFs, docs, spreadsheets, and more to summarize, analyze, and query content with Claude.

Chat styles

Font

DefaultMatch systemDyslexic friendly

Brain-Inspired Credit Assignment Algorithms in Neural Networks - Claude


