So, once again, just to let you know, we're reading from the innovators, a book by Walter
Isaacson, who wrote the seed jobs biography, made a lot of money, and then this is the
thing he wanted to write.
And into introduction, it says, how this book came to be.
The computer and the internet are among the most important inventions of our era, but
few people know who created them.
They were not conjured up in the garret or garage, or by solo inventors, suitable to
be singled out on magazine covers, or put into a pantheon of Edison and Bell and Morse.
Instead, most of the innovations of the digital age were done collaboratively.
There were a lot of fascinating people involved, some ingenious and a few even geniuses.
This is the story of these pioneers, hackers, inventors, and entrepreneurs, who they were,
how their minds worked, and what made them so creative.
It's also a narrative of how they collaborated, and why their ability to work as a team made
them even more creative.
I gotta tell you, that surprised me.
The tale of their teamwork is important because we don't often focus on how central that skill
is to innovation.
There are thousands of books celebrating people who were biographers, portrait and mythologize
and lone inventors, I think he's referring to his own Steve Jobs biography right there.
I've produced a few myself, for sure he is.
Search the phrase, the man who invented, quote, on Amazon, and you'll get 1,860 book results.
But we have far fewer tales of collaborative creativity, which is actually more important
in understanding how today's technology revolution was fashioned.
It can also be more interesting.
We talk so much about innovation these days that it has become a buzzword, drained of
clear meaning.
So in this book, I set out to report on how innovation actually happens in the real world.
How did the most imaginative innovators of our time turn disruptive ideas into realities?
I focus on a dozen or so of the most significant breakthroughs of the digital age and the people
who made them.
What ingredients produced their creative leaps?
What skills proved most useful?
How did they lead and collaborate?
What did some succeed, why did some succeed where others failed?
I also explore the social and culture forces that provide the atmosphere of innovation.
For the birth of the digital age, this included a research ecosystem that was nurtured by
government spending and managed by military-industrial-academic collaboration, intersecting with what was a loose
alliance of community organizers, communal-minded hippies, do-it-yourself hobbyists, and homebrew
hackers, most of whom were suspicious of centralized authority.
These can be written with a different emphasis on any of these factors.
An example is the innovation of the Harvard IBM Mark I, the first electrical mechanical
computer.
One of its programmers, Grace Hopper, wrote a history that focused on its primary creator,
Howard Aiken, IBM countered with a history that featured its team of faceless engineers
who contributed the incremental innovations from counters to card feeders that went into
the machine.
Likewise, what emphasis should be put on great individuals versus the cultural currents
has long been a matter of dispute.
In the mid-19th century, Thomas Carlisle declared that, quote, the history of the world is but
the biography of great men, end quote.
Herbert Spencer responded with the theory that they emphasized that the role of societal
forces, academic and participants often viewed the balance indifferently, quote, as a professor,
I tended to think of history as run by impersonal forces, end quote, said Harry Kissinger, told
reporters during one of the Middle Eastern shuttle missions in the 1970s, quote, but
when you see it in practice, you see the difference potential, the difference personalities
make, end quote.
When it comes to digital age innovation, as with Middle East peacemaking, a variety of
personal and cultural forces all come into play.
And in this book, I thought to weave them together.
The internet was originally built to facilitate collaboration.
By contrast, personal computers, especially those meant to be used at home, were devised
as tools for individual creativity.
For more than a decade, beginning in the 1970s, the development of networks on the home computer
proceeded separately from one another.
They finally began coming together in the 1980s with the advent of modems, online services,
and the web.
Just as combining the steam engine with ingenious machinery drove the Industrial Revolution,
the combination of the computer and the distributed networks led to the digital revolution that
allowed anyone to create, disseminate, and access any information anywhere.
Historians of science are sometimes wary about calling periods of great change, quote, revolutions,
because they prefer to view pro-progress as evolutionary, quote, there is no such thing
as scientific revolution, and this is a book about it, is the rye opening sentence of the
Harvard professor Steven Shappen's book on that period.
One method that Shappen used to escape his half-joking contradiction is to note how the
key players of the period, quote, vigorously expressed the view, and quote, that they were
part of the revolution, quote, our sense of radical change of what comes substantially
from them, and quote, likewise, more of us today share a sense that the digital advances
of the past half century are transforming, perhaps even revolutionizing the way we live.
I can recall the excitement that each new breakthrough engendered.
My father and uncles were electrical engineers, and like many of the characters in this book,
I grew up in the basement workshop that had circuit boards to be soldered, radios to be
opened, tubes to be tested, and boxes of transistors and resistors to be sorted and deployed.
As an electronics geek who loved heath kits and ham radios, I can remember when vacuum
tubes gave way to transistors.
At college, I learned programming using punch cards.
And recall when the agony of batch processing was replaced by the ecstasy of hands-on interaction.
In the 1980s, I thrilled to the static and screech that modems made when they opened
up for you the weirdly magical realm of online services and bowling boards.
And in the early 1990s, I helped to run the digital division at Time and Time Warner that
launched the new web and broadband internet services.
As Wordsworth said of the enthusiasts who were present in the beginning of the French Revolution,
quote, bliss was it at the dawn to be alive.
That's cool.
I began work on this book more than a decade ago.
It grew out of my fascination for the digital advances I had witnessed, and also from the
biography of Benjamin Franklin, who was an innovator, inventor, publisher, postal service
pioneer, and all-around information networker and entrepreneur.
I wanted to step away from doing biographies, which tend to emphasize the role of a singular
individual.
And once again, do a book like, quote, The Wise Men, which I had co-authored with a colleague
with the creative framework of Six Friends who shaped America's Cold War policies.
My initial plan was to focus on the teams that invented the internet.
But then I interviewed Bill Gates.
He convinced me that the simultaneous emergence of the internet and the personal computer
made for the richer tale.
I put this book on hold until early 2009, when I began working on a biography of Steve Jobs.
But this story reinforced my interest in how the development of the internet and computers
intertwined.
So I soon finished that book, and I went back to the work on this tale of digital age innovators.
The protocols of the internet were devised by peer collaboration, and the resulting systems
seemed to have embedded in the genetic code of propensity to facilitate such collaboration.
The power to create and transmit information was fully distributed to each of the nodes,
and any attempt to impose controls on the hierarchy could be routed around.
Without falling into the tele- what is that?
Without falling into the tele-tele-logical fallacy of ascribing intentions of a personality
to technology, it's fair to say that a system of opening networks connected to individually
controlled computers tended, as the printing press did, to rest control over the distribution
of information from the gatekeepers, central authorities, and institutions that employed
scriveners and scribes.
It became easy for ordinary folks to create and share content.
No, it's not theological.
It's T-E-L-E-O-L-O-G-I-C-A-L.
Tele-logical.
The collaboration that created the digital age was not just among peers, but also between
generations.
Ideas were handed off from one cohort of innovators to the next.
Another theme that emerged from my research was that users repeatedly commandeered digital
innovations to create the communications and social networking tools.
I also became interested in how the quest for artificial intelligence, machines that
think on their own, has consistently proved less fruitful than creating ways to forge
a partnership or symbiosis between people and machines.
In other words, the collaborative creativity that marked the digital age included collaboration
between humans and machines.
Finally, I was struck by how the truest creativity of the digital age came from those who were
able to connect the arts and the sciences.
I'm going to take a pause here.
Marion artists.
If you're a hacker or if you're a geek, fucking Marion artists.
Rob Pike did, Aiken did.
So many people have done this.
Finally, I was struck by how the truest creativity from the digital age came from those who were
connected to arts and sciences.
They believe that beauty mattered.
Shayla, absolutely.
Quote, I always thought of myself as a humanities person, as a kid, but I liked electronics.
Jobs told me as I embarked on his biography, quote, then I read something that one of
my heroes, Edwin Land of Polaroid said about the importance of people who could stand at
the intersection of humanities and sciences.
And I decided that that's what I wanted to do.
The people who were comfortable at the humanities technology intersection helped to create the
human machine symbiosis that is the core of this story.
Like many aspects of the digital age, the idea that innovation resides where art and
science connect is not new.
Leonardo da Vinci was the exemplar of the creativity that flourishes when the humanities
and sciences interact.
When Einstein was stymied while working out the general relativity principle, he would
pull out his violin and play Mozart until he could reconnect to what he called the harmony
of the spheres.
When it comes to computers, there is one other historical figure and not well known who embodied
the accommodation of the arts and sciences.
Like her famous father, she understood the romance of poetry.
Like him, she also saw the romance of math and machinery.
And that is where our story begins.
Anyone want to guess who it is?
Anyone want to guess where the story begins?
What historical figure embodies the romance of math and machinery more like any others?
The daughter of a famous poet?
The daughter of a mother who forced her to take mathematical tutoring even though it
was a man's world?
Much much before was, way before was.
I'll give you another hint.
She looks like this.
When they make her dress up to take a picture, she looks like that.
Ada.
Ada's story is so amazing.
And I've already read Ada's section in here, so I'll read it again.
We'll save it for another night.
Ada's story.
If you think you know Ada Loveless from just looking at her picture here, you don't.
That's all I have to tell you.
This was her dressing up for a painting.
Most of the time, she dressed like a guy.
And she was completely irreverent and she was really funny and she was super smart and
she was super narcissistic.
And you know, the daughter of Lord Byron, who's a gallivanting, you know, horny, philanderer
poet, bad poet by the way.
Yeah, Robin Williams makes a joke about being teased by bullies in his school and they would
kick copies of Byron in my face.
It's a quote from Dead Poets Society because Byron is not regarded as one of the greatest
poets of life.
But that was her dad.
So we will read more about Ada Loveless in the next episode of Artifix Rob, Reads the
Innovators.
I know you want me to read more, but that's all you get, so there.
That's all.
That's all for tonight.
That's all we get for tonight.
Okay.
Good night.
