The privilege of having been screwed over so directly and so beautifully by the system
is the right to raise the middle finger to the institutions, like how dare you expect
that I'm going to use your quiet procedures.
If you think about what peer review is, it's the exact opposite of what peer review should
mean.
Peer review should mean that you publish your article and then the peers in the community
review it.
But in fact, what it is is peer suppression.
You take your article and you mail it off to somebody who you don't know.
That person gets an early look at it.
They might hold it up and review.
They then inflict any changes that they want or they reject it for reasons that make no
sense and then it's handed back to you.
Now why does it have such a positive spin?
It's not long standing in the community.
It doesn't seem to have a very long history, but it came out of an effort to quality control
new ideas.
We wanted to know if new ideas were coming from reputable people.
Were they using reasonable methods?
Were they reasonably familiar with their fields?
And in fact, that is the good reason that we had this new technique of peer review.
Previously editors had been tasked with being responsible for the field and figuring out
whether or not something was up to snuff.
In this new situation, it was perfectly constructed for abuse.
In fact, what you find is that it's like what my brother refers to as the low posted
speed limit in a southern town.
The key question isn't peer review.
How is it enforced for different people?
That is, if you are a famous professor who is well plugged into a journal where your
friend is the editor, you're going to have an entirely different experience with peer
review than if you submit the exact same article coming from some place that is not well known
to that journal and in which there is a bias against that group.
For example, if I were to point out that every purebred dog in a kennel show is a product
of intelligent design, that is that humans have commanded canines with whom and how
they can mate, that process has produced things like doxons and poodles.
However, if I use words like intelligent design, I guarantee you that even though it's clearly
true that dogs are intelligently designed, that that paper will be rejected because there
is a belief that we should have a line which says no paper on intelligent design has ever
been accepted by a leading peer review journal.
That political understanding of intelligent design has to do with both a reasonable idea
and an unreasonable idea.
The reasonable idea is that you should not be able to smuggle Jesus into evolutionary
theory.
You should not be able to do young earth creationism inside of a scientific context.
That is the previous reasonable version of peer review.
It makes sense as quality control.
But what happens when you start talking about perception mediated selection?
For example, pseudo copulation in orchids, which we've discussed before, or in the predatory
system with the muscle Lampicillus, where the perception of the bass matters because
it thinks that it's consuming a baitfish, but in fact, that's a fake baitfish filled
with the young of the muscle.
In both of those cases, you have perception mediated selection, and you could make an
argument that that should be called intelligent design, but those magic words can't appear
in that journal.
Why?
For a political reason.
What we have is we've created a system based around quality control that, in fact, is rife
and open for abuse.
In that system, we now have to realize that we need other channels.
We need an ability to route around.
We need to be able to reinsert dissidents and people who do not get along with institutions
back inside of the institutions.
If you look at Noam Chomsky sitting at MIT, you will realize that it was once the case
that such people were much more common.
You can look up a fellow, an old friend of mine named Serge Lang, and you could scarcely
believe that such a person could have existed at Yale, but that person very much did exist.
You can look at an old controversy about David Baltimore and a woman named Margot O'Toole
and the courage of Mark Ptashny and Walter Gilbert in fighting a Nobel laureate when
Margot O'Toole accused a colleague of the Nobel laureate of misconduct or at least irreproducibility
of results.
We have a long and storied history that has gone wildly off the rails with the crisis
in current sense-making, and the purpose of the portal was always to set up a channel
by which we would have enough people watching that we could attempt to keep people from
being rolled in the alleys when they contradicted the institutions.
That is in large measure what we're here to do.
If you look at our episode with Timur Karan, we introduced you to a concept of preference
falsification.
Right now, the danger of the Andrew Yang and the Jeffrey Epstein situations is that they
have conveniently communicated to many people, of course we're going to mess with your sense-making.
What is it you're prepared to do about it?
This brings us to a final issue which I think is incredibly important, which has to do with
why there are no living heroes.
In effect, we almost don't believe in heroism.
As soon as somebody starts to make us excited about the world and what is possible for the
individual, we come to start feeling terrible about that person unless they're trapped inside
of a Marvel movie or something like that.
If you go back to the history of ticker tape parades, you will see that there were many
ticker tape parades given for individual aviators, individual explorers, ships captains who put
their ship at risk to rescue the crew of another.
In fact, this pattern largely stopped.
My contention is that the difficult case of Charles Lindbergh may have marked a turning
point.
In Lindbergh's case, he had flown solo to Europe from the United States and come back
a hero, I believe in the late 1920s.
Lindbergh was a very difficult human being to deal with because he was an authentic hero
and he was also somebody who believed in America first in an isolationism.
Given the Nazi menace in Europe, I think that's almost an unforgivable position.
Nevertheless, the fact is that Lindbergh commanded tremendous popularity and that popularity
could have been used to keep the US out of a war.
What I find is that since Lindbergh, it has been very rare to elevate any individual to
the point where they can oppose our institutions.
The Pete Segers and Albert Einstein's of the world who fought against McCarthyism were
a huge danger to the industry that was cropping up around anti-communism.
When it came to the Vietnam War, it was very dangerous to have popular entertainers like
John Lennon who were against it.
We have been frightened about individuals coming to rival our institutions in terms
of power.
That's what's so great about the New Revolution and long-form podcasting and all of these
other forms of social media.
We have a great danger in that most of these platforms are mediated.
We saw what happened to Alex Jones.
It's quite possible that if these powerful institutions come to believe that a particular
individual should be removed, they can always choose to enforce the rules in a different
way.
We saw recently the advent of terms of service changes to include dead naming.
If I say that Walter Carlos composed the album Switched on Bach or performed the album
Switched on Bach, that is a true statement, but because Walter Carlos became Wendy Carlos,
I have no idea whether or not I can be accused of dead naming.
Imagine that you have a hundred such rules, rules that are never spelled out, never clear,
that can be enforced any which way to deny someone access to the major platforms.
This is the great danger with this moment.
We have unprecedented access, but we also have a gating function which can be turned
on at any time if we fall out of line with the institutions.
I want to read you one tweet that has been on my mind for quite some time.
This tweet came from a contributor to the Washington Post, who's a professor at the
Fletcher School, and it said, good morning, Eric.
I'm going to leave out the parentheses.
I've read up on a few of your notions, and I have some thoughts, but my basic conclusion
is simple.
What's true isn't new, and what's new isn't true.
I think it's fantastic.
I was stung by it because at first I was under the impression that we were still living
in a world in which the Washington Post, New York Times, Harvard, Stanford, what have you
control the major conversation, but coming off of a recent date at the Ice House in Pasadena,
which was a live gig with Peter Thiel, I've started to realize how powerful this new movement
is.
We can reach anyone anywhere.
What I now believe is that the gated institutional narrative has been spoiling for a fight.
We are quickly coming to the point where we have a David and Goliath moment.
We now need to try to reinflict the individuals who are uncorrelated, who are not particularly
good at taking orders, who don't like committee meetings, who don't want to sign loyalty oaths,
but who are passionately committed to the public good and to some version of intellectual
meta-honesty.
We need these people to once again take up positions inside of the institutions.
I would like to, in fact, inflict myself on my favorite institution, Harvard University.
The children of Harvard University have always been divided into white sheep and black sheep,
and there's no question that I represent black sheep Harvard, but I also think that
one of the features of the university that makes it great is that it has tolerated both
its white sheep and its black sheep.
It is time to do battle with the oppressive structures that have been used to silence
new ideas.
If in my family I assert that there might be as many as three revolutionary Nobel quality
ideas in one clutch, how many ideas might there be suppressed if that is actually true?
How many people are sitting on top of intellectual gold that never got its chance to see the
light of day?
What I'd like to do is to try to do battle with the disk, to show you that it exists,
to try to figure out how it works, and to try to show that the tools that we currently
have may be powerful enough to defeat it.
This is the actual purpose of the portal, and I think even if we lose some viewers and
some listeners, even if people start to see articles appearing that say how terrible the
show is and how it's trying to foment some kind of unrest, to hell with them.
We're in an amazing position to try to do something new and to stand up for a lot of
people who may have given up on their own original ideas and to try to spark a revolution.
Because if I'm right, the disk has been sitting up on top of some of our best and most hopeful
ideas for a way out of our economic condundrums, our military problems, ideas which have some
chance of delivering us to a much more interesting and brighter tomorrow.
So I hope that this is going to be an unbelievable decade.
Thank you guys for sticking with it.
I'm sorry if this was a little bit long, but it was a lot to say, and it was heartfelt
and quite important to me to get it out.
And we will return to trying to get you high quality content, either in the form of interviews
which you've become used to on the portal, or perhaps some new visual content that allows
you to understand ideas that would be very difficult to communicate, but for some novel
means of presentation.
We hope to approach the community to try to coordinate people who are eager to contribute
back into the program, and maybe get a little bit of a closer relationship to our content
going forward, maybe influence it a little bit.
And we haven't figured out all of the bugs.
So thanks for being part of the initial experiment.
Thanks for sticking with us, and we're looking forward to being with you in the coming year
and decade ahead.
So you've been through the portal for our first solo episode of 2020.
And be well, everybody.
Stay tuned.
