I just finished a conversation with Devin Erickson, who recently blew up on Twitter and social media
with his harsh truths and deeply articulate insights. He is also the author of a new science
fiction book titled Theft of Fire, and this is the first fiction book that I've read
in almost 10 years, and I think that is a testament to the quality of this conversation as a whole.
Now I came across Devin after Naval Ravikant reposted one of his tweets and I was instantly
hooked. I followed him, I continued reading his content and it was incredible. He was saying the
things that I knew deep down but did not know how to articulate. Then naturally I instantly
bought his book, I burned through it, and now we're here. So in this conversation, we talk about
how to future-proof yourself going into the age of AI, what's wrong with the current school system
and how people learn skills as a whole, why agency is the most important trait you can develop to
become free, why intelligence is not a good predictor of overall success, how to find direction in
life and remove dangerous self-limiting beliefs, how Devin left his career as a software engineer,
built an audience, and became an independent author and creator and much more. I hope that you
enjoy this conversation with Devin Erickson.
I want to start with that very first post of yours that I came across and it was you responding to
Yuval Noah Harari like a clip of him saying that nobody knows what to learn because nobody knows
what will be relevant 20 years from now. And then you started it with that's because this dude
doesn't know what education is. That caught my attention immediately. And you went on to say
this, in my opinion, the seven liberal arts of the modern world are logic, how to derive truth
from known facts, statistics, how to understand the implications of data, rhetoric, how to persuade
and spot persuasion tactics, research, how to gather information on an unknown subject,
parentheses, practical psychology, how to discern and understand the true motives of others,
investment, how to manage and grow existing assets and agency, how to make decisions about
what course to pursue and proactively take action to pursue it. This will set us up for the entire
podcast. So I want to start with this question. What do you find wrong with the current education
system? And why are we not teaching what you call these liberating arts? Well,
the root cause of what is wrong with the education system is that a third party is paying for it.
You know, we could go on all day, sort of nitpicking the symptoms, but that is the disease.
And when when something is being paid for, the person who pays for it is the is the customer.
And it is the customer who gets served. So when you don't pay for your education,
when the government pays for your education through money that it has taken from other people,
then the government decides on some level what you are going to learn. And you do not have
so much as a veto power. Because if you if you pack your bags and go somewhere else to some other
college, you're getting the same thing. Because the government is paying that for that either
through these kinds of education grants, through the Stafford loan program, you're not writing the
checks. So you don't decide the curriculum. And when somebody else decides the curriculum that you
are going to be educated from, then they are going to give you the education that is going to make
you useful to them, not specifically the education that is going to make you useful to you. And this
is something that Cicero talked about when he talked about education. And I would highly recommend
giving those bits of his writings a read, because we don't really have
an organized version of what Cicero would have considered education. You know, the what we call
education today is mostly actually training. And that is the kind of education that in Rome would
have been given to slaves. A slave is essentially a human machine, where he's property, he's going
to spend his whole life doing one task. So you give him job training. Job training is not education.
It is preparation to do a specific task. If in that era of history, if someone was a free man,
a Roman citizen with the full rights there of who could, you know, carry weapons and do all the
things that Roman citizens could do, it was expected that he would probably need to be able
to do many different things in his life, because he would be acting in his own interest. He was
not a slave, he did not exist to serve someone else. He existed to benefit his society, but also
to serve himself. And hopefully the two would align. So that meant that you couldn't teach,
you couldn't possibly teach him everything he might need to know, because you had no idea
what he might need to know, he had no idea what he might need to know. So you taught him
how to train himself. You taught him how to learn. And education is not about how to do a task.
It's about how to learn a task. And we do not have systematic education in this society,
in the modern West, about how to learn and educate yourself. Because the people who are
determining what goes into education are really more focused on, okay, what's going to make this
person a useful worker for the moneyed interests that I actually serve. Exactly. Beautiful. With
that, it seems like agency is a massive part of that equation. The last art, so to say, could be
the glue between it all. So in your eyes, what is agency and what is the importance of it in this
context? Well, agency is really sort of the one most rare factor that determines highly successful
people in life. If we look at someone like Elon Musk, we can say, oh, he's very smart. And clearly
he is, IQ probably 150 plus. But there are lots of people banging around with 150 plus IQs,
thousands upon thousands of them in the United States alone. And a lot of them are cloistered
in academia. And they come up with these sort of postmodernist papers, or maybe they're doing
something slightly more useful like physics, but they don't get this magical effect where
everything they touch turns to gold. And that's because the bottleneck is not intelligence.
Intelligence is only one of the things that is needed for success. It's necessary, but it's not
sufficient. And intelligence is a very narrow thing. So what agency is, is it is the tendency to
initiate action to achieve your goals? And we don't solve the world with intelligence. We don't
look at the world and think very smart thoughts and oh, I understand everything now. That's not
how it works. Because when we look at the world and we think very hard, we get a few things right,
and we generally get most of it wrong. And then what we do is we
try something. We have our guess, we test it, some of it fails, maybe it succeeds, but usually it
fails. We refine that guess and try again. So what raw, what applying raw intelligence to the
universe is missing is that feedback loop. And what agency does, what this tendency to initiate
action, what the belief that you will eventually be successful, which is what agency is, what it does
is it makes us willing to take risks, and it makes us resilient to failure. Because if you're
trying something that really is, is an achievement worth having, that somebody hasn't done before,
the first time you try it, you're going to fail, no matter how smart you are,
you're going to get a lot of things wrong. So you have to keep trying again, until you eliminate
all of the errors from your model, or from your plan. And you can't do that with pure
intelligence, because intelligence is just the ability to analyze, it doesn't give you data,
it doesn't tell you what the universe is like. So you have to go over and over and over and over
again. And you have to, you have to have this notion. If you're going to do that, if you're
going to persist in that, you have to have this notion that gosh, this problem is too hard for
me to solve right now. But if I keep at it, I will learn how to solve it. And I will succeed.
Notice that word learn, you have to teach yourself. Education is teaching yours, is
learning how to teach yourself. Then when you go and do a hard task, you have to learn how to do
the task. If you don't learn how to learn, then you can only do things that somebody already
understands how to do. Absolutely. So what's special about the Elon Musk's of this world is not
intelligence. It's intelligence coupled with a very high degree of agency. Yes. And what that
reminds me of specifically with Elon or people in general who have, who like the thought of
achieving a very high goal. But since it seems impossible to them, they just write it off as
if they can't do it. Elon, on the other hand, has this massive vision. He knows that it's not
possible right now, and it wasn't before, but he built the steps. Yeah, he's going to make it
possible. Yes. And this is this is why I think agency is so important, because you can't make
yourself more intelligent. Intelligence is biological. I know that in some of your videos,
you disagree with that, but I want to talk about it. I think you're defining intelligence more
broadly than I am. The narrow sort of narrow band analytical ability, IQ type intelligence,
you can't increase that. That is that that is determined very early on in your biological
development. And it is a physical and chemical feature of the brain. There's not much you can do
about that. But agency is a skill. You can learn it. And more importantly, you can teach it to
your kids, you can raise your kids with the correct attitude that is going to enable them to go out
and do cool stuff that is hard and fail and fail and fail and fail until eventually they succeed.
So it's about beliefs and it's about emotional resilience.
Yeah. Yeah. So for those who haven't watched the video, I kind of I tried to paint a connection
between Susan Croix, Susan Croix groiders stages of ego development and intelligence with each
of those levels. And so the way that I thought about it in this sense, when I read your article
on what is intelligence, and you defining it as the ability to tell stories, what that brought
to my mind, maybe intelligence wasn't the right word for me to use, but perspective and the ability
to collect, integrate and widen your perspective to notice more opportunities through some kind of
skill or self development. And so with that, the way that I think about it with perspective
is that kind of increases your ability to maybe not tell a story, but to create a story because
you can see further. What do you think about that? Well, I think, I think that the concept,
whether you call it intelligence, defining intelligence broadly, or whether you call it
something else is is about effectiveness. The question you're really asking is what makes
an effective human being? Correct. A human, a person who can go out and accomplish
significant goals that contribute both to his own life and to his entire civilization.
And I think we would both agree that IQ is not enough, because we are constantly birthing people
with high IQs. And a lot of the time when you read about somebody who has
an IQ of 180 or 200 or something, and we enter the few of them for a magazine or something,
you never heard of this guy. Like, who the fuck is Chris Langham? Why do I care?
And the only reason we really care about intelligence is because it's a component of
getting things done. And I think what's very important is to realize that there are other
components of getting things done, that we as a civilization could be making a much better effort
to teach to people who are born with this high IQ thing, instead of just shoving them into
government schools and then shoving them into postgraduate education and then saying,
gosh, why is the only thing that's coming in? Why does academia produce nothing but
criticism of old literature because it was written by dead white males or Michael Foucault
constructing rationalizations for how he wants to sodomize young boys. So it's because we have not,
we've confused the condition of necessity with the condition of sufficiency. For this kind of
groundbreaking civilization will progress, high IQ is necessary, but it's not sufficient. And we
are not grooming our high IQ children for success. And that's where the what education really is
comes in. Yeah. So in that case, where if you want to take a stab at it or if you have some idea
about it, how education could start to shift to shape that thing. But more importantly,
you mentioned that one of the most important things you can teach your children is agency.
Is that the first step is on an individual parental level? Yes, yes, yes, because if children have
agency, then even if there's something you miss, they can address it themselves as an adult,
because they believe they can. And I like to characterize agency as belief in the existence
of hard problems. Nice. What do I mean by that? Well, there's there's three kinds of problems.
There's easy. And these are the things that we can do. The moment we turn our hand to them,
with the intelligence, the skills, the knowledge, the resources that we already have.
You know, if you wanted to go down to the store and and buy a karkna milk, that's an easy task.
You already know how to do it. You already have the resources. You already have the techniques.
So there then there's impossible tasks, things that you not only can't do with your capabilities
and resources, but things that you don't know how to you don't know how to overcome the distance
between you and that. And there's no meaningful attempt. If I told you to eat a bicycle,
you wouldn't try. Yeah, because you know, you can't do it. Your teeth don't work that way.
You know, you're not I'm not going to be able to hype you up with enough motivations, motivational
speeches that you can tunnel to Java. You can't dig through the center of the earth. Some tasks
are impossible. So the trick is to raise children who believe in a third category of tasks. Those
are hard. And those are the tasks where you can't do this right now. But you can learn if you keep
trying. And the way that we educate children in government schools erodes this ability.
Because what is the definition of success in a government school? Well, you got an A on the test.
That means that you answered all the questions with which which all were selected for having a
difficulty determined by the lowest common denominator. And you didn't make any mistakes.
So if you are raised in this government school environment, and if you are sent to public
school in America in your childhood, you spend almost as much waking hours there as with your parents.
So this really shapes people's personalities. You know, your definition of success is avoiding failure.
Except in the real world, the real definition of success lies on the other side of a whole lot of
failure. Yeah. So when you create a and so called educational environment that makes children risk
averse, and especially when you do it to high IQ children, you are crippling what you are
psychologically crippling, what could be the next generation of hyper productive people.
Right. So in that case, with, I'd like to summarize that in my own head as the greatest
mistake is no mistake at all. And in that case, for people that have already gone through this
school system, who are at least have the curiosity to listen to this and actually be open minded to
it. Yeah. What is something that they can do or think about to practice this, the agency, the how
to learn? Well, start thinking about your own emotional makeup. Start thinking and trying to notice
ways that you are risk averse, that you are too afraid to do something where there's something
you want that lies on the other side. And, you know, you can watch a bunch of YouTube shows
about success and motivational videos and whatever. But the first thing you have to realize is that
belief in your ability to succeed is like a muscle. It has to be trained. You don't go
into the gym and bench 300 on the first day. So what you can do is you can first be aware of this,
and you can make a plan to where you can set yourself goals that are achievable that are
things that you can't do right now, but they're achievable in steps. And lifting is actually
excellent for this, you know, lifting weights is excellent for this because you go in as a beginner,
you pile a bunch of weight on the bar, you lift it till you can't lift it anymore. And then the next
time you go into the gym, you can put on like three or five more pounds. Like, wow, I got better.
And this, this is not only making you stronger, but it trains you in the belief that if you work
at something you can't do now, you will eventually succeed because you have to teach yourself to
believe in the possibility of success. And you have to teach yourself not to be ashamed
of the distance between who you are and what you can do and who you want to be and what you want to
be able to do. Because if you are ashamed of that, if you allow yourself to be ashamed of that,
a small amount of it can motivate you. But a lot of it will make you avoid the very kinds of tasks
you should be seeking out. In other words, you have to go do something and give yourself permission
to suck. Yeah, give yourself permission to suck at it. Awesome. With okay, so tying this back around
to have so much to talk about. But the in terms of agency, intelligence, the connections between
those making mistakes, looping back to the original post by you've all of people not knowing what to
learn. Yeah, is it possible to know what to learn? Or is it just a process of making mistakes until
you cultivate enough vision through that to move in your own direction? Well, I think the further
into the future you have to look the harder it becomes to get everything right. So I might know
what I need to learn in the next two months. I might have some idea what I need to learn in
the next two years. I don't have any idea what I'm going to need to learn in the next 20 years.
I'm going to find that out as I learn what I need to learn in the next two years. So if you decide
in the beginning, when this child is, you know, five years old or whatever, and he's entering
kindergarten, this is what this child needs to learn. No, you're going to get it wrong.
Because the world is going to change. In order to follow a moving target,
you have to have a feedback loop. So what you want to do, the way you want to structure how
you learn is not I make the best plan at the outset. No, my plan sucks, because I don't know
anything yet. I need to I need to get moving. I need to get moving and learn as I go.
And so, you know, what we really need to be cultivating in children and calling it education
is the tendency to move and the ability to learn as we move.
Yes. The ability to figure it out. Get started. Do something. Time in the market beats timing the
market. You're not going to get it all right. You're not going to be perfect. You know, you're
not going to make a million dollars in your first year as an online content creator. You know,
you're not you're not going to be the most popular show on YouTube. You know, you're not going to
write a book no matter how good it is that sells a million copies in its first year when no one's
ever heard of you. You just have to get going. You just have to move forward and make your mistakes
and learn as you go. And agency is the willingness to do that.
Beautiful. In Theft of Fire, when Marcus is describing the the the robot guard spiders
of Miranda after being attacked multiple times on the ship, he describes them or it may not be
them exactly but the artificial and the quote is simple reactive predictable artificial stupidity.
Yeah. I feel how do I set this up?
With the talk of intelligence and agency and this artificial stupidity and people going through
this regimented education system that many could say leads to that definition.
What makes us human? What is the thing that if we're so afraid of this artificial intelligence
and what it is right now? Yeah.
How how do we make sense of our own place? Okay. So I think that the reason
people are afraid of artificial intelligence right now is they don't really understand what
artificial intelligence right now is. We do not have an artificial human. We do not have something
that can replace a human or do the things that a human can do because what the defining capability
of a human is the ability to look at your environment and say I need to learn that and
then go learn that and do it. So we can make an artificial intelligence that can play chess better
than us. We can make an artificial intelligence that can draw better than well not all of us
but certainly draw better than me. I can't draw. I haven't devoted the time to learn
and other priorities but you know these are task specific machines and they're no more a threat to
our central humanity than a machine that can lift more than we can is and you know I'm sure that a
lot of people in the in the industrial revolution thought oh no you know human beings are obsolete
because machines can now lift and move more than us and it's it's not true. What human beings do is
navigate their environment and learn things and decide what to learn. It's that executive function.
It's that ability to tell ourselves stories to look at the universe and say
all these things I see fit together into a story and now I'm going to tell myself another story
which is my plan and I'm going to make my plan happen and of course a plan is a list of things
that don't happen but that just means you have to make another plan midway through and eventually
you hit the moving target if you if you have your feedback loop running and you can chase it but
when I call these things artificial stupidity when I call these machines artificial stupidity
they've they are essentially a robot with a neural net that's been trained on one set of tasks.
Okay I'm going to protect this person and there's numerous instances in this story
where they do something very counterproductive to Miranda's real goals because they only know
how to do this one thing. They can't think about the broader context of what's going on
and so a real human being is able to outwit them despite the fact that he doesn't have the speed
or the strength or the the the processing speed that they have you know because he's able to
understand the broader context that he's operating in and to act appropriately.
You know the real when you were talking about ego development in this other video
you know one of the things that jumped out at me is I don't see these as levels you move through.
I see them as tools you add to your toolbox because even someone on what you would call
the highest level of development you know your your philosopher king or whatever if you drag
him out and you stick his head in the horse trough and you hold him down he's going to act on
ego development level one I want air I'm going to fight you and that is not a regression or a failure
it's just he's pulling his earliest tool out of the toolbox because that's what's appropriate to
the situation so Marcus the human real intelligence versus the robot the artificial stupidity
Marcus can decide what tools to use based on his understanding of the total context that he's in
you know the robots only have the tools that have been provided to them by this neural net
training data set and they're unable to say okay my whole paradigm no longer applies
so I need to learn to do something totally different they can't make that jump and the way
this ties back to what we see with artificial intelligence right now is that it is this kind
of artificial stupidity and what it's revealing is you know our research into artificial intelligence
has actually discovered natural stupidity because what it's revealed is that a lot of people are
only functioning on the level of this this chatbot AI a lot of people are only functioning on the
level of chat gpt you know because either because they're dumb or because that's how we've educated
them right interesting connection we have we have tried we have created an education system
that makes human beings into single purpose tools and then we feel threatened when we can build
computer single purpose tools but human beings did not evolve to be single purpose tools
we evolved to be navigators of an ever-changing environment
and we need to recapture that ability and rediscover that capacity within ourselves
and stop looking to our society and to our so-called leaders for what we're going to do next
take responsibility for our own lives what do I need to learn what do I need to do what are my
goals what is important to me and then we won't feel so threatened by artificial intelligence
because artificial intelligence won't do any of it can't do any of that yeah I like the
distinction there where humans being natural generalists they shouldn't be the tool because
they build the tools yeah the cheetah is perfect for its niche but then you put it in another
environment it doesn't survive same with the polar bear but the cool thing about being human
is that we are in all of the environments because we created the parka or the coat or whatever it
may be so we can survive in that context so AI being a tool to help us survive better in some cases
do you see that being used as mainly a tool for the person to get work done more efficiently
or just be more productive for the foreseeable future right now obviously
it is at least theoretically possible to make a software entity that can do the things that humans
can do because if you were to take a human brain and scan it and simulate the physics
of every atom of it in a vast supercomputer the size of a solar system then this would be able
to function like a human brain functions there's nothing magical about meat so I'm not saying
that a that a truly sentient artificial person is not someday possible what I'm saying is that
what we have right now is a tool that does certain types of thinking like processing
and that's going to be very useful and we could use it and we can maybe even to some extent
integrate with it where the the line between us and the tool starts to blur as we incorporate
these capabilities into ourselves technologically and that's fine but what a human being is really
for is that executive function is deciding
what do I want what are my goals what do I wish to achieve okay how can I do that with the tools
I have and if I can't do that with the tools I have what kind of new tool do I need to create
and when you are able to navigate your life on this level then chat gpt doesn't feel like a threat
to you you know if you are for example an artist you know people prompting dolly through chat gpt
is very threatening to you oh my god you know how will how will I get work I am an artist and all
these authors are making book covers out of AI art and they're stealing bread from my mouth
and you know we need to boycott them and shame them so we don't do this well
well the problem you have there is that you have defined yourself as a tool don't be a tool
when you say I am an artist that is a self-limiting belief because you have defined yourself in terms
of this one capability and now you are threatened by the existence of a tool that has that same
capability because you have reduced yourself to the level of a tool right I'm noticing in terms
of that identifying like identification with something that's rather narrow I'm noticing
a few connections here between different worldviews and one the thing that I've been most interested in
after following you for a good amount of time is just that it's your worldview where I've
where I want to talk about uh and cap after this yes and give a brief intro to that because I'm a
newbie to it but before that in terms of how you make sense of the world is there any guiding
religion philosophy some way of making sense that already has a label or do you kind of just
have your own way of thinking about it well again self limit you have to be aware of
self-limiting beliefs so I would describe my views as somewhat anarcho-capitalistic
but if I call myself an anarcho-capitalist you know I can do it sometimes for convenience
we don't want to fight the great linguistic crusade but if I do it so consistently within my own head
then I have made my then I have made that my identity and then I am unable to critically
examine anarcho-capitalism yeah and to critique it as a tool and say does this or doesn't this
serve my goals right now and this is one example you know so I I describe myself a lot as an
anarcho-capitalist or a libertarian and I get other people who describe themselves as libertarians
doing the uh the sort of the uh the favorite hobby of libertarians which is calling other
libertarians not real libertarians yeah because I say well I would like to see seed oils banned
and they're like that is a statist position no you have identified with a political philosophy
to the point where you are thinking about how to serve the political philosophy not how to
achieve your goals the political philosophy was made to serve you not the other way around
so the reason I describe myself as an anarchist or a libertarian is that I want to see people be
freed and when I understand that that is my motivating goal to see people having control
over their own destinies I can say well you know does what move in this specific situation
allows people more control over their own destinies which is more important the freedom to poison
people or the freedom to not be poisoned right I think that's one of the things there where
we can go over some of the principles of an cap but yeah with that you are
the nuance here is that the thing that makes a person most free isn't always absolute freedom
it's having those limitations like the seed oils as an example if someone doesn't
have the choice or they don't know then that's not inherently freeing yeah yeah yeah
political philosophies have to be understood as tools not as goals you know we don't we don't do
classical liberalism to achieve a classical liberal society we implement ideas from classical
liberalism because it is good for people's quality of life because it is good for the economic
productivity of society as a whole but any tool that you have that you're using to do part of a
project you have to know when to set it down and when to pick up another tool so anytime you say to
yourself I am an artist I am an author I am an anarcho capitalist I am a republican I am a democrat
I am a communist you know I am white I am male you know all of these things are useful ways to
describe yourself but you have to be careful with them because any of these can become self-limiting
you know even even something like I am male well it's a biological fact but I'm writing the sequel
to Theft of Fire right now and Miranda for part of the book is a point of view character
so now I have to write from the perspective of a woman
and the fact that I am male is the truth but I have to set that tool down and pick up another tool
of oh this is my mental model of how women work and how what it feels like to be one
in order to achieve the task that I want to achieve so one of the biggest reasons why people are
unwilling to take risks and try new things one of the biggest things that can be a real risk to
someone's agency are these self-limiting beliefs I can't do that I can't try that because it threatens
my sense of identity my sense of who I am from where I get my sense of value and if you're running
around saying I am an artist and I am worthwhile because I am a great artist then you're not only
threatened by AI that can draw you're also threatened by doing things that aren't art
because no you're an artist you know ultimately we are not a tool for doing any particular task
we are here to navigate our own lives in a way that makes sense to us and what what it really
means to develop as a human being is to have this toolbox have the ability to expand the toolbox
and be able to express whatever part of our capacity helps us to do what we want
yes so when I say when I say I'm an anarcho capitalist it that's that's not about the methods
I want to use it's about my goals it's about I want to eventually make government obsolete
and get rid of it I know there are certain things we do with government now that we
don't know how to do in other ways so I need to build a new tool or I need to help my species
build a new tool we don't have all the tools yet it's a long-term goal it's a hard problem
that we will fail and fail and fail and fail at until eventually we learn how to succeed yes
really well said and that ties it back to we can't do it now but exactly we can build the tool
so the entire argument of yeah oh that's not possible or like that's crazy for thinking that way
it's an ideal that we're working towards to and building the tool so that it becomes possible
and at that point in terms of what you want or what that goal is it's a goal that once you achieve
it may change when you realize okay this was a mistake oh yeah absolutely absolutely and we
have to develop all our technologies along the way we as a species recently figured out how to
do money without a government yeah but we haven't yet figured out how to do criminal justice without
a government so we need another tool yeah what's it gonna be I don't know exactly but let's let's
work at it yeah on that point of doing what you want it reminded me of a common thing that comes
up with my audience or even young people anyone in general if let's take an example of identifying
with a goal something that you really want to achieve and that you love and you want to dedicate
your entire life to let's say artist or art or being an artist yeah with how the world is changing
do you see that as a worthy goal to pursue or would it be a different kind of goal the question
I'm asking here is the underlying question is how does one find fulfillment in what they do
if what they do may not be relevant or allow you to survive in the future
well the simple answer the base level answer to this is whoever said you had to do one thing
whoever said you had to do one thing with your whole life I have done many different things
with my life and each one of them has been very fulfilling at the time that I was doing it
our wants change and that's okay and we we leave behind some of the goals we have achieved
or the goals that we abandoned because they weren't quite right for us
but we take with us all the learning and all the learning how to learn
that we picked up along the way so we become deeper richer more developed characters
as we as we go through this process so even if you learn to draw and then an AI comes along
and draws better than you you you still learn something from that process you've still learned
how to learn to draw you've you've learned how to pursue an ambition you've learned a lot about
envisioning a scene and creating it that you can now do with AI tools so that's the simple answer
but there's a deeper level answer to this which I think is a little more difficult to grasp but
it's it's very important is that what is the real reason why you had that goal why did you want to
be an artist did you want to give vent to a creative impulse if so there are there are still lots of
ways to do that did you want to entertain people did you want to show the world what exists in your
head did you want to be famous and make a lot of money that's just as good as any other goal
that's that's fine you know that's not shallow you know what is it that you wanted out of that goal
what is it that you wanted to experience in your own life in your own psyche
that made you decide I want to be an artist I want to be an author I want to be an entrepreneur
because when we boil it down most of our goals are about the core things that make us happy
you know I spent many years as a software engineer and I was I was told I was very good at it I was
I had a lot of other software engineers saying wow how did you figure that out but I always found
myself having this sort of friction with the people that I worked for and I always experienced
them as very short-sighted you know we need to be building this or that thing for the next
five years for the next 10 years and they would be like okay here's a list of features that we
need to get done by our next two-month release cycle and why are you going off the rails building
all this you know foundational cryptography toolkits to support our next five years of programming
you know just write the login page or whatever and what I realized was that eventually was that
yeah these people didn't trust me because I did what was good for them rather than what they said
to do but also that I was giving vent to a creative impulse
and it's like if I had said well my life goal is to be a really great software engineer
I would have been stuck there it would have been a self-limiting identity belief
and eventually you know it took me some time I got gray hair but you know I eventually figured it
out that I'm doing this because software is the ultimate set of Lego blocks and I can create things
and I want to create things I want to bring new stuff out of my imagination and into the world
but working as a software engineer they don't want that because you know they don't want to
most people don't want to take risks most people don't want to do green field development of
something that's never been done before because that's scary unless you have a whole lot of agency
and then it's still scary but you could stand it so I was like what is my real goal
no my real goal isn't I am a software engineer my real goal is I want to be creative my real
goal is I want to imagine something that no one has imagined before and make it real
so I said okay I'm gonna I'm gonna retire early and I'm going to start writing science fiction
and it's tremendously satisfying and now it's blossomed out into some of the political opinion
writing and the sort of the sort of the philosophical musings that people find interesting
but it's it's all I take something out of my brain and I show it to people and I go look
and they go ooh and that is that is what I really wanted out of being a software engineer all along
so maybe if you're if you're you know your your skills that form your identity run up against
this dead end either because the skills have become obsolete or because they aren't serving your real
purpose you sometimes have to stop and say well what is my real purpose what is it that I wanted
out of this and how do I find some way to get it that is more directly related to what I really
want yeah so that was the one of the what was the thought process there unless that was it
of choosing to do the fiction writing instead of let's say indie hacking and building a tool
that you could share in a similar way if you had the same audience because I felt like ultimately
stories meant more to me when I started doing this self-examination I realized that there's
something that there's something that a lot of people think that sort of genre fiction is this
very frivolous thing and this is something that this attitude that you see in a lot of these sort
of uh you know sigma hacker grind set bros or like I haven't read a fiction book in 10 years
I only read check manuals and well that's how you lose the culture war
that's how you lose the culture war because stories are the dna of societies
and you know they think about it elon musk did not grow up reading uh little house on the prairie
you know I don't know for sure but I bet he grew up reading you know
hindland and niven and pornell and then he went I'm gonna make that real yeah you know if you
think about the if you think about the history of the 20th century as a whole all the inventions
of the 20th century all this stuff that humans figured out in that hundred year period name
four that didn't happen in science fiction before they were real
I can't well yeah maybe you could do it if you if you search the internet enough yeah
but the point is that this is a hard task so you know science fiction is is in some sense
very important to our future because it is this technology that allows us to think about thing
about about new technologies before they're real it allows us to decide how we feel about
true artificial intelligence before it's real it allows us to think about how we feel about
genetically engineered post humans and what we want to do about that possibility before it
becomes real it allows us to lay the groundwork for how we're going to deal with new technology
and it fires our imaginations to create it so I felt like yes science fiction is entertaining
but it's also important in ways that people don't realize because you know people don't
people don't start these tech startups and you know build reusable rockets and you catch
the first stage with a giant pair of mecha chopsticks and then somebody sticks a microphone
in their face and he says well you know I was really influenced by the writings of Marcus Aurelius
and Nietzsche no he's like I read Ringworld yeah stories are important because they appeal to the
part of our brain that does the actual thinking intelligence is stories consciousness is stories
so stories influence us in important ways yes on that subject we previously talked on the call
prior to this call about how Theft of Fire was the first fiction book that I'd read in the first
in the last 10 years yeah and you asked me why that was you asked me was that just because
there weren't any good books out there yeah and when I thought about it it's yeah nothing really
grabbed my interest so over those past 10 years and with a lot of the things that we've talked about
with the education system the stories being put out there how dangerous is that and why
why is it happening yeah it's it's very dangerous and I I completely understand why you haven't
been reading fiction and I don't mean to mock you for it because you know you talk to you for 30
seconds and anybody can realize you are an alpha male type with a four-digit testosterone level
you know that's readily apparent and if you were to go to a bookstore and try to find some fiction
that appeals to an alpha male with a four-digit testosterone level you ain't got to find much
right because and I think what happened there was that was this attitude that I have just been
announcing where conservatives and people who were interested who were pro-western civilization
they somehow decided at some point that art was for sissies
that because a lot of artists were you know sort of long-haired noodle armed hippies
that art must be for long-haired noodle armed hippies and we are going to seed that entire
battlefield to them but see children read stories children read fiction and if they're not reading
your culture's fiction whose fiction are they reading yeah and this hit me one time when
out of sheer curiosity and boredom I was watching one of Stephen Crowder's
YouTube shows and you know he says conservative stuff and he he talks about politics it's all
okay I guess but then he does this weird thing where he says I don't read fiction
in this one particular show he goes I don't read fiction and he said it like he was proud of it
right he said it he said it like this was a point of pride like I am a serious person who
doesn't go into frivolous pursuits and then he starts talking about how that's childish
and then he does this cartoon voice like tell me a story daddy and it's like you moron
you moron you sit here whining about how you're losing the culture war
and then you go on this whole rant about how culture is for sissies well why do you think
you're losing the culture war you know if you if if you if your children say tell me a story daddy
and you're not telling them a story then who is yeah
and what values will your children absorb from that story so any political philosophy any cultural
philosophy that doesn't have art and stories associated with it that doesn't have a coupled
artistic aesthetic is doomed because it will not be able to propagate itself
so you know it's like yeah there's nothing there's very little fiction for you as an alpha
male type with a four digit testosterone level to read but if we don't have that there isn't going
to be a next generation of you and people like you there is going to be a next generation of
guys who are very high anxiety and low agency and nothing feels right and they don't feel
comfortable in their own skin and they decide they're going to put on a dress and call themselves
a woman that's where this comes from yeah is we haven't we you know generation x we stood by and
let this happen the boomers made it happen but we as a society have not created or maintained
the the cultural and artistic scaffolding for a healthy strong robust masculine identity
right in that sense did you when you wrote theft of fire and even when you right now do you
did you feel a sense of responsibility with that in contributing some new way of looking at the world
or potentially some unpopular way of looking at the world because of how many of your values
were baked into the book and are in the writing yeah well when you write you're essentially tying
a rope to a bucket and you're throwing it into your subconscious and you're dredging it across the
bottom and you you take up that bucket and you pour it out on the table and so it's it's a very
psychologically vulnerable act in some ways because the fiction you write is who you are
and i felt like you know this i want when i'm showing other people you know who i am inside
and making it into a story obviously i want other people to approve of this and like it
but also it has to make sense it has to resonate you know the goal of writing
is is to communicate something in a clear and interesting way if it's not clear they won't
understand it if it's not interesting they won't read it so the responsibility i felt was okay i
need to be clear i need to be interesting i need to entertain people and it has to resonate with
who they are so i wasn't setting out to convince the world of any particular thing i was just saying
this is my story the responsibility i felt was to make sure that it was a story people would like
and i i think yeah i think i think there's a lot of of unfulfilled hunger for these kinds of stories
right now because you know we're sick of post apocalyptic despair you know we're sick of fiction
which is a thinly veiled excuse for discussions about pronouns you know science fiction used to be
about how we were going to go out and conquer the galaxy yeah and i think i think we're we're
ready to do that again we're ready to work toward it you know there's a whole bunch of stuff we don't
know how to do that we're going to need to learn but we're ready to start doing that instead of
sitting around and whinging about how everything is unfair so we need stories that that that have
that attitude yes we're going to loop we're going to naturally loop back around to this but i want
to read a quote from theft of fire i'll go straight into it it was the equal share thing
guess i got that from my dad he talked about ownership a lot about his plans for us said
the reason most people spend their lives spend their whole lives making someone else rich is
that they sell their time get paid for the hours they spend on the job see if you're running a
business and you make some money you can reinvest it buy buy more equipment hire more people scale up
but if you're selling your time no matter how much money you earn you can't buy more time to sell
it doesn't scale was this belief also a part of your decision to write the book and contribute in
this fashion yes yes on the topic of ownership as well yeah i'm not too sure i yeah understand that
fully yeah well when you the basis of all civilization is property rights which we
should probably call investment rights because the basic idea is that you invest in something you
own it you have the right to control it without that there's no civilization because when you're
a plane's ape there's nothing to own there's nothing out there but a rock a few sticks and
some grass and things only become worth having when you take material from the environment
and you invest your time and effort into it and you start chipping out spear points and no one
is going to do that if someone can come along and take it from them you know and their their
their effort is wasted so property rights are civilization civilization is property rights
that's fundamental any political philosophy like communism that goes against that is anti civilization
so when i talk about this it's like okay we've gotten into a rut right now where a lot of people
sell their time because they are low agency i am afraid of starting a business on my own i am
afraid of putting my effort into something that i am going to own and try to make money off of
i want a guaranteed paycheck so i am going to go to someone who buys my time directly
and then how to monetize that is their problem and i don't have to worry about that and i can
feel safe but that makes you dependent and it prevents you from getting ahead because
you you only have so much time and no matter how much money you make you can't buy more time to
sell so when you sell your time you may be safe because it's somebody else's job to figure out
how to pay you and you know usually it's not too safe anymore you know gone are the days where
people work for the same company for 50 years but when you do that you can't you you you you
can't see that same level of success of oh i own something i'm going to double down on it you
can't get that exponential growth you know when i write a book i can sell many many copies of that
book i can sell as many copies of that book as people are willing to buy and i can sell all
sorts of stuff associated with it i can leverage that attention because you know when you get an
audience you start to realize that some people love your stuff so much that they want to pay you
they're happy to pay you they're like you know here's ten thousand dollars put your come put my
company in your next book wow okay cool i'm down with that and but you can never you can never get
that until you start until you take that risk and start making something that can scale you know
i write a book i can sell it over and over again you you make these these videos and and content
that helps people think about you know the philosophy of business and how to be successful
and people can watch those over and over and over again you produce it once with a limited amount
of time and it can make revenue for you forever and you know a lot of people
you know sort of the socialist leaning types think this is a bug like you know
there you know he only did three hours of work and he's being paid tens of thousands of dollars
for it but really that's a feature because we want everybody to be doing things that require
very little effort but have tremendous value and so capitalism rewards those people you know
if you can figure out how to spend four hours shooting a video and make a lot of money off it
or can figure out how to spend three hours a day working on something and make you know
800 000 in a year or whatever it is then what that means is you've figured out how to efficiently
produce something that has a lot of value to people and when you sell your time
that means that you've taken this safe route which solves that equation well enough to keep
you going but it's maybe not the best or most profitable thing you could be doing with your time
and you know don't get me wrong somebody has to do a lot of these tasks that anybody can do
you know we we need we need certain things done that maintain civilization
but i think there are people out there who have the potential to produce amazing things
and they've been raised to be afraid
you know imagine if Elon Musk had been raised in a way that made him timid and nervous because it's
very possible to do that to a child if if you're not paying attention or if that makes you feel
and think of the loss to civilization not only the fact that it was a loss to civilization but
that we would never have understood what we lost we had never we would never have seen it
so i think there are a lot of people out there who have wonderful things in them
and they're selling their time you know for minimum wage making sandwiches or whatever
on that topic with the way that people are raised i was personally i don't know how i
overcame it really but i was raised in a Mormon household so lds very strict religious
do what you're told we're going to church on sundays put on your slacks put on your white
shirt pass out bread all that stuff with that um my parents were they made a decent living
middle class but they were very focused on hey you need to save your money you need to invest
you need to get a job you need to go to school you need to do exactly these things and after
speaking with a lot of other people and it's just a general thing that you can observe is a lot of
people have a bad relationship with money and so it prevents them from even thinking about making
more or they'll see those the mega billionaires and make an assumption of oh that's shallow that's
corrupt that's evil whatever it may be so they write off even thinking about starting a business
no matter how small scale it is in terms of perception of money how do you view that and
making a lot of it well the the attitude you talk about
reminds me of the discussion we had a little bit a little bit further back about the sort of
self-limiting identity beliefs you know i am not a billionaire i will not be a billionaire
therefore i need to formulate my beliefs and my identity in such a way that i am prevented from
feeling bad about that and so i can formulate beliefs like oh they must have done something
immoral to get there and therefore i am not in the place that they are because i am not immoral
and i can take pride in that or oh they had a tremendous amount of luck
therefore it's not my fault that i didn't have that luck or you know their parents provided them
with a certain amount of wealth and access that my parents did not provide me with therefore it's
okay you know that that so all of these sort of identity beliefs are designed
not to not to help this person prosper but to prevent them from feeling bad about not prospering
and we will always work hardest on what our real goals are if we're focused on
defending our sense of identity and who we are right now and not feeling bad then we won't be
focused on these external goals of how do i get ahead how do i make myself better and it may be
very true that to reach sort of billionaire level you have to be very lucky or you have to have the
right parents or you need all other all sorts of other help you know thriving is a team sport
no one prospers in a vacuum but at the same time this self-limiting belief isn't just about oh i'm
not going to be a billionaire it it prevents any kind of getting ahead it prevents any kind of
striving it prevents any kind of saying i am not as good as i would like to be therefore
i am going to make an effort to become something that i am currently not this goes back to giving
yourself permission to suck at something yeah you know you're leading you have to be you have
to be a business that's just struggling to break even before you can be a business that makes a huge
amount of money if you are so ashamed of being the business that is struggling to break even
then you'll never get where you want to go i just finished my first year as a professional author
and congrats thank you and i will disclose fully that you know i managed to break six figures
but i did not make as much as i made as a software engineer and i have to remind myself not to be a
shatant of that because this is the first year and if you don't give yourself permission to start
out and suck at something then you're never going to reach the the point where you're good
you know you're never going to build that audience or whatever it is you need to do
to achieve the success you want to achieve you have to give yourself permission to not be there
yet and if people start making excuses you know these ego-defending beliefs for not being there yet
then that makes them feel better in that place but it prevents them from progressing beyond it
so you know money is a measure of fox given and when you start out not a lot of people are
going to give a fuck about you because they haven't heard about you but if you say to yourself well i
don't want a lot of money what you're saying is i don't want a lot of people to give a fuck about me
yes and if you say well you know if if you have a lot of money then you must have done something
evil then you're saying you know a lot of people only give most people only give a fuck about evil
people like what no no money is just a token that says i care about this thing
and it's how it's what we use to persuade people
to care so if you're making money you know assuming you're not robbing banks or something
or hitting the lottery or you know defrauding people or whatever then when the money starts
to come in that is a signal that people care about what you're doing it's a signal that you're on the
right path it's it's the way people tell you what they like and what they don't like so when you
when you hit on a formula that starts to earn that's not you being selfish it's you
figuring out what people like and giving it to them and that's so personal right because
the people the the thing that i find funny even before i was doing this in this business and
i'm sure you have too when you would go and look at someone else's promotion
like of a book or a product you'd always see the comments like oh you shouldn't be
earning money from this or you're like this is a terrible product whatever it may be
but it's extremely profitable and they're doing extremely well and it's just those people that
don't give a fuck about that one thing but they're in this reactive state and just don't
realize that right and so they're say they're objecting to the fact that somebody else cares
about something that they don't care about yeah they're they're essentially saying that everybody
should act in accordance with their priorities not with their own priorities it's sort of one of the
most if you dig into it it's one of the most anti libertarian sort of anti humanity sentiments
that you can think of like you know people shouldn't spend their money how they want to spend it on
what they care about they should obey me you know well who died and put you in charge
to expand on the audience part that's something i talk about a lot because i really
i started off as uh in in terms of business as like a freelance web designer and then when i got on
social media i was doing cold outreach before that to land clients and local marketing and other things
like that yeah when i started to figure out my formula for social media stuff and really see
the power of building an audience there was like no turning back for me right yeah with you
with you having incredible success for first year of theft of fire that's insane for first
year and how much you've grown i mean i talk to these creators every day that's abnormal that is
absolutely incredible so with that as you've been growing has there been any unique characteristics
of the creator economy or building an audience that you didn't see before that now you see as
a very viable thing for a lot of people well i can talk about what i've learned along the way
which i think this sort of ties into is that
as i don't like the term content creator i don't either and the reason i don't like the
term content creator is it focuses on what you're making you know oh i'm a content creator well you
know if you if you paint something and you show and you burn it or you shove it in a drawer you're
a content creator you created some content doesn't do you or anybody else any good as an author
you know both of fiction and non-fiction short and long form but as as a guy who writes interesting
things for a living what i am my primary thing that i'm doing in my business is building an audience
and an audience doesn't mean how many people follow you on twitter because there is an account
on twitter called why you should have a cat and you know he posts pictures of cats and he's got
two million followers and you know that's great people like cat pictures but that is not they're
not following him they're following the cats they like cats i like cats i follow him but the point
is that an audience building an audience is about trust
an audience is a set of people who trust you where if you come out with something
you know like if i write a book they're gonna say well i'm gonna spend 20 hours reading this book
because i trust debon that i'm going to enjoy it or if you come out with a video that spends 45
minutes talking about you know success and some you know obscure philosophy of marcus aurelius and
how these tie in together you've you've created enough value for them in the past that i that they
say i am gonna devote 45 minutes of my time to watching this so really what you're doing is
you're creating a people you're creating this this group of people who know who you are and they trust
you and in order to be in order to build trust you have to be trustworthy you have to act with
integrity and you have to act with these people's best interest in the heart because they are not
stupid they know when you're trying when you're just interested in what's good for you they know
when you're trying to scam them they know when you're trying to do something that 60 other people
have done better and you're just going to try to jump on the bandwagon so you have to be trustworthy
and create real value and some of it you have to give away for free so that they sample it and they
say aha this guy makes good stuff i'm going to pay him because i want there to be more of this
stuff that i give a fuck about so and that is the mistake that i see a lot of content creators
making now i focus mostly on on fiction authors but there's a lot of indie fiction authors who
some of them who whine a lot about not having success and then you look at their twitter feed
and every single one of their twitter posts is some iteration of buy my book
yeah buy my book it's a good book and none of it is let me say something interesting
right here right now to you for free to prove that i am an interesting person who can entertain you
if you if you buy my paid products so you know ultimately if you're if you're on the internet
and that's how you make your money your product is you your ability to be interesting your ability
to be informative your ability to be entertaining your ability to make something where people spend
some time paying attention to it and they walk away saying i like that that was a good use of
my time i want more of that so there's no shortcut there's no here's the six bullet points to a
successful internet influencer business where you can make millions of dollars going to cafes and
taking pictures of your food you know that's that's bullshit you know people will click on
that stuff but they don't care they don't care because it doesn't provide any value to them
you have to actually make something that people like and you know you have to actually be someone
who's who's able to give them a good experience and you have to prove that to them
and you have to not whine about that you know oh my books aren't selling
write something interesting yeah the way that i think about it with building an audience specifically
is bringing back in the topic of agency and if you want to write a book or you want to make music
or you want to do whatever creative challenge you want to do you want to build something and
distribute it but you don't have like you don't want to give up control of that thing to a publisher
to a record label to someone else who can give you the resources to make some money from that thing
but also take a large portion of it themselves so the way I view social media now is where most
of the attention is attention and social media are a tool to get eyes on what it is that you built
or created and you have to approach social media for what it is which is media media that people
like to watch but now it's different from mainstream media because it's one person
media companies in a sense all creating content to attract people that they like individually
with that
what in terms of did you ever want to go with a traditional publisher or the Manhattan
I've heard you say Manhattan before but I'm not yes I think that's just referencing yes
Manhattan the word Manhattan emerging from my mouth is not a compliment
it is not intended as one I I considered it when I when I first when I finished my first
novel I wanted to weigh all my options and I realized that
you know the during the 20th century there was a real need for publishers
because you needed you needed to do offset print runs which typically had a five figure
cost associated with them and you needed to finance here so a a publisher was essentially a
venture capitalist during that time you know they were gonna they were gonna pay for your printing
they were gonna give you an advance they were going to enable people who are just starting
out to make a living as a writer and then they were going to make back their money on the ones
that took off it was a it was a working viable business model that provided value for everybody
involved authors publishers and readers so there were two things that broke that
and the first was the internet and the second was gay race communism because you had a whole
bunch of people who you know all these publishing companies that were now sort of conglomerated
together with offices in the same 10 blocks of Manhattan going to the same parties you know
participating in the same social circles and they became less and less interested in what
people wanted to read and more and more interested in what they thought people should read
and so they were no longer providing a a valuable function to the audience
because the function that publishers provided to an audience was we are going to gatekeep
this media for you and filter out all the trash
you know but they were no longer filtering for quality they were filtering for aligned political
opinions so they did not provide the benefit to the audience and then lo and behold their business
model started becoming less and less profitable I wonder why and then the advances started to go
away and the promotional you know expending especially for new authors started to go away
and they started getting rid of their mid-list and their mid-list is an incubator for your
future A-listers that's what that exists for so gradually because they weren't they weren't able
to serve a purpose for the audience they also lost the ability to serve a purpose for the authors
so nowadays I don't think book publishers really serve any purpose at all for most
for most genres and types of books I think that's true and as I started looking for agents
and looking for publishers I realized this I mean I was offered some publishing deals at
certain points especially when when I got out there on my own and people figured out I could sell
yeah then then they came knocking and I was like what use are you to me yeah I can have a direct
relationship with my audience where I can be more responsive to them and I can be more appealing
to them and I can get better feedback about what I'm doing wrong and what I'm doing right
directly from them not only from what they say but from their actions and what do I need this
middleman for what value do you offer and I've had a lot a lot of pushback from this attitude
at things like science fiction conventions and such I had I had I said that I said something like
in one conversation where I don't think publishing houses add any value for new authors
and he absolutely blew up and threw a temper tantrum and called me a sociopath for some reason
and I later learned that he was an editor from a major publishing house so I was standing between
this man and his bread but of course he had this self-limiting belief I am an editor from a major
publishing house and you know but I very quickly learned that the the value wasn't there it was
just this useless buffer in in the relationship between author and audience that that actively
disrupted the quality of the feedback loop and you know I there was the moment there was a
particular moment where I decided that I was going to be self-published and that was when
my editor who I hired myself enthusiastically shoved some sample chapters from my book in front
of a sort of an acquisitions guy from one of the major publishing houses and he looks at this
folder he reads like the first three two three sentences he holds it out to me like this
as if I had offered him a dead spider and he says rewrite it in third person
you do know how to write in third person don't you it more or less that tone of voice yeah
and I realized that this this man had no idea that perspective and tents are tools in an
author's toolbox and I would have had to teach him how to correctly employ these tools and why
theft of fire is written in first person present tense and the precise technical craftsmanship
reasons why that unusual choice was made if he could even be taught because he had the
self-limiting belief I am an editor with 20 years of experience well that's great you
repeated the same mistakes for 20 years and call it experience go you and I realized that this was
this was this industry was full of people who were very full of themselves and who were very
full of self-limiting identity beliefs where I wasn't going to be able to get them to look at
things in a new way I had to go and prove that I could sell and so I did and then they came
with the publishing deals and I said well you know this deal you're offering me isn't very good
because the only additional feature that this offers to me is you get paid
yeah from my perspective that's not a future that's not a feature you know I
you know there were people who offered me like a $5,000 advance to sell them the audiobook rights
like really wow and so I was like no I'm gonna do a Kickstarter so I did a Kickstarter to fund
the audiobook I raised I think $43,000 nice and and thank you to all the Kickstarter backers out
there you're amazing people and I was able to get three very talented professional actors one for
each major role and just do it with all the bells and whistles and so we're gonna put out the audiobook
pretty soon all the major recording is done and I think we've produced something really special
and it just confirmed again this belief I had I don't need someone to give me permission to create
I can just create things and if they're good enough people will be interested
you know that's that agency again you don't wait for someone to say you can create do so
you say I can create and I will do so whether you wish it or not
and there are so many new authors who are so much in doubt about whether their work has value
that they will offer up 80% of their earnings to you know tour books or something in exchange
for what basically amounts to a pat on the head yeah so you know if if there are any aspiring
authors watching this I'd like to speak directly to you for a moment I know you're afraid I was
afraid to everyone is afraid you know you you stay afraid even as you start having success and
the fear is constant but you don't know if your work has any value and you may be a few of your
friends have read it and a few of your relatives have read it and there are some other people who
leave through it and said yeah wow this is really good but you know you're not sure if that's true
or if they're just trying to be nice so you're in this difficult place where you're trying to
sell something but you don't know what its actual value is well I'll tell you something the way you
find out is to try to sell it yourself because if it actually has value to people and you start
getting out there and vlogging it and persuading a few people to read it if it has value then they
will start saying wow this is really good and recommending it to their friends it won't be a
fast process but it does work and that is so much better as a measure of value than whether some
acquisitions guy at a publishing house is going to compliment you because they don't know what's
else they don't they don't have any special magic knowledge or insight that you do not have so
people are out there they want good stuff and they will buy it if you have the courage to offer it to
them you know it's not your decision whether your work is good enough it's theirs give them the
opportunity to make that decision that is a great way to end because I was going to ask
what's your advice for aspiring authors that want to reach that so we'll end on that because
those beautiful I think we touched on a lot of great topics in terms of the audiobook
you said that's finished recording yes is there I know we're dealing with other things is there a
date that it may be pushed back to or that you're hovering around um we are
our sound editor is booked up till about January and that was because we were unable to book at the
time that we wanted to complications from my wife having cancer so that was that it is what it is
so we're looking at maybe changing there but you know maybe we want to stick with that so
it's it's probably going to be first quarter of next year and then also working on the sequel
again you know life has intruded so there have been some delays but we're looking at maybe spring
of next year for the sequel and this is this will be the second book in what is planned out as a four
book series awesome I'm very much looking forward to both of those because audiobooks are my thing
so not only was it like the first time I'd read a fiction book in a while but I very rarely
read unless it's like a physical book that I just burned through yeah and so I think I think there is
a big future in audiobooks and I think there is a big future in a certain type of audiobook like
this this high effort high production value kind of audiobook because they started out being called
books on tape and it was just like somebody read the book onto tape yeah because you know you wanted
to be able to listen to the book and there was there was nothing beyond that it was just kind of
something kind of somebody reading the book out loud and what we're starting to discover really
resonates with people is good narration and moving over into it being an audio production
with real acting something akin to a sort of a 1930s radio play where they're really trying to
make it into an an acted piece of media and I went with that and I went and I found some some really
very very talented voice actors who I really felt like I went from saying oh I suppose I should do
an audiobook to oh we're gonna make something special so you know all the raws are done
we're just waiting on sound engineering but I directed every moment of it personally
and we had a lot of fun with that and we're very proud of what we put out so I think I think it's
either I'm completely delusional or this is gonna be good it's gonna be good
that's one last thing that I respect is it seems like in every piece of content even on
twitter like something that could be as short as a one sentence tweet on twitter there's a lot
of quality and thought that goes into it then same with the audiobook it seems like that's a
driving factor in your decision-making yeah it goes back to the integrity thing you know you can't
you can't just try to to cheat people you can't you can't just you take pictures of your food
and put it on instagram and pretend you're a success you have to offer them real value
and I try to proceed from the assumption that people are smart yeah because I want an audience
of smart people because smart people have more money
all right so with that I'll have links to everything in the description the book the
sub-stack the twitter account all of them are great follow them hopefully I'll follow up with you
on how that does because I actually want to see yes absolutely and then outside of that
anything else you want to plug website general things that people can find
uh well I'm not sure I want to plug it yet but we may have we may have us another special
collaborative project in the works with those voice actors oh cool so okay yeah if you do if
you do let me know I'll put the link yes sweet Devin thank you so much I got more out of that than
you know so very excited to get this thank you for having me on it was it was it was a really good
conversation I love doing these things and it's it's so good to be able to talk about what I do
to interesting people who really have have been there and have an insight into what that whole
journey is like yeah the audience will benefit a lot from it too so thank you
