I'm going to apply a theory of services in the field of supply chain to illustrate the
role of capabilities.
And I'll just start by reminding you of the definition of capability that we are working
with.
So we start with dispositions in BFO.
Some dispositions are what we might call good dispositions.
For example, the disposition of a speaker of a language to speak that language.
Those we call capabilities, and we define capabilities more precisely as dispositions
in whose realization some person or group of persons has an interest.
So that will be the background of what I say now, which is about supply chain.
So there is a familiar distinction.
I'm sure you're all familiar with it more than me between goods and services.
The problem is to define services, and they are sometimes said to be occurrence, which
are provided because they have economic value.
I'm going to argue that this is not sufficient to do justice to what is involved in the service
realm.
So specifically, I want to argue that in many cases, services are services because they
give rise to patterns, which are complex qualities or complex dispositions in material entities.
And you can't buy and sell patterns in the way in which you can buy and sell trucks or
cranes or parcels of meat.
All right, so we talk about hairdressing services.
The hairdresser creates a new pattern on your head, and the teacher creates a new pattern
in your brain.
And so in BFO, capabilities fall under realizable entities, patterns fall briefly under qualities,
and then we have material goods, and then we have processes, some of which are services.
So we're interested in those cases where patterns are created as a result of the provision
of service.
So these are economically relevant patterns, and they ground a disposition in some entity,
for instance, a customer or a client or an employer.
And those dispositions are called, okay, for example, at the heart of much of this will
be training.
Training is a service, teaching is a service.
This provision of this PowerPoint deck is a service because it gives rise to capabilities
on the part of the people who hear it, if we're lucky.
So capabilities are realized in processes, and the capability which is realized in a
service in very many cases, perhaps in all cases, has output some economically relevant
pattern.
Now, in the supply chain case, this pattern will be, for example, a pattern of adjacency
between a truck and the loading bay.
All right, now, but where services create patterns, we need more services to protect
those patterns or repair or restore those patterns, and we also need infrastructure.
So the supply chain has lots of physical infrastructure.
That is not my topic here, I'm just mentioning it for completeness.
So we have pattern related services which create patterns, protect patterns, repair
and restore patterns.
In medicine, we have cosmetic medicine, which gives you a new lick pattern.
We have preventive medicine, and we have restorative medicine, and similarly in services.
So we have pattern-creating services.
All transport services are pattern-creating.
They create adjacency chains, roughly speaking.
There's a lot more to transport than this, but all of it fits within this view, I believe.
And now, selling services create similar patterns of adjacency between sellers and buyers.
So the production life cycle for goods always involves accompanying provision of services
of buying and selling, and so these do is switch patterns of ownership.
So now, person one has money and person two has a good, the service provider who may be
person one, switches this pattern, so now person one has good and person two has money.
So these are spatio-legal patterns, they involve both spatial adjacency and ownership rights.
And of course, they become very complicated when we have brokers and other parties supplying
services to assist in the realization of selling processes.
Then there are pattern-protecting services by warehouse guards and police and so forth,
and also tracing and auditing services, which serve to protect the supply chain, where it's
important to keep in mind the importance of the case of healthcare services.
And then we have pattern maintenance services, where we repair supply chain infrastructure,
for instance, and insurance is also a pattern-restoring, repairing maintenance service, which is a very
complicated set of services at each stage in the adjacency chain, and insurance is there
in order to enable the restoring of a supply chain.
So we have three kinds of services, pattern-creating, pattern-protecting, pattern-restoring, and
that's the end.
