Hey, everybody, I want to talk to you briefly about the truth
about SystemD. So for those who are Linux newbies, SystemD is an
init system for Linux. And it also controls a lot of different
demons on your device, like network manager SSH, through a
program that you can access them called system CTL. And there
are other things that it controls as well, or that it
does for your system. And the reason why that's strange, if
you don't know, if you're not familiar with the SystemD
debate, is because Linux is effectively a lot of GNU software
and the Linux kernel itself, they came after Unix, and they
kept the things about Unix that they liked and then dispose of
the things they didn't like. In Unix, the philosophy was always
do one thing and do one thing well. Now, what does this mean?
It means if you have a networking demon running on your
machine, and an SSH demon running on your machine, the code
for that networking demon should just be a networking demon.
That's all it should do. The reason for this is because it
makes things more modular. If for some reason, the author of
that demon decides to stop developing the project, you can
easily replace it, you replace one thing on your device. It's
easier to troubleshoot. If you know where the issue is, etc.
You know, it just basically makes things the fact that makes
things more modular and easier to troubleshoot should be
enough. So anyway, SystemD, like I mentioned earlier, controls
these a lot of processes on your system. And people dislike
that because it's not following the Unix philosophy, which
means if something goes wrong with SystemD, the author does
something that people don't like, the author decides to make it
non free. You don't you don't just replace your your init
system with like run it or some other alternative, you have to
replace a lot of things, you have to basically find an
entirely new operating system, one that probably doesn't already
you know, basically just use one of the other options, and then
relearn everything. So that's kind of the legitimate reason
because there are there are that I think it's a good reason to
dislike SystemD. But what you'll hear in the SystemD debate is at
least what I've heard, I should say, because there are people
who are very passionate about this, who are way more educated
than I am. But what I hear in the debate is a lot of illegitimate
reasons to not use SystemD like they don't like the author. I
completely concede it's your choice and your right to not use
software from people you don't like. When it comes to floss, I
don't particularly care about the politics or the personality of
the person who authored the code. That's not a concern of mine.
With paid software, of course, it's different because you're
you're, I mean, you're not supporting a movement of any
kind really, depending on what the software is, most likely
you're not supporting a movement of any kind, but you are giving
money to someone. So for example, I hear it all the time
where I live in a kind of liberal area. I see people all the
time who rant about the ethics of Steve Jobs while they have
iPhones. And to me, it's it doesn't make any sense. But
whatever, when it comes to floss, though, this is much less of
an issue, because not only can you take over the project and
fork it and make it into something of your own, but you
don't have to show support for anything other than floss, you
can just show support for the philosophy behind floss and not
really show like I don't think using Emacs is showing support
for Richard Stallman. Anyway, sorry, a little bit of a
recursive rant there.
What was I even saying? Come on, man. Oh, yeah, okay, so
there are legitimate reasons to like system D legitimate reasons
to dislike it. One legitimate reason to dislike it, which is
the breaking of the Unix philosophy. But if you're a
newbie, this is the whole reason I want to make this video,
I'm going to call it the truth of system D. If you're a newbie,
and you're coming to Linux, the truth is, you will likely be
using system D all of the not all most of the things that are
targeted to new users use system D. This is Ubuntu, Debian,
elementary pop. By the way, can I tell you okay, so I'm me, you
guys, you guys know me by now. I pretty much, you know, wake up
and then Linux is my life. And then when I go to bed, the first
thing I do last thing I do before I go to bed is usually I'm on
a Linux machine doing some kind of development. So I know quite a
bit about Linux, but I don't I don't plug into the news a lot
surrounding Linux, unless it's like really big. But the other
day, I was helping someone troubleshoot something at the
university I work at. And I said, Okay, what distribution are
you running? And he goes Papa OS and he literally said this
literally I'm not kidding. This is what he literally said. I'm
using literally correctly here. This is what he said. Papa
OS. You've probably never heard of it. Can you believe that? I
was shocked I was taking it back and I was like, Yeah, I've
heard of it. It's not like a hidden operating system. Like
what are you talking about? Like did you just like, did you
say it in front of your grandma and your grandma went what you
thought? Oh, wow, it's no one knows Papa OS. That was weird.
Anyway, if you're using Papa OS or Ubuntu or Debbie in
elementary, you're going to have system D on your on your machine.
And so when when you're a newbie, you will think that
system CTL this what happened to me and happens to everyone who
doesn't look it up initially. You will think system CTL is
software on your machine for managing and organizing demons
with system CTL is actually a feature of system D.
And you know, well, other features system D but that's the
biggest one because when you look up, like for example, why
isn't I'm using Debbie in and for some reason, SSH isn't
working. Okay, well, first you have to install the open SSH
server, and then you have to do pseudo system CTL enable SSHD or
SSH. And then you're good to go. It should always be started on
your system, whenever you turn it on. And so you might think, Oh,
here you go, it's a demon manager, or whenever you use
pseudocyst, pseudo system CTL restart network tech manager,
you know, you might think that's again, the thing that
manages demons on your device. But to people in the know, people
who know it's a bootloader, or I'm sorry, I know it's in a knit
system, they, you know, and they think it's doing too much,
you'll go online, you'll look up the system D debate, and you'll
hear people say, No, you should be using run it. No, you should
be using sys V, you know, you should, you should not be using
system D for all of the reasons that all of the one reason I've
just mentioned here, all the none of the other reasons really
matter to me. I've never noticed as far as new users go, I have
never met anyone, anyone who has changed from system D, or a
system D default distribution, to a non system D default
distribution, and noticed any difference whatsoever. For example,
before I knew what a knit system was, I installed parabola OS,
not because I knew I didn't even know it was arch, I just wanted
to arch based rather, I just wanted to install something that
I thought looked cool. And I think their advertisement, their
big advertisement is we exclusively use floss, no matter
what, like our none of our repositories will ever have
anything non free. And they fully follow Unix philosophy, but
at the time I didn't know what that was. So I installed
parabola, did not notice any performance issue. And that's
typically what new users care about, you know, they care about
I want to turn it on, I want to get it working, I want to
customize it. And I want it to work quickly, you know, I want
it to work in a way that I find usable, which is fair. And
then as you learn more, you explore more, you test more,
you do more risky things, let's say riskier things even. But
when you first get started, none of that is going to be a
concern. So the truth about system D is that if if you are
the kind of person who you look things up, you Google things,
you want to read about what you're going to get yourself
into before you get started. And you're reading a lot about
Linux, you're reading all these forum posts, you're watching
these YouTube videos. What will happen, what does happen
sometimes with with new Linux users is you'll come across an
article or a forum post or something about system D. And
you'll go, Oh, I got to factor this into my decision. You know,
I've really got to think about this, because I don't want to
use a trash bootloader that that's a knit. Your knit system is
PID one, I keep on calling it a bootloader. What's that about?
You know, your your knit system is PID one, that's like the most
important thing ever. And the truth about system D is that
well, the truth about a knit systems is that that is not
something you should be worried about at all. And this is just
my my personal opinion. But I don't think it's something that
new Linux users should be concerned about. And I say
new I mean, like, if you aren't familiar with what parts of the
operating system are Linux and which parts are GNU software and
which parts aren't neither. I think being concerned with your
knit system is a it's too far. It's way too far ahead of where
you you should be focused on. And that's not because like, you
know, it's not important necessarily to know what on
your system is GNU slash Linux slash anything else. That's not
necessarily important. But you'll be interfacing with that
stuff way more than the the knit system. Even if you are
running system D, you know, it's just way more likely that
you'll be running, you'll be working with non in its system
software. But I'm getting distracted. Sorry. So that's
the truth of system D. The decision isn't important. And
system D is just fine. There's nothing wrong with it. I still
get confused. Well, I still hear people who they talk about
system D in such a vitriolic way. And they're clearly deeply,
deeply affected by the fact that this this violates UNIX
philosophy, which again, is a legitimate concern. I just don't
think it's something to be concerned about at the moment.
Again, it's all floss system D is all floss. And if it
becomes something else or something does happen, I can't
even think of a good example of what would happen. But if
something did, you you could just switch over to a run it
system or assist V system, you know, you could just switch over
to parabola, or you could switch over to slack ware or
something. But anyway, so that's kind of just what I wanted to
get across. I think I every time I see a system D debate
online, I'm just like, Oh, no, not again, like, who is this
for? You know, who is this for? Is it for a knit system?
Hackers, like people who work on a knit systems or or what?
Because it's definitely not for new Linux users. It's not for
hobbyists. It's not for people who are interested in. Well, I
should say I find the conversation interesting. I
promise I'll wrap up. I won't keep on going. I find the
conversation interesting, because I find technology
interesting. But I don't like the vitriol. I don't like the
ferocity with which people fight against and or defend system
D, especially because in the end game, overall, it's not a very
important decision to an end user. In my opinion, again, I'm
sure a lot of people disagree with that. But I don't think it's
a very important decision to an end user. And I'll even say
this, because it's such a not important decision, there's no
problem with you never using system D. If you decide, yeah,
look, it breaks the Unix philosophy. I don't I don't care
about it. I'm only going to use run it, then fine. Like that's
that's completely that's okay. It's not that important. It's my
whole point. But if you are going to use system D, or if you're
not going to use system D rather, you should be made aware that
if you're a newbie, most of the tutorials you find will be
targeted towards system D system. So people will say, okay,
well, to troubleshoot your network issue, try restarting
your network using system CTL. If you're using run it, system
CTL will not be on your machine. Which means you have to find
the different way to do that, which is usually something like
going to forward slash etsy forward slash and it's dot D
forward slash some other whatever the name of the demon
is and then restarting it manually. You know, just depending
on what system you're running, it will change. But anyway, so
that's pretty much it. I've gone on for long enough. Don't be
concerned with people who hate on system D. Don't be concerned
with people who rave about system D. It's a bootloader. It's an
init system rather. And I don't think it's something that most
Linux users should be concerned with or actually are concerned
with. I think it's just kind of fun to to have an opinion on
something that's that's so inflammatory. That's it. Thanks.
