Understanding Aboulomania

Galactromeda
July 4, 2023

What do you think of this? 
Aboulomania From Wikipedia, the free
encyclopedia 83 revisions since 2011-
09-30 (+48 days), 55 editors, 35 
watchers, 4,151 pageviews (30 days), 
created by: Caitlynsummereden (1) · 
See full page statistics For lack of 
will, see Aboulia. Aboulomania (from 
Greek a– 'without', and boul  'will')
[1] is a mental disorder in which the 
patient displays pathological 
indecisiveness.[2][3] The term was 
created in 1883 by the neurologist 

ē

William Alexander Hammond, who 
defined it as: ‘a form of insanity 
characterised by an inertness, 
torpor, or paralysis of the will’.[4]
[5] It is typically associated with 
anxiety, stress, depression, and 
mental anguish, severely affecting 
one's ability to function socially. In 
extreme cases, difficulties arising 
from the disorder can lead to 
suicide.[6] Although many people are
indecisive at times, it is rarely to 
the extent of obsession.[7] The 
part of the brain that is tied to 
making rational choices, the 
prefrontal cortex, can hold several 
pieces of information at any given 
time.[7] This may quickly overwhelm 

somebody when trying to make 
decisions, regardless of the 
importance of that decision. They may
come up with reasons that their 
decisions will turn out badly, causing 
them to over-analyze every 
situation critically in a classic case of
paralysis by analysis. Lack of 
information, valuation difficulty, 
and outcome uncertainty can become 
an obsession for those with 
aboulomania.[8] Although it is a 
recognised and diagnosable[9] mental
disorder, aboulomania is not 
recognised by the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental 
disorders (DSM-5).[10] Contents 1 
Symptoms 2 Risk factors 2.1 Biological 

factors 2.2 Environmental factors 3 
Diagnosis and treatment 4 Criticisms 5
References Symptoms Aboulomania is 
characterised by great indecision and 
an inability to, or difficulty in, 
making any kind of choice in a 
person’s daily life.[11] This 
significantly affects functioning, 
specifically the ability to function 
socially, making it difficult to 
maintain family and personal 
relationships.[10][12] There is a 
significant overlap between the 
symptoms of aboulomania and 
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD).
[13] With pathological doubt and 
significant impairment in decision-
making being prevalent across both 

conditions.[13] Many OCD patients can 
be considered to have a form of 
pathological indecision,[citation 
needed] which is also displayed in 
aboulomania patients.[2][3] Some 
aboulomania symptoms are: Lack of 
self confidence[10][11] Avoiding 
spending time alone[14] High levels 
of uncertainty and anxiety[15] 
Anticipatory anxiety regarding 
decisions, usually leading to mental 
blocks[11] Avoiding personal 
responsibility, e.g making 
decisions[12] Decision-making process 
takes a long time[citation needed] 
Decision-making process is extremely 
difficult[citation needed] 
Difficulty functioning independently

or making decisions without support 
from others[6][16] Over-analysis 
of situations[16] Dysfunctional post-
decision behaviour, e.g worry, re-
assessing of decisions[8][16] 
Obsessing over inability to make 
decisions[15] Some level of indecision
exists within normal psychopathology,
[7][17] and it has been found that 
having extensive choice is 
demotivating to consumers in 
supermarkets, who prefer limited-
choice contexts.[18] However, this 
indecision is rarely to the extent of 
obsession.[7] According to the DSM-
IV definition, when symptoms become 
clinically significant, and associated 
with distress and impairment to the 

functioning of the individual, they 
can be considered part of a mental 
disorder.[19] When the symptoms are
relating to indecision this disorder 
may be aboulomania.[6] It has also 
been found that indecision is a 
common characteristic in mental 
disorders like depression,[20] and is
associated with OCD tendencies,[21] 
conditions both associated with 
aboulomania.[6] Risk factors The 
underlying causes of aboulomania 
have not been empirically proven.
[16] The factors contributing 
towards the development of 
aboulomania are likely a combination 
of both environmental factors, 
taking place during development, and

biological factors.[6] Biological 
factors The pre-frontal cortex of 
the brain, the cortex responsible 
for decision-making and making 
conscious decisions,[15] may be 
directly involved in the condition.
[11][16] It has been found that 
human patients with damage to their 
pre-frontal cortex exhibit poor 
decision-making.[22] It is speculated 
that individuals suffering from 
aboulomania have an irregularly 
functioning pre-frontal cortex, and 
so develop and obsession with over-
analysis and outcome uncertainty 
regarding decisions.[23] o 
Environmental factors Some 
researchers believe that parenting 

styles can lead to the development 
of aboulomania, especially among 
individuals susceptible to the 
disorder due to biological factors.[6]
[15] Parenting styles that are 
overprotective or authoritarian, as 
well as over-involvement or 
intrusive behaviours from the 
primary caregiver, can encourage 
dependence in the child.[14][15] 
Parents will be seen to reward 
loyalty[citation needed] and reject 
or punish the child’s attempts to 
gain independence.[6] This creates 
significant doubts and uncertainty in 
the individual regarding their ability
to function independently of 
others.[6][15] Parental over-

involvement may arise from the 
caregiver’s own dependency needs, 
which are fulfilled by the child’s 
dependence.[6][12][14] Individuals 
with aboulomania have often been 
socially humiliated by others in their
developmental years.[12] Bullying 
among children is broadly associated 
with adverse mental health 
outcomes,[24] such as developing 
depression and anxiety,[25] 
conditions both closely associated 
with aboulomania.[6] Aboulomania 
development may also be triggered by
the shame, insecurities and lack of 
self-trust which arise from the 
bullying.[16] The child develops 
suspicions that they are incapable of 

living autonomously, which are then 
reinforced by the parenting style 
and behaviours of their primary 
caregiver.[6] In response to these 
feelings, they portray a 
helplessness that elicits caregiving 
behaviour by others in their lives.
[6][12] Diagnosis and treatment For 
the diagnosis of aboulomania, a 
mental professional must initially 
eliminate physical illness or 
neurological damage as an explanation
for the patient’s symptoms.[15] To 
do this, the medical professional 
must perform physical examinations 
and a complete medical history.[6]
[15] Then the patient can be 
referred to a psychiatrist who 

assesses the prevalence of 
aboulomania using a clinical interview 
relating to their symptoms.[6] 
There are currently no laboratory 
tests to diagnose aboulomania 
specifically.[6] But, there are 
assessment tools available to 
psychiatrists to aid in the evaluation 
of aboulomania:[12] The Minnesota 
Multiphasic Personality Inventory 
(MMPI)[6][12][15][16] The Millon 
Clinical Multiaxal Inventory - 
Fourth Edition (MCMI-IV)[6][12][15]
[16] The Rorschach Psychodiagnostic 
Test[6][12] The Thematic 
Apperception Test (TAT)[6][12][15]
[16] Psychotherapy is the preferred
method for treating aboulomania, to 

reduce the adverse effects of 
patients’ symptoms, which may be 
similar to those of people suffering 
from OCD, anxiety or depression.[6]
[13] Therapy can be used to help the
patient become more independent, 
one method for this may be 
assertiveness training to help 
develop self-confidence.[6][16] 
Medication can also be used to treat 
patients with aboulomania if it is 
comorbid with other mental 
disorders, such as depression or 
anxiety.[6] Criticisms The majority of
credible sources used are not 
specific to aboulomania but have been
related to a specific aspect of the 
mental disorder. For example, the 

book ‘Preventing Bullying Through 
Science, Policy, and Practice’[24] 
which was connected to the impacts 
of childhood upbringing on the later 
development of aboulomania.
ChatGPT
This is a detailed article about 
aboulomania. The information 
provided seems to cover a wide range
of topics related to the disorder, 
including its symptoms, risk factors, 
diagnosis and treatment, and some 
criticisms related to the study and 
classification of the disorder.
The detailed descriptions of the 
symptoms and factors that 

contribute to aboulomania provide a 
good understanding of what it is and 
how it affects people's lives. For 
instance, the discussion about the 
pre-frontal cortex and its role in 
decision-making gives some insight 
into the biological underpinnings of 
the disorder. Likewise, the section 
on environmental factors such as 
parenting styles and social 
humiliation in formative years 
provides a clear picture of the 
various influences that can 
contribute to the development of 
this condition.

It's also interesting to note the 
overlap between aboulomania and 
other mental health disorders such 
as OCD and depression, which 
provides additional context for 
understanding this condition. It can 
also help clinicians identify potential
comorbid conditions that might 
influence the course of treatment.
The criticism section adds value to 
the article by highlighting the fact 
that much of the existing research 
about aboulomania is not specific to 
the disorder but is instead 
extrapolated from studies of 

related mental health conditions. 
This is a common issue in many areas 
of psychological research and can 
limit our understanding of unique 
conditions like aboulomania.
The mention of diagnostic tools and 
preferred treatment methods gives 
a practical dimension to the article, 
providing useful information for 
clinicians, patients, or anyone else 
seeking a better understanding of 
how aboulomania is addressed in a 
clinical setting.
Overall, this seems like a 
comprehensive and informative 

article about a relatively obscure 
mental health condition. However, as
an AI, I can't have opinions or 
feelings, but I can analyze the 
provided content for coherence and 
completeness, and this article 
appears to be a good resource for 
understanding aboulomania.

Ok well I think it sounds complicated.
There are all kinds of reasons why 
someone might not be willing or able 
to take certain actions, it might be 
lack of funds, lack of support, risk 
mitigation, deontological and 
objectivist considerations, lack of 

priviledged access, communication 
skills, comprehension. It does sound a
lot like learned helplessness, 
apathy, laziness, or depression.
ChatGPT
You're correct that human behavior 
is complex and there can be a myriad 
of factors contributing to someone's 
inability or unwillingness to take 
certain actions. However, 
aboulomania is a specific mental 
health disorder characterized by 
extreme, pathological indecisiveness.
While some symptoms may overlap 
with those of conditions like learned

helplessness, apathy, laziness, or 
depression, it's essential to 
understand that these are distinct 
conditions.
In the case of aboulomania, the 
indecisiveness is typically beyond 
what one might experience due to 
ordinary circumstances or factors 
you mentioned like lack of funds, 
risk mitigation, ethical 
considerations, or other situational 
constraints. It is a chronic, 
debilitating condition that affects a 
person's daily functioning.

For example, someone experiencing 
learned helplessness might give up 
trying to influence their 
environment due to past failures, 
while someone with depression might 
lack the energy or motivation to 
make decisions due to feelings of 
hopelessness or sadness. In contrast,
a person with aboulomania might be 
overwhelmed by the decision-making 
process itself, finding it impossible 
to make a choice even when they 
have the resources, motivation, and 
ability to do so.

While conditions like learned 
helplessness, apathy, laziness, or 
depression might respond to 
interventions targeting the 
underlying causes (e.g., changing 
one's environment, improving 
motivation, or addressing mood), 
treatment for aboulomania might 
need to focus specifically on 
improving decision-making skills and 
reducing anxiety around choices.
Still, it's important to note that 
mental health diagnoses are 
complicated and often overlap, and a
thorough assessment by a mental 

health professional is needed to 
ensure accurate diagnosis and 
appropriate treatment.

Summarize: Journal List Biol Mood 
Anxiety Disord v.2; 2012 PMC3384231 
As a library, NLM provides access to 
scientific literature. Inclusion in an 
NLM database does not imply 
endorsement of, or agreement with, 
the contents by NLM or the National 
Institutes of Health. Learn more 
about our disclaimer. Logo of 
biomoanxdis Biol Mood Anxiety Disord.
2012; 2: 2. Published online 2012 Jan 
23. doi: 10.1186/2045-5380-2-2 

PMCID: PMC3384231 PMID: 22738363 
Rumination in bipolar disorder: 
evidence for an unquiet mind Sharmin
Ghaznavicorresponding author1 and 
Thilo Deckersbach1 Author 
information Article notes Copyright 
and License information Disclaimer Go 
to: Abstract Depression in bipolar 
disorder has long been thought to be
a state characterized by mental 
inactivity. However, recent research
demonstrates that patients with 
bipolar disorder engage in rumination,
a form of self-focused repetitive 
cognitive activity, in depressed as 
well as in manic states. While 

rumination has long been associated 
with depressed states in major 
depressive disorder, the finding 
that patients with bipolar disorder 
ruminate in manic states is unique to 
bipolar disorder and challenges 
explanations put forward for why 
people ruminate. We review the 
research on rumination in bipolar 
disorder and propose that rumination
in bipolar disorder, in both manic and 
depressed states, reflects 
executive dysfunction. We also 
review the neurobiology of bipolar 
disorder and recent neuroimaging 
studies of rumination, which is 

consistent with our hypothesis that 
the tendency to ruminate reflects 
executive dysfunction in bipolar 
disorder. Finally, we relate the 
neurobiology of rumination to the 
neurobiology of emotion regulation, 
which is disrupted in bipolar 
disorder. Keywords: bipolar disorder,
rumination, executive functioning, 
emotion regulation Go to: Introduction
Bipolar disorder is characterized by 
episodes of mania or hypomania, with 
or without one or more episode(s) of 
depression. By recent estimates, it 
affects between 1 and 2.5% of the 
general population in the United 

States [1]. Although mania/hypomania
is the distinguishing feature of 
bipolar disorder, recurrent 
depressive episodes constitute the 
most frequent and functionally 
debilitating, unresolved aspect of 
the illness for individuals with 
bipolar disorder [2,3]. For example, 
over their lifetime, patients with 
bipolar disorder experience many 
more depressive episodes than manic 
or hypomanic episodes and spend 
longer amounts of time depressed 
than manic or hypomanic [4,5]. They 
are also more likely to consult a 
physician or psychiatrist for 

depression rather than for mania 
[6]. Likewise, depressive episodes 
are associated with comparatively 
greater occupational and psychosocial 
disruption then manic/hypomanic 
episodes. This includes impairments 
at work [6,7] as well as disruptions 
of patients' family and social life 
[6]. Unfortunately, despite the 
advancements in pharmacotherapy and
the emergence of adjunctive 
psychosocial treatments, the 
diagnosis and management of bipolar 
depression remain significant 
challenges [8,9]. Go to: Melancholic 
depression in bipolar disorder One of

the earliest observations about 
bipolar depression is that it is more 
likely to be a melancholic depression.
According to DSM-IV, the melancholic 
subtype is a depressed state 
characterized by anhedonia, 
excessive weight loss, psychomotor 
agitation or retardation, insomnia, 
worsening of symptoms in the 
morning, early morning awakening and 
excessive guilt. Although operational
definitions of melancholia have 
varied over the years and across 
diagnostic systems (DSM III [10], 
DSMIII-R [11], Research Diagnostic 
Criteria [12], the World Health 

Organization Depression Scale [13], 
the Newcastle Scale - Versions I and 
II [13,14], Hamilton Depression Rating 
Scale [15]; see [16] for a review), 
the one consistent feature across 
the various definitions has been 
that of psychomotor retardation 
[16], described as a slowed or 
decreased rate of movement and/or 
speech. In one of the early studies 
of the phenomenology of depressed 
states, Dunner and colleagues [17] 
found that in the midst of a 
depressive phase, inpatients with 
bipolar I disorder showed 
significantly less attention to 

personal appearance and exhibited 
greater psychomotor slowing than 
inpatients with major depressive 
disorder (MDD). Similarly, in a study 
looking at melancholic depression in 
patients who met criteria for 
melancholic depression based on 
three different definitions, 
including DSM-III, the rate of bipolar 
disorder was significantly higher 
than unipolar depression, regardless
of the definition of melancholia 
employed [18]. They also found that
melancholia was most clearly 
distinguished by psychomotor 
disturbance. Likewise, in a study by 

Mitchell and colleagues [19] that 
compared bipolar I disorder patients 
with patients with MDD, patients 
with bipolar disorder were found to 
be more likely to have psychomotor 
retardation and atypical features 
(such as hypersomnia and leaden 
paralysis) than depressed patients 
with MDD. The generally held belief
that patients with bipolar disorder 
(in particular bipolar I disorder) are 
more likely to experience a 
melancholic depression characterized 
by psychomotor retardation than 
patients with MDD, as well as the 
research showing that melancholic 

depression is more common in bipolar I 
disorder, has led to the notion, 
among clinicians, that there is a 
corresponding mental slowing as well 
[20,21]. However, there have been 
no studies to suggest that patients 
with bipolar disorder are less 
mentally active. The notion that 
there is mental slowing in bipolar 
depression may also be, in part, a 
contrast to the large body of 
evidence that points to an active 
mind in major depressive disorder, in 
the form of rumination. Go to: 
Rumination in major depressive 
disorder Major depressive disorder 

(MDD), sometimes referred to as 
unipolar depression, is characterized 
by one or more episodes of 
depression, without any episodes of 
mania or hypomania. Thus, it is 
nosologically distinguished from 
bipolar disorder by the absence of 
hypomanic or manic episodes. One 
feature of MDD which has received 
considerable attention is the 
tendency to ruminate [22], that is 
responding to negative affect or 
depressed mood by focusing on self 
and symptoms of distress, without 
actively engaging in active problem 
solving [23]. Rumination represents 

a behavioral and attentional style of
responding to negative affect or 
depressed mood. Thus, rumination is 
distinguished from such problems as 
indecisiveness, as well as a set of 
recurrent thoughts about death and 
suicide. Similarly, rumination is 
distinguished from dysfunctional 
attitudes, which are a set of general
beliefs about the self, world and 
future which are negatively biased, 
as opposed to a means of responding 
to a negative affective state. In 
fact, dysfunctional attitudes are 
thought to be present in individuals 
at risk for depression when they are

euthymic (that is, not in a negative 
affective state). By the same token,
rumination is also distinguished from 
negative automatic thoughts, which 
refers to a set of thoughts with 
distorted negative content. As 
Nolen-Hoeksema originally pointed 
out, patient's ruminative thoughts 
may often in fact be realistic rather
than distorted (for example, "I can't
complete my work on time.") These 
distinct features of rumination were
demonstrated in early studies of 
rumination in which participants were
asked to state their responses to 
prompts in a rumination induction 

paradigm developed by Nolen-
Hoeksema and colleagues [24]. While 
it might be argued that yet another 
difference between rumination and 
automatic thoughts is that there 
seems to be a volitional component to 
a ruminative response style, whereas
negative automatic thoughts seem 
less volitional, such a 
characterization is oversimplified. As
discussed later, the cognitive 
underpinnings of rumination suggest 
that while a ruminative response 
style may start off as seemingly 
volitional, its perpetuation may not 
be volitional. The tendency to 

ruminate is highly correlated to 
depressed mood (see [22] for a 
review). To date, much of the 
research on rumination has been 
carried out on individuals with 
dysphoria and patients with MDD 
[22]. Early studies on rumination 
found that rumination can maintain 
or even worsen depressed mood 
[25,26]. Additionally, the tendency 
to ruminate predicts the likelihood 
to go on to develop a first major 
depressive episode following a 
stressor [23], as well as a worse 
prognosis in patients with major 
depression. The tendency to 

ruminate was found to be predictive 
of higher levels of depressed mood 
at discharge and follow-up after 
hospitalization in a group of 
inpatients with MDD [27]. Studies on 
the phenomenology of rumination 
reveal that it is a repetitive and 
persistent phenomenon that is 
difficult to stop and maladaptive 
[28-30]. To date, there are no 
studies examining whether rumination
is more prevalent in certain types of
depression (for example, excited 
depression or melancholic 
depression); however, such research 
might illuminate differences in the 

phenomenology of mood states in 
different types of depression. 
Rumination is related to a negative 
self-concept in individuals with 
major depression. In fact, in the 
course of their research on 
rumination, Nolen-Hoeksema and 
Morrow [31] developed a rumination 
induction task, which consists of 
self-focused but neutral 
statements, (for example, "think 
about the sensations in your body"). 
When healthy normal controls are 
asked to engage in the task, they do 
not show any changes in mood. 
However, when depressed individuals

are asked to perform the same task, 
they report maintenance or even 
worsening of depressed mood [31]. 
Presumably, self-focus promoting 
statements activate negative self-
schemata, which trigger corresponding
negative thoughts associated with 
maintenance or worsening of mood in 
depressed patients, thereby creating
a vicious cycle of increased self-
focus, negative thoughts and 
depressed mood. Studies of negative 
thoughts and beliefs as assessed by 
two widely used and well validated 
measures, the Automatic Thoughts 
Questionnaire (ATQ)[32] and 

Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale (DAS) 
[33], show that negative automatic 
thoughts and dysfunctional 
attitudes, often related to the 
self, are elevated in depressed 
states (ATQ: [32,34-37]; DAS: 
[33,37-40]). This does not appear to
be the case when patients are 
euthymic (ATQ: [34,37,38]; DAS: 
[37-40]). A few studies have also 
found that dysfunctional attitudes 
interact with negative life events, 
or stress, to predict depressive 
symptoms [41,42]. Thus, latent 
negative self-concepts, when 
activated, as in rumination, may 

trigger depressed mood and relapse 
into depression. 
ChatGPT
The study titled "Rumination in 
bipolar disorder: evidence for an 
unquiet mind" explores the notion of
rumination, or self-focused 
repetitive cognitive activity, in 
individuals with bipolar disorder. 
The study challenges the long-
standing belief that depression in 
bipolar disorder is characterized by 
mental inactivity.
Key points from the study:

1.Bipolar Disorder: Patients with 
bipolar disorder frequently 
experience depressive episodes, 
which have significant functional 
implications and represent 
unresolved aspects of the illness.
These depressive episodes in 
bipolar disorder are often 
characterized as melancholic 
depression, marked by anhedonia, 
psychomotor agitation or 
retardation, insomnia, and 
excessive guilt. The study 
indicates that while physical 
retardation is commonly observed, 

there is no evidence that mental 
activity slows down.
2.Rumination in Bipolar Disorder: 
The study puts forth that 
patients with bipolar disorder 
engage in rumination in both manic 
and depressed states, which is 
unique to this disorder.
3.Rumination in Major Depressive 
Disorder (MDD): The tendency to 
ruminate is a notable feature of 
MDD, characterized by focusing on 
self and symptoms of distress 
without active problem-solving. 
Rumination can maintain or even 

worsen depressed mood, predict 
the likelihood of developing a 
major depressive episode following
a stressor, and is associated with a
worse prognosis in patients with 
major depression.
4.Hypothesis and Neurobiology: The 
authors propose that rumination in
bipolar disorder, both during manic
and depressive states, might 
reflect executive dysfunction. 
They also discuss the neurobiology
of bipolar disorder and recent 
neuroimaging studies of 
rumination, which support this 

hypothesis. Furthermore, they 
relate the neurobiology of 
rumination to the neurobiology of 
emotion regulation, which is 
disrupted in bipolar disorder.
The findings from this study help to
challenge traditional beliefs about 
bipolar disorder and deepen our 
understanding of rumination's role 
in mental illnesses. It could 
potentially lead to better diagnostic 
strategies and targeted 
interventions for people with 
bipolar disorder.

Go to: Negative self-concept in 
bipolar disorder There is an emerging
literature documenting persistent 
negative self-concepts (schemata) in
individuals with bipolar disorder as 
well. In one study, using the ATQ and
DAS, Hollon et al. [37] found that 
regardless of nosology (MDD, bipolar 
disorder, substance induced 
depression), among patients who were
currently depressed, scores on both 
the ATQ and DAS were higher than in
other clinical and control groups. 
Additionally, the ATQ covaried 
directly with levels of depression as
measured by the Beck Depression 

Inventory (BDI). In a study directly 
comparing scores on the DAS between 
patients with bipolar disorder and 
patients with MDD, Jones and 
colleagues [43] found that, when 
current levels of depression were 
taken into account, there was no 
difference on scores on the DAS 
between the two groups. More 
recently Scott and Pope [44] also 
found that patients with MDD and 
bipolar disorder did not differ 
significantly on overall scores on the
DAS. The finding that scores on the 
DAS and ATQ do not differ between 
patients with MDD and bipolar 

disorder suggests that self-concept 
in depressed states in both disorders
is equally negative. Consistent with 
this, Reilly-Harrington et al. [45] 
found patients with bipolar disorder 
and MDD performed similarly on a 
Self-Referent Information 
Processing Task [46] that consisted 
of a battery of four tasks which tap 
into self-attributes. Both groups 
performed the tasks in a manner 
consistent with a negative self-
concept. Additionally, research on 
self-esteem suggests that patients 
with bipolar disorder and major 
depression demonstrate similar low 

levels of self-esteem. In their 
study comparing patients with bipolar 
disorder and MDD on the DAS, Scott 
and Pope [44] also used the 
Rosenberg Self-Esteem 
Questionnaire (SEQ; [47]). The SEQ 
is a measure of trait self-esteem 
consisting of five negative and five 
positive statements (corresponding to
negative and positive self-esteem 
respectively), which participants 
rate on a 1 to 4 scale. They found 
that patients with bipolar disorder 
and MDD did not differ significantly 
on overall scores on the SEQ. 
Similarly, in the Jones and colleagues 

study [43], when current levels of 
depression were taken into account; 
there was no difference on scores 
on the SEQ between depressed 
patients with bipolar disorder and 
depressed patients with MDD, and 
both patient groups had significantly 
lower scores on the SEQ than control
participants. Unique to bipolar 
disorder, scores on the DAS are 
elevated in patients with bipolar 
disorder during the manic phase as 
well as the depressed phase. 
Goldberg and colleagues [48] 
compared scores on the DAS in 
patients with bipolar disorder who 

were manic, patients with MDD who 
were depressed, and controls. They 
found that while patients with MDD, 
who were currently depressed, had 
the highest scores on the DAS, 
patients with bipolar disorder who 
were manic, had significantly higher 
scores on the DAS than healthy 
controls. As in MDD, scores on the 
ATQ and DAS do not appear elevated 
when patients with bipolar disorder 
are in remission. For example, in the 
study by Hollon and colleagues [37],
they found that scores on the ATQ 
and DAS were not elevated compared 
to controls, in patients with bipolar 

disorder who were in remission. 
Likewise, in a study by Lex and 
colleagues [49] investigating 
cognitive styles in patients with 
bipolar disorder in full remission, 
there were no significant 
differences on scores on the DAS and
ATQ between patients with bipolar 
disorder who were in remission and 
normal controls. Finally, similar to 
patients with MDD, negative self-
concept or schemata seem to predict 
relapse into mania and depression in 
patients with bipolar disorder. In the
study by Reilly-Harrington and 
colleagues [45], scores on the DAS 

interacted with the number of 
negative life events to predict 
increases in depressive, as well as 
manic, symptoms. Depressed patients 
with bipolar disorder, who possessed 
greater dysfunctional attitudes and 
experienced more negative life 
events, showed worsening in their 
mood symptoms, both depressive and 
manic symptoms. Go to: Rumination in 
bipolar disorder While the bulk of 
the research on rumination has been 
conducted in individuals with major 
depression, given the research 
showing negative 
self-concept/schemata in bipolar 

disorder and the role of rumination 
or self-focus in sustaining 
depressed mood one might expect 
that depressed patients with bipolar 
disorder engage in ruminative 
thinking, similar to patients with 
MDD. Indeed, this is what Johnson et 
al. [50] found in a recent study 
looking at the tendency to ruminate 
in individuals with bipolar disorder, 
MDD and normal controls. They used 
the Response Styles Questionnaire 
(RSQ; [51]), which is a measure of 
the tendency to engage in ruminative
responses when feeling depressed, 
and found that both individuals with 

MDD and bipolar disorder endorsed 
heightened rumination in response to
negative affect, compared to normal 
controls. Consistent with this, van 
der Gucht et al. [52] found that 
the tendency to ruminate was highly 
correlated with depressive 
symptoms, (as assessed by the 
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale; 
HDRS), in patients with bipolar 
disorder. In a recent study, in our 
group with patients with bipolar 
disorder, using the RSQ, we also 
found that patients with bipolar 
disorder, who are depressed, show a 
greater tendency to ruminate, when 

compared to levels previously 
reported in normal controls [53]. 
Given the repetitive and persistent 
nature of ruminative thinking, its 
presence in depressed states in 
patients with bipolar disorder is 
contrary to the widely held belief 
that depression in bipolar disorder is
characterized by mental slowing, 
decreased mental activity, or a 
relative dearth of thought. Early 
studies of rumination in unipolar 
depressed states, in which 
participants were asked to state 
their thoughts in response to the 
prompts on the rumination task 

developed by Nolen-Hoeksema and 
colleagues, demonstrate that 
individuals who ruminate are 
mentally quite active, with numerous
thoughts, albeit with a negative bias 
[24]. Patients with bipolar disorder 
in depressed states ruminate and, as 
such, are mentally quite active, 
suggesting an unquiet mind in 
depressed states in bipolar disorder 
as well. Notably, melancholia and 
rumination are not necessarily 
contrasting phenomena. As reviewed 
above, various definitions of 
melancholia exist, but generally 
these definitions, including the 

current DSM-IV definition, encompass
primarily physical symptoms (for 
example, psychomotor disturbance). 
Thus, cognitive states in melancholia 
are not well characterized. It is 
possible, given the greater 
depressive symptom load in 
melancholic depression and the 
correlation between rumination and 
depressive symptom load, that 
rumination is prevalent among 
individuals afflicted with 
melancholia. Thus, rumination and 
melancholia are not necessarily 
contrasting phenomena, and, in fact, 
it is likely that rumination is a key 

feature of melancholia, not 
previously described. What appears 
to be unique to bipolar disorder is 
that studies of rumination in bipolar 
disorder reveal that not only do 
individuals with bipolar disorder 
ruminate in response to negative 
affect in depressed states, they 
ruminate in response to positive 
affect as well. In the study by 
Johnson et al. [50], individuals with 
bipolar disorder endorsed ruminating 
in response to positive affect as 
well as negative affect, albeit with 
a more positive focus. Using the 
Response to Positive Affect 

Questionnaire [54] which assesses 
tendencies in responses to positive 
affect, Johnson and colleagues found
that individuals with bipolar 
disorder, who were hypomanic, 
endorsed a tendency to focus on 
positive affective experiences and 
positive self-qualities. Thus, 
patients with bipolar disorder engage 
in a positive ruminative style in 
response to positive affect in a 
hypomanic state, as well as a negative
ruminative style in response to 
negative affect, in a depressed 
state. Notably, positive rumination is 
conceptually different from 

grandiosity, which is defined as an 
inflated sense of self-esteem or 
believing that one has special 
powers, spiritual connections or 
religious relationships. Ruminative 
thoughts of a positive nature may 
often be realistic (for example, "I 
did a good job on a project at work 
last week", which describes a positive
affective experience that is reality 
based). Additionally, positive 
rumination is distinguished from 
flight of ideas by the fact that the 
content of positive ruminations is 
organized around positive affective 
experiences and qualities, and not 

random associations. Studies which 
record the content of positive 
ruminations, as Nolen-Hoeksema and 
colleagues have done with negative 
rumination [24], are needed to 
provide empirical support for these 
distinctions. Surprisingly, the 
tendency to engage in rumination to 
negative affect may also be 
associated with hypomania. In studies 
of college sample students [55,56], 
scores on the RSQ are found to be 
positively correlated with hypomanic 
traits (as assessed by the Eckblad 
and Chapman's Hypomanic Personality 
Scale; HPS [57]). Individuals who 

have a tendency to focus on their 
symptoms of distress and negative 
self-qualities also possess more 
hypomanic traits. Notably, in another 
study, van der Gucht et al. [52] did 
not find a correlation between 
rumination (as assessed by the RSQ) 
and manic traits (as assessed by the 
Bech-Rafaelson mania scale [58]) in
patients with bipolar disorder. Go to: 
Psychological accounts of why 
patients with bipolar disorder 
ruminate Given the role of 
rumination in persistence of negative
mood, the question arises, why do 
depressed patients ruminate? One 

account that has been put forward 
to explain rumination in unipolar 
depression by Papageorgiou and Wells 
[28] is that rumination is a coping 
strategy. Papageorgiou and Wells 
found that patients identified 
advantages as well as disadvantages 
to rumination, suggesting that they 
engage in rumination in part because 
of a perceived benefit from 
rumination. The advantages cited by 
patients included a sense of 
improved understanding of their 
depression and the causes of their 
depression, and a sense of control 
over their symptoms and problem 

solving. This account is likely 
applicable to patients with bipolar 
disorder who are depressed. They 
may engage in rumination for reasons 
similar to their MDD counterparts. 
However, such an account does not 
explain why rumination has been 
associated with hypomania in patients 
with bipolar disorder as well. One 
possibility that has been put forward
to account for this finding [55] 
invokes the age old idea of the manic
defense to depression. On this 
account, the hypomania/mania is a 
coping strategy just like rumination, 
so the correlation between hypomania

and rumination reflects that they 
are both coping strategies used by 
patients with bipolar disorder who 
are struggling with depression. 
Support for this account comes from a
recent study by Goldberg and 
colleagues [48] showing that 
patients with bipolar disorder in a 
manic phase endorse negative core 
beliefs, suggesting that the mania 
may be a means of coping with the 
negative core beliefs. Another 
account is based on research that 
patients with bipolar disorder 
generally have higher expectations 
[59] and are goal attainment 

focused [60], but when depressed, 
have greater difficulty realizing 
those expectations and goals. The 
account proposes that this difficulty
leads to a failure to achieve those 
expectations and goals in depressed 
states, which in turn may lead to 
negative self-appraisal and 
rumination. A final related 
hypothesis explaining the link 
between the tendency to ruminate 
and mania in bipolar disorder is 
rooted in the possibility that 
individuals with mania may have 
experienced more failures, as well 
as destructive complications, as a 

result of their mania (as opposed to 
failures due to their depression). 
According to this account [61], 
hypomania/mania may have led to 
more failures and in turn may lead 
to a greater likelihood to resort to 
self-blame, negative self-appraisal 
and rumination. One problem with 
these three psychological accounts is
the finding from Johnson and 
colleagues (2008) that patients with
bipolar disorder engage in positive 
rumination (that is, positive self-
appraisal) in response to positive 
affect in a hypomanic state. 
Similarly, Eisner and colleagues [62]

found that there is a tendency to 
engage in positive generalization, 
similar to positive rumination, in 
response to successes. An account of 
why patients with bipolar disorder 
ruminate must take into account why 
they ruminate in response to both 
negative and positive affect. 
ChatGPT
The text discusses various aspects 
of negative self-concept and 
rumination in patients with bipolar 
disorder.
In terms of self-concept, studies 
have indicated that patients with 

bipolar disorder often exhibit 
persistent negative self-concepts or
schemata, similar to those observed 
in patients with major depressive 
disorder (MDD). Tools like the 
Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale (DAS) 
and the Automatic Thoughts 
Questionnaire (ATQ) reveal that, 
when currently depressed, these 
patients score higher than other 
clinical and control groups. However,
the scores on these scales do not 
appear elevated when patients are 
in remission, suggesting the impact of 

the disorder's mood phases on self-
concept.
Additionally, research has found 
that negative self-concept may 
predict relapses into both 
depressive and manic states in 
bipolar disorder. When individuals 
with more dysfunctional attitudes 
and more negative life events 
experience worsening mood symptoms, 
it highlights the role of negative 
self-concept in driving the severity 
of bipolar disorder.
Regarding rumination, the text 
suggests that patients with bipolar 

disorder are prone to ruminative 
thinking, similar to those with MDD. 
This involves frequently 
contemplating negative thoughts, 
experiences, or feelings. The 
tendency to ruminate is positively 
correlated with depressive symptoms
in patients with bipolar disorder, 
contradicting the common belief that
depression in bipolar disorder is 
characterized by mental slowing or 
reduced thought activity.
Intriguingly, the text also proposes 
that individuals with bipolar 
disorder ruminate in response to 

positive affect as well, particularly
during hypomanic states. They engage
in a positive ruminative style, 
focusing on positive affective 
experiences and positive self-
qualities. This "positive rumination" 
is different from grandiosity (an 
inflated sense of self-esteem) or 
flight of ideas (rapid shifting 
between unconnected thoughts).
Several psychological accounts are 
presented to explain why patients 
with bipolar disorder ruminate. One 
suggests rumination as a coping 
strategy, providing a perceived 

benefit or sense of control. 
Another relates rumination with the
concept of the "manic defense" to 
depression, in which hypomania/mania 
serve as a coping strategy for 
negative core beliefs. Other 
theories tie rumination to the gap 
between high expectations and 
reality during depressive phases, or 
as a response to failures and 
destructive complications brought 
about by manic episodes. Finally, an 
account must be developed to explain
why patients with bipolar disorder 

ruminate in response to both 
negative and positive affect.

Go to: The tendency to ruminate in 
bipolar disorder and executive 
dysfunction We propose that the link
between the tendency to ruminate in
manic and depressed states in bipolar 
disorder reflects executive 
dysfunction in bipolar disorder. 
Research on neuropsychological 
functioning in bipolar disorder 
reveals deficits in several cognitive 
domains, including attention, learning
and memory, and executive 
functioning [63-66]. The executive 

dysfunction seen in bipolar disorder 
is present in euthymic, depressed 
and manic states, suggesting that the
executive dysfunction is not state 
specific, but rather trait-like. In 
one study, investigating 
neuropsychological functioning in 
bipolar patients in manic, depressed 
and euthymic mood states, Martinez-
Aran et al. [66] found that 
regardless of mood state, all 
patients with bipolar disorder showed
impaired functioning on tests of 
executive functioning, including the 
Wisconsin Card Sort Task (WCST) and 
Stroop Color and Word Interference 

task. While a more recent study calls
into question the presence of 
executive dysfunction in euthymic 
states in bipolar disorder, they 
nonetheless found a trend towards 
executive dysfunction in patients 
with bipolar disorder who are 
euthymic [67]. It is possible that the
executive dysfunction present in 
patients with bipolar disorder in 
euthymic states is exacerbated in 
mania and depression. In fact, in 
studies using tests of executive 
functioning, including attentional 
set-shifting [68,69], planning 
ability [70] and decision making 

[69,70], researchers consistently 
find deficits in executive 
functioning in mania. And the finding 
by Martinez-Aran et al. [66] of 
executive dysfunction in depressed 
states in bipolar disorder is 
consistent with the literature 
showing executive dysfunction in 
depressed states in MDD (see [71] 
for a review). Of note, many of the 
tasks used to assess executive 
functioning are tasks which 
incorporate multiple executive 
processes (for example, the WCST 
incorporates shifting attention as 
well as inhibition), so a fine grain 

approach to executive functioning as 
suggested by Miyake et al. [72] is 
not currently possible. However, 
such an approach would be invaluable
at more precisely identifying 
particular executive deficits in 
bipolar disorder. This highlights the 
need for research into specific 
executive processes in bipolar 
disorder. There is some initial 
evidence that the tendency to 
ruminate is associated with executive
dysfunction. In a study by Davis and 
Nolen-Hoeksema [73], individuals 
with a tendency to ruminate were 
found to demonstrate perseverative

tendencies and failures to maintain 
adaptive cognitive sets on the WCST. 
Similarly, Watkins and Brown [74] 
found that depressed patients who 
underwent a rumination induction and
were asked to perform a random 
number generation task showed 
failures of inhibitory executive 
control compared to depressed 
participants who underwent 
distraction, and non-depressed 
participants. More recently, Whitmer
and Banich [75] found that 
individuals with a tendency to 
ruminate have trouble inhibiting 
mental representations of previous 

task demands when they switch their
attention to new task demands. Thus,
rumination seems to be associated 
with executive dysfunction, 
particularly inhibitory executive 
control. Of course, given the dearth
of studies, further research into 
executive functioning and rumination
is much needed. Taken together, the
evidence for executive dysfunction 
in bipolar disorder and the 
relationship between rumination and 
executive dysfunction suggests that 
the tendency to ruminate may be 
symptomatic of executive dysfunction
in bipolar disorder, specifically 

inhibitory executive dysfunction. 
Patients with bipolar disorder may 
experience an exacerbation in 
executive dysfunction when manic or 
depressed, which may lead to a 
tendency to ruminate because of a 
failure to inhibit self-focused 
thoughts of a positive or negative 
nature. This possibility invites 
investigation into the effects of 
mood states on executive functioning 
and rumination in bipolar disorder.
ChatGPT
Research suggests that patients with
bipolar disorder tend to ruminate 

during both manic and depressed 
states, possibly reflecting 
underlying executive dysfunction. 
Executive functions are cognitive 
skills used for planning, problem-
solving, and goal-directed behaviors,
and studies have indicated that 
individuals with bipolar disorder may 
have impairments in these areas, 
regardless of their current mood 
state.
Neuropsychological research in 
bipolar disorder has revealed 
deficits in multiple cognitive domains,
including attention, learning and 

memory, and executive functioning. 
Importantly, these deficits seem to 
be present whether the individual is
in a euthymic (non-depressed, non-
manic), depressed, or manic state, 
suggesting that they are trait-like, 
rather than state-dependent.
Studies using executive functioning 
tests, such as the Wisconsin Card Sort
Task (WCST) and Stroop Color and 
Word Interference task, have 
consistently found deficits in mania. 
Furthermore, depressed states in 
bipolar disorder have also been 

associated with executive 
dysfunction.
There is some evidence that a 
tendency to ruminate (to 
repetitively focus on distress and 
the causes and implications of 
distress) may be related to these 
deficits in executive function. For 
example, individuals who tend to 
ruminate have been found to 
demonstrate perseverance and 
failures to maintain adaptive 
cognitive sets on the WCST, as well as
failures of inhibitory executive 
control.

The executive dysfunction in bipolar
disorder and the relationship 
between rumination and executive 
dysfunction suggest that the 
tendency to ruminate in bipolar 
disorder may be a symptom of 
inhibitory executive dysfunction. In 
other words, individuals with bipolar
disorder may have difficulty 
inhibiting self-focused thoughts of 
either a positive or negative nature,
leading to a tendency to ruminate. 
Further research is needed to 
clarify these relationships and to 
investigate the effects of 

different mood states on executive 
functioning and rumination in bipolar 
disorder.

What Is Abulia? By Ana Gotter on 
February 1, 2019 Symptoms Causes 
Diagnosis Treatment Conditions 
Outlook Overview Abulia is an illness
that usually occurs after an injury 
to an area or areas of the brain. It’s
associated with brain lesions. While 
abulia can exist on its own, it’s 
often found in conjunction with 
other disorders. These disorders can
either be neurological or psychiatric 
in nature. Abulia is a widely 

underdiagnosed condition and is 
classified by strong apathy. This can 
result in a lack of motivation, and 
many with abulia struggle with issues
of will, volition, or drive. Those 
with abulia experience less 
motivation despite normal mood, 
consciousness, and cognition. Someone 
with abulia has desires, but may 
struggle to do what’s necessary to 
accomplish the goals they wish. 
Abulia is common but is often 
confused with other brain-related 
issues. There are possible treatment
options, but it’s important that this 
condition is diagnosed appropriately in

order to receive treatment. Despite 
the importance of diagnosis, this 
condition has been rarely 
acknowledged. However, in recent 
years, discussion and research 
around abulia diagnosis has increased.
Symptoms of abulia A person with 
abulia exhibits symptoms that include
emotional and behavioral changes. 
This condition isn’t due to reduced 
levels of consciousness, attention, 
or language capacity. Symptoms can 
include: loss of productivity, 
effort, and initiative emotional 
indifference lack of plans and goals 
less or absence of speech or action 

lack of emotional responses to 
important life events less goal-
oriented thoughts diminished social 
interest poor attention being easily 
distracted Those with abulia can 
usually describe goals, interests, or 
plans that they have. However, 
they usually do so in a less 
extensive way and for a shorter 
time, showing initial signs of apathy. 
Mild cases of abulia are more common 
than severe ones. It’s often more 
common in older people with mood 
disorders, neurological issues, and 
other conditions. Abulia is often 
seen as a symptom within a 

complicated clinical situation. More 
research is needed regarding the 
diagnosis and management of abulia in 
older adults. This is important 
because it appears in conjunction with
many diseases and disorders related 
to aging. Causes of abulia Abulia is 
most often caused by an injury to 
the brain. These injuries are seen 
mostly in the form of brain lesions. 
Motivation is triggered by 
environmental factors that release 
neuron signals. When areas of the 
brain are damaged, these neuron 
signals don’t function properly. This
results in the brain’s inability to 

register reward. An apathetic 
response follows. The common 
affected areas of the brain include:
basal ganglia frontal lobes cingulate 
gyrus caudate nucleus globus 
pallidus There’s growing 
evidenceTrusted Source that 
suggests that the dysfunction can 
occur in areas outside of the area of
the lesion. These areas are 
connected to, but outside of, the 
lesioned brain matter. Despite that 
there’s likely more than one 
neurotransmitter involved, most 
studies have focused on the role of 
dopamine in cases of abulia. One 

animal studyTrusted Source found 
that the damage to dopaminergic 
circuits related to apathy. 
Researchers think these pathways 
are what enables us to turn impulse 
to action. There are also social, 
environmental, and biological factors 
that can affect drive. These 
factors can induce apathy. They’re 
not to be confused with the 
presence of abulia. Diagnosing abulia 
Abulia may be more common than once 
thought, as it tends to be a widely 
underdiagnosed condition, often 
confused with other diseases or 
disorders. This can result in 

individuals going untreated for 
longer periods of time. This condition
is often confused with: depression 
aphasia dementia It’s important in 
the process of diagnosis to rule out 
conditions that may present apathy as
a symptom. As a result, doctors 
frequently perform thorough 
neurological and psychosocial exams 
when apathy is involved to provide a 
differential diagnosis. In a survey of
British doctorsTrusted Source on 
the subject of apathy in older 
adults, less than 50 percent 
believed abulia was different from 
depression. Abulia is indeed a 

separate diagnosis from depression. 
Sadness or negative thoughts aren’t 
attributed to abulia. Your doctor may
order a resting state fcMRI. This 
test involves undergoing an MRI 
without being asked to perform 
specific tasks while the brain is 
mapped. Other forms of brain imaging 
such as CT scans can also help 
diagnose conditions linked with abulia.
Treating abulia A doctor needs to 
identify abulia early so that they 
can help you identify the best 
treatment options for you. 
Treatment options currently include
bromocriptine, which has been proven

to be effective in lowering apathy. 
This treatment is often given in low 
doses with small increases in dosage 
over time. You should be monitored 
by your doctor while taking 
bromocriptine, due to potential 
negative side effects, including: 
drowsiness lowered blood pressure 
an increase in compulsive behaviors In
a small number of case studies, L-
dopa was tested as a potential 
treatment option. This studyTrusted
Source found that the L-dopa 
successfully treated severe cases 
of abulia, but the effects of this 
medication were not long-lasting. 

Dopamine medicine could prove 
helpful, but due to lack of 
evidence, it’s not generally used. 
These medications also have a list of 
side effects that include potential 
psychotic relapse in people who have 
experienced episodes of psychosis in 
the past. Amphetamines have been 
shownTrusted Source to increase 
stimulation-seeking behavior in rats. 
Human studies for using this drug in 
cases of abulia still need to be 
researched. Conditions associated 
with abulia Abulia has been observed 
in association with: Huntington’s 
Alzheimer’s mental illnesses Lewy 

body dementia Parkinson’s disease 
stroke What’s the outlook? Abulia is
a condition that can affect your 
quality of life. Fixing underlying 
issues that may be linked with abulia 
is important. This will help your 
doctor to better identify the best 
treatment plan for you. It’s 
important to seek the help of a 
medical professional if you or a 
loved one is experiencing apathy or 
other symptoms listed above. If 
you’re concerned about abulia, make 
sure to mention it to your doctor, as 
some may not be familiar with the 
diagnosis. How we reviewed this 

