I want to say also why I think I'm so focused on theoretical physics as the most important
endeavor that humans are engaged with.
I think there are three components to it and just see whether it resonates with you.
One is that this is the closest we get responsibly to asking why are we here, what is it that
we're made of.
It is the thing that would best substitute for a religion if you were able to understand
what it was.
The second thing is that it appears to be the secret powering our economy that very
few people have really fully understood.
It gave us the worldwide web, the semiconductor, the electron shells that generated chemistry.
Nuclear power.
Nuclear power, nuclear weapons, communications, technology, electromagnetic, you know, Wi-Fi,
what have you.
If you want it and it invented theoretical physics, more or less created molecular biology.
That's probably a bit of a stretch, but the others certainly aren't.
If you look at the RNA Tie Club, the people in it were Teller, Feynman, Crick, people
trained in physics.
In this telling of the tale, its second major feature of importance is that it sort of created
our modern economy and I don't think people have understood the extent to which all of
these things, the web semiconductors and even molecular biology really came out of
theoretical physics because of the third issue, which is I think even though I'm a mathematician
or trained in mathematics, I could make a pretty decent argument that this was the world's
most impressive intellectual community ever.
It certainly seems to attract some of the greatest minds.
Well, I would say, I would go even farther, I would say that because of the interplay
between the most beautiful mathematics, even according to mathematical standards and experimental
discipline, so you have this thing that's forcing you to go back and forth between the
purest of pure theory and the dirt and intuition and messiness of experiment, I don't think
anything else had that property so that it wasn't necessarily even that it just attracted
the best people, but it actually rewarded human intellectual achievement like no other
subject ever.
Right.
It's also touching on something that's a little bit different socially, which is the
type of people who are attracted to really hard problems in fundamental physics and modeling
and really trying to get, as you say, the source code of the universe.
These often aren't very skilled people-people, they're not very socially oriented people
for the most part.
Some are, some aren't.
But for the real intellectual heavy hitters, you're talking about people who sort of, I
mean, walk among us as aliens, you're talking about that they're not extremely social, they're
not very focused on issues with other human beings, and physics, this understanding of
our universe through mathematics is really otherworldly pursuit, right?
It's not like law, where laws are made up by humans and discussed in front of humans
and compared in front of humans, it's, I mean, that has its own intricacies and difficulties
and puzzles, but theoretical physics, you're getting, you're working at something that's
not related to humans directly.
I mean, any intelligent beings in this universe that advance to a certain state are going
to be involved in studying physics, and it's going to be the same physics, right?
With some of the same mathematics and the same mathematical tools.
It's something that exists independent of humanity.
So if you're not a huge fan of human beings, but you really like puzzles and you're good
at math, physics is very attractive because it's the greatest puzzle there is in our universe,
and it exists completely independent of humanity, and yet humans have been able to work on it
and make progress, which is freaking amazing.
It's amazing the degree to which humans have understood our reality, and I think we're
getting close to having a complete picture of it.
