You may have noticed, I am not in Japan, you are correct, congratulations.
For those of you who don't know, me and Marisa have been trying to move to Japan now, for quite a while.
Even just making the choice to move there was really difficult.
We obviously would be leaving everything that we built here behind all these amazing friends,
but we just felt like we really want to take on this adventure while we're still young.
Just getting the preliminary visa, just that was a huge process, but it didn't matter because we
wanted to go so badly. I counted all the emails with the correspondence and it's 700 emails.
We're not able to enter because Japan has been kept their border closed for everyone,
even people going through a visa process during this, most of this time at least.
And there's obviously because of COVID and that's the reason why I avoid making a video
even talking about this. Usually I share what's going on with you guys, but it just felt like
I don't think the world needs someone who's well off complaining how COVID is affecting them.
And it's also a complicated issue and I just felt like this is going to complicate it more if I talk
about it. And I don't want to read a bunch of headlines, I can already see them like
PewDiePie complaining about not being able to enter Japan. I get it, it sounds entitled.
But at this point, I just wanted to give an update and sort of talk about what we've been
through these past two years, because it's kind of driving me a bit crazy. I think I bother my
friends and family about this like 600 times and be like, what, what did you think I should do?
Hey, by the way, what do you think I should do? Okay, because every day I swear at this point,
because it's been so long, first year was fine, whatever. Every day I go from we should just
give up. This is ridiculous. Like it shouldn't have taken this long. You know, maybe it just wasn't
meant to be. They're not giving us any updates on when they're planning to reopen. You know,
why should they change their mind all of a sudden? It's obviously, what if it takes another two years?
Like we can't just wait forever. And then we go from that to we spent three years, all this money,
we're all these things, we're gonna go, we want it. And I just jump in between that every single
day. And it's, it's awesome. It's great. And that's the thing, like, I feel like I'm living a cautionary
tale and I don't know what the meaning behind it is. Is it never give up? Or is it don't give up?
Because you never know how close you are. I wish I knew. This is the hardest choice I ever made.
And I don't know. One of the most difficult part about this whole thing has been not knowing.
If I knew that they were going to be close for two years, then at least we could have made some
choices around that. We could have made trips to see our family more. We could have not stayed in
my office for two years. We thought we'd be here for a couple months max. We could have avoided
playing this guessing game of Oh, the Olympics that surely they're gonna open up for the Olympics,
they're gonna have to have an audience. Okay, no. Maybe, maybe now the cases are really low.
And they weren't giving any updates. It's just like, maybe next month. Okay, well, maybe next
month. Maybe next month. Maybe next month. And do that 24 times. It's like, maybe this is my fault
for being so crazy about it. But it is a big choice to make when you make the choice to move
to another country. And it's hard to get just dropped. And as it turns out, I'm not alone in
this situation. There was a New York Times article estimating about 350,000 people stuck in this
limbo situation. The same as I am. Not people entering with business visa like I am, but
students as well, who have already paid their tuition, but they're not allowed in,
just want to make it clear like, it's not tourists, it's not people going, they're still closed.
Guess I'll have to reschedule my flight again. You know, it's people who made this difficult
choice. And they don't even have a choice at this point of then having to wait. And honestly,
reading their stories online, because a lot of them might be trying to contact me and send me
messages, it breaks my heart. Because if this has been heavy for me, I can't imagine for all these
people. And I'm honestly just so sorry. Now that they closed their border for everyone in December,
I think that was the last straw for a lot of people seeing messages of people giving up.
This is so sad. And the sad part is like, all these people writing me that are in this limbo
situation are hoping that I'm gonna like, urge on the Japanese government and like,
do something. But they just closed down for everyone. Like even not now, not even Japanese
people can exit and return. You know, people that were hoping to see their family abroad can't do
that now and sucks for everyone. So, you know, obviously, it's not going to matter if I talk
about it. That's just not the case. And I guess that's the point. People are so desperate that
their last hope is literally some Swedish YouTuber complaining online, which I'm sorry,
I'm not even doing. I just wanted to explain my situation. I will say, it has been frustrating
also seeing that other Japanese people can travel to other countries as they want. But
their own borders have been closed for everyone this entire time.
Kind of like, there's no one else talking about this. Am I the one? Am I the only one seeing this?
Shouldn't countries like call this out? I don't know if I'm allowed to show it, but I am approved
to go for five years, which is amazing. I would love that. But I'm not allowed in. But as part of
me acquiring this, I had to get an office in Japan. Do you know how hard it is to get an office in
Japan if you're not even allowed to enter the country? Thanks to our friends there, we were able
to do it. This is part of our visa. We had to have that. I have a company in Japan, a business ready
to set up. I'm going to pay my taxes, whatever. I have an employee in Japan. I have a house in
Japan. I'm approved to go, but I'm not allowed in. And it's like, damn, we're still here, huh?
I keep meeting people here and they're like, you're still here. And it's like, yeah, still here.
I don't know what to tell you. I'm almost like sorry for even making this video. It feels,
it just feels super lame. I don't like talking about this. It feels like I'm complaining and I
feel entitled. But you know, I appreciate being able to talk about my situation. And I hope that
other people in my same situation can find some comfort that you're not alone. And Japan, if you
can give an update at least, a lot of people would appreciate it. And that was it for my update.
Still not in Japan, but I'll be fine. And I'm happy either way. So thank you for listening. That's it. Bye.
