Yankees and the Guardians are in a pretty good game.
Guardians are up by one in the bottom of the ninth inning.
Donaldson leads off against Clausset.
99 inside ball, 98 outside ball, 98 outside ball, 99 low.
That's a leadoff walk.
They pinch run.
Tim LoCastro, he's fast.
He immediately steals second base during Hicks is at bat.
Hicks gets out, Gallo gets out.
They're down to their last out, and it's up to IKF 100.
That's a strike.
Doesn't get called a strike.
99, kind of the same spot that gets called a strike.
One-in-ones the count, fouls back the 100 mile per hour pitch.
1-2, strike away from winning the game.
But Kainer-Fuleffa says no way.
Takes the 100 and puts it up against the wall.
Kwan with a great effort, but Tilo scores the games tied.
Kwan's busted up.
Kainer's ecstatic.
Look at this effort.
If he caught that, it would have been a game-ending catch.
Goes face first into the fence there.
Just a metal fence, and it's not a soft surface behind it.
And you can see him say here, one Yankee fan,
yelling some ridiculous shit, celebrating the fact
that he got hurt, maybe rooting for him
to be more hurt than he was.
And you can see Mercado here step around
and go address people in the outfield,
and then you can see Straw and Mercado
trying to defend their buddy, Kwan,
pointing out the guy who's saying it,
and then Straw is going to climb the fence
to get in his face, and one of the guys in the gray shirt
kind of backs up a little bit.
Now here's Mercado and Straw's take on all of this.
Kwan was a little shaken up and had some cuts in his face,
and there was a specific Yankee fan in left field
that was celebrating Kwan getting hurt.
You can't say stuff like that,
especially when someone gets hurt.
So I just let him, I was like, listen, man,
you can chirp all you want,
but don't celebrate someone getting hurt.
That's classless.
That shouldn't be a thing.
Kwan is the nicest guy on the planet,
and that's my teammate, that's my brother,
and some of the things that were said to him,
just for me, wasn't going to fly.
So my emotions got to me a little bit,
but at that point, I feel like as a Yankee fan,
you've got to be excited for your team.
You should be cheering,
and you should never prey on someone's,
you got to go ahead first and do a hard wall.
There's no business for saying the things
those guys said to him, and it got to me a little bit,
and I said what I said,
and if I were to do it again,
I probably would have said the same thing.
That's my guy, and at that point, just cheer.
Be happier, team, tie the game up,
and be a normal baseball fan,
just enjoy what's going on.
They can chirp all they want,
but when someone's hurt,
you should never really talk the way they were talking to him.
So obviously, we don't know what he said,
but we know that the kid behind them is throwing up.
This, like, pussy sign, which maybe,
I mean, if you throw that up,
it pretty much confirms that you are
what you're accusing others of being.
Hiding behind someone, throwing that,
thinking it's something,
and then the guy that's been filming it,
and hey, where's this footage, dude?
You have some cool footage.
Trying to get, like, a fist bump out of him as he leaves.
Just a bizarre scene.
You can see this woman up here,
she's like, why are we doing this?
And these guys are talking shit.
Now, who knows what Strauss said?
Probably like, shut the fuck up.
Don't talk shit to an injured player.
It seems like that's what they're saying.
And then these guys, these three guys,
man, they just couldn't be more proud of themselves
for doing nothing at all.
The guy throwing up the sign, stays throwing up the sign.
Like, he's doing something cool,
just the least cool thing you could do.
Look how proud of himself he is.
And then he's gonna throw it again.
Man, what a loser.
The umpires come over and they're like,
all right, you're good, man.
Calm down, calm down, yeah, they were wrong.
Mercado's talking to the other ump,
letting them know, like, ask him, ask him.
He'll tell you, he'll tell you what he said.
Meanwhile, the game's still going.
It's tie game in the ninth, there's one out left.
Glaibre Torres, five career walk-off hits.
Most in MLB since 2018.
He's pinch hitting against a dude
who throws one-on-one on the first pitch.
Strike one, that's a ball out on an off-speed pitch.
Off-speed again, he gets the strike there.
Glaibre turns, says, I kindly disagree,
but all I can do is smile and swing at the next pitch.
Hope you have a good day, blue.
And off-speed again, pokes that through the outfielders.
Now watch what happens here.
A beer can gets thrown at Mercado, just one beer can.
Now we're not in left field.
These aren't those kids over there.
This is just brand new people.
The Yankees win and they throw a beer can.
Now maybe they weren't aiming at him,
but it came pretty close to him.
So on the bottom right,
you have the Yankees celebrating the win.
Then you have Mercado picking up a beer can.
Another one comes at him, he catches it.
He's fighting with fans.
The Yankees are celebrating.
Beer cans are raining down.
It's a weird scene, it's a bad scene.
Bunch of asshole Yankee fans throwing beer cans
instead of celebrating.
And we're not talking about like two fans
throwing empty beer cans.
We're talking about, there's like 20 beer cans
plus that end up on the field and water bottles
that are full that aren't like,
and these umps gonna get hit right here by a beer can
in the back that had beer in it.
And then a water bottle that has water in it bumps.
It's just, it's bullshit.
And it's, I don't know.
Don't throw shit at players or on the field, ever.
But to do it after you win is just pathetic
because what did you buy the ticket for then?
What are you there for if your team wins via walk off
and you and like 30 of you throw beer at the other players?
You're just, and then we got another loser here
going after Mercado.
You suck, you suck, you suck.
His wife is grabbing his arm like, stop, stop, stop.
You suck, you suck.
And then he's gonna go with the L on the forehead,
takes off his hat to make sure he can see it.
And he's gonna start screaming, L, L, loser.
God damn, you are what you are accusing them of being.
If you use these hand signals non-ironically,
it is so embarrassing for you.
Just pathetic.
And then look at this.
This dad is like grabbing his daughter
because it's a scary scene.
So look what these assholes are doing.
If you're one of the assholes that threw beer,
look what you did.
You hit a girl and now the dad's got to protect her
and she's scared and that's the scene
after a fucking walk off win of the team you went to see.
And they keep going.
Now Rizzo comes out, Cole comes out.
Rizzo goes straight to Mercado,
probably says you good, you good, you good.
Cole goes and tries to help out.
Judge and Stanton go to right field
to try and get the fans to stop.
Glaber's like, my moments ruined.
Pinch it, walk off.
You dicks.
And they're like, stop, stop.
What are you doing?
G's like, that's not cool, guys.
It's so easy to not embarrass the rest of your fan base
and not embarrass sports fans
and not be a fucking dickhead or a loser.
It's really easy.
Step one, don't do the pussy sign
or the L on the forehead sign
unless you are 12 or under or living in 1990 to 2000.
Step two, don't root or clap for an injury.
Step three, don't throw shit at the players.
I hope all of the people that threw something
are never welcome back to Yankee Stadium.
