I had no idea that I was going to be talking to so many people.
I, luckily, I don't get more nervous in front of 1,100 than in front of 200 or something.
But it is a surprise, and it's a beautiful venue, and it's exciting, and it's an honor
to be here.
You know, of course, to have a conference named something that, a phrase that you once
invented 40 years ago, or something like that, is a very, it's a very curious thing,
and it's an honor, and it's a pleasure.
And I can tell that I would have a great deal in common with many, many of the people here.
Too bad there's, you know.
Time is finite, life is finite.
I wanted to say that I accepted the invitation for a number of reasons, but one was the name
of the conference, but another was that Alex wrote me a handwritten letter, and it was,
he gave it to Dan Friedman, who many of you know.
I think one of you must know Dan Friedman particularly well, if you're here, Dan.
And Dan said, Doug, I have something to give you, and so I went over to his house and he
gave me the letter, and I saw the invitation, and when you receive a handwritten letter
like that so graciously inviting you to a conference with a name following something
that you've invented, it's hard to turn it down, and so it was a very nice thing.
I might also say that Dan played another role.
I mean, I've known Dan for a long time, because we're both at Indiana University,
and he was one of the main reasons that I went to IU back in 1977.
But in 1979, Goethe Lecher Bach came out and Dan threw a party for the appearance of GEB.
I mean, and you know what was wonderful about it in retrospect, or at the time it was already
wonderful that he did such a nice thing, because just to throw a party for the launching
of a book is very nice, but the point is that it was not a known book.
It wasn't known that it was going to become famous or that it would win a Pulitzer Prize
or anything like that.
Dan just did it because he loved the book from having seen a pre-publication version,
and he just was excited, so that was marvelous.
And then he threw another party in 1999 on the 20th anniversary of the book, and again,
it was a marvelous party at his house.
So I mean, Dan and I go back long ways in strange loops and such things, and so I just
wanted to give a little bit of background to some of my connections here.
I mean, I could go on and on and on, but I think I'd better get to the point of my,
the central point of my talk, which is to talk about this notion of strange loops in
my view of it, which is, it's a term that I invented.
I sometimes regret having invented it, but that's okay.
You invent an idea, and it goes out into the world, and people interpret it in their own
ways, and you contribute in many ways to its misinterpretation by not being clear enough,
you being me in this case.
And you're not always me, but in this particular case you are.
And so, so as a youngster or a teenager, I have always, I was always interested in what
it is that gives us a self or a soul or a consciousness or an I.
And that was what led to my writing, Good Lesher Bach, and my placing the notion of strange
loops at its core, although I don't think that was well understood at the time when
the book came out, and I think it's my fault.
I probably didn't state it enough or clearly enough or whatever, so about some, I don't
know when it was, almost 30 years later, I came out with this book, I Am a Strange Loop,
in which I tried to say these things again, but to put the emphasis more on what I was
trying to say in a philosophical sense, and I found that my ideas had probably developed
somewhat in the interim.
They hadn't, I hadn't changed them, but I had increased them, and so I was able to
say them in new ways, and so that's what happened.
So I begin this book by talking about my own reverence, you might say, for life, and the
fact that I've been a vegetarian for a long time, I've, you know, gone back and forth,
drawing my threshold for where I, I mean, for a while I ate chicken and turkey and fish,
and then I didn't, and then I did again, and, you know, so I've sort of waffled a little
bit about where the line is, and I, and that's in itself a very interesting matter.
It brings up questions, of course, about what it is that creates respect for us, for other
beings, and when do we think other beings merit a certain kind of respect?
You could say that they have a soul, or they have a self, or they are conscious, or they
have feelings, or they have experiences.
Where is the borderline between small things and big things, and it's not exactly a small,
big thing, but it tends to be correlated that way.
For example, why am I, as a vegetarian, perfectly okay with swatting a mosquito?
And it sounds like a sort of a simple-minded question, but the point is I'm not okay in
general with killing insects.
I tend to respect insects to the extent that I can without, I mean, I, if I buy accident,
you know, in the shower, see that a spider is going down the drain, I think, oh my gosh,
too bad, but, you know, I, you know, I don't, I don't, you know, turn down, turn off the
plumbing system in my house and try to take the pipes apart to rescue the spider.
I mean, but there is a certain reverence, nonetheless, for life, but it doesn't extend,
you know, it's not as much reverence for spiders or ants or mosquitoes as it is for, let's
say, a squirrel and then more, much more for a dog and so forth up the scale to humans.
And so what is the difference, what is going on?
And I might, I want to extend the continuum, or maybe continuum isn't exactly the right
word, but I want to also bring into the picture some other kinds of structures.
Let me include, I'll say along the continuum, below the level of mosquitoes, thermostats,
and below that level, although it's probably probably at the same level, flush toilets.
And I would also include in there somewhere, and I don't know quite where, plants.
So, you know, that's something to think about.
If you've ever watched time-lapse photography of plants moving around and sort of groping,
grasping, seeking things in their environment, it looks eerily much like the tentacles of
an octopus or something like that, and it makes you really wonder how much awareness
if you want to use that word there is in the fiber of a plant.
Things to think about, very, very provocative questions.
So to jump to the punchline, so to speak, or the point is that I think that what makes
me feel that something is worthy of respect is when it houses a strange loop, a strange
loop of a certain sort, I might say, because in my books I've tended to use the word strange
loop to talk about things that I don't think even I would qualify as being conscious.
So I have to say a certain type of strange loop, and I want to just sketch that out for
you a little bit in this short period.
So we begin with the concept of perception.
It's very crucial that we talk about perception, because that's where it all comes from.
What is perception?
I'm not going to give you a dictionary definition or a rigorous definition, but I want to just
suggest it.
And I think you'll probably agree with me that perception is a kind of funneling process,
and by which if you take human perception, we perceive something in the outside world
that is it impinges upon us in some fashion, the most obvious fashion being through light
impinging on our eyes.
And then it excites processes further back in the brain until at some point it triggers
the concept so that we can label something.
So I can label this a book, I can label this thing a podium, I can label that big thing
out there an audience, and so forth and so on.
I've never seen this audience before, but I can still do it, which says that I don't
pay attention to all the fine-grained details.
It's a coarse-grained approximation, summarizing these, I don't know, maybe it's 1,100 people,
each of whom is a very complex entity, and multiplying a complex entity by 1,100 and
then just reducing it down to one thing and saying this is an audience is obviously throwing
away an enormous amount of information, not to mention all the visual signals, all the
photons reaching my eye, and all the neural firings on my retina that are all going down
and being funneled down into that just one word audience.
So I want you to think of perception as being an extreme funneling operation.
And so perception exists in all living beings in various forms, and there are different
levels of sophistication of perception, and I think this is self-evident.
I'm going to let, I mean, if we talk about a mosquito, for example, what kinds of things
can a mosquito perceive?
I don't think that if a mosquito were flying around in here that it would perceive an audience.
I don't think it would perceive a podium.
What I think it would perceive is some warmth and in a certain sense a source of nutrition,
although it doesn't, it wouldn't have that concept the way we do nutrition or food or
anything like that.
It might also perceive from time to time, or maybe very often, landing spots.
And I don't think it has, you know, in any sense a, it's very subtle to try to put words
on these things, but I would like to say, and I don't know if you'll agree with this
intuition, that I think a mosquito is such a primitive being that it doesn't really have
the concept of landing spot or the concept of food or nutrition or anything like that.
To make, to give you a sense of that, I mean, I don't think my knee has the concept of anything
when it, you know, when I hit the right spot and it jerks, it just does it.
It's a living thing, but it doesn't have concepts and it doesn't need concepts to have reflexes.
And I think a mosquito is at about that level.
Now if you were to, if you were to go down to a more primitive level, such as that of
a flush toilet, a flush toilet perceives some aspect of the world and makes decisions, you
might say.
I mean, in a very crude sense, it perceives, if you allow me to use that word perceive,
it perceives the water level and it says yes or no, I will add some more water.
If the water level is high enough, it says no and if the water level is low, it says yes.
And so the, but it doesn't have the concept of high or low or enough or water or anything
like that.
It manages to do these things without those concepts.
And it's in that sense, I think that's a good metaphor for thinking and the knee maybe might
be helpful too, for thinking about how a mosquito can react to the world in a conceptless way,
but nonetheless, in a certain sense, by perceiving certain things.
It makes sort of yes or no decisions, land here or not on the basis of certain amount
of information that is impinging on it, which is much bigger than one bit.
I mean, it's all those photons that are impinging on it that allow it to decide whether or not
to land or it's all those vibrations, the molecules in the air that are banging into
it that create the feeling of a temperature gradient that suggests, oh yes, I think I'll
go this way and I will stop here and I will now try to get some blood, although it doesn't
have the concept of blood either.
So perception is a funneling process and it exists sometimes with concepts and sometimes
without concepts.
And I'm not going to suggest that the boundary line is ironclad, that is, that all of a sudden
at a certain level of sophistication concepts snap into existence.
It's more that as creatures deal with a more complex environment and have more complex
behaviors, the neural structures get more and more complex and the neural networks get
more and more intricate and gradually concept-like things start to emerge, very primitive ones.
And so it might even be that maybe something inside the mosquito's brain does deserve to
be considered a very primitive concept.
In that case, all the things that I said, you just have to reduce it to a simpler creature.
I mean, I'm just pointing out that there's a continuum, it's not a black and white on
or off phenomenon.
Now as creatures get more and more sophisticated and have higher and higher degrees of sophistication
in their conceptual repertoires, they perceive the environment, they divide it up into finer
and finer categories and more and more abstract categories.
Their categories don't always have to depend upon instant visual or auditory or tactile
input.
In other words, we categorize, humans categorize things on the basis of hearing stories.
You know, you say, somebody tells you a story and you say, oh yeah, yeah, yeah, that's just
sour grapes.
And it's a category.
You didn't see anything, you didn't, I mean you heard something, but it's not because,
it's not you're categorizing the sound, the vibrations, the Fourier series as sour grapes.
You're talking about a situation that you perceived thanks to those sound waves.
You perceived an abstract situation in some far part of the world involving people that
you've never met and you said, oh yeah, just sour grapes.
And so we have very sophisticated perceptions that take place and as I say, once again,
think of how much of a condensation or compression or funneling act that is where a whole story
that could have taken somebody 10 minutes to recount gets reduced down into the two-word
phrase, sour grapes.
So we have these very sophisticated perception mechanisms.
Now what in one's environment is going to be perceived the most and the most often and
the most in greatest detail?
I think the answer is probably very self-evident.
That is, it's the things one encounters the most.
That is, the most frequent things are going to have the most frequent perception.
Now in the case, that means basically, since I am around myself more often than I'm around
anything else, that means I perceive myself more often than I perceive anything else.
And so my conceptual, my perception of myself is going to be very sophisticated and it's
going to involve a very large set of concepts.
And you might wonder about whether mosquitoes have, therefore, a very large conceptual repertoire.
I would again remind you that it depends on the level of perceptual sophistication.
I mean, for example, if you take a thermostat or a flush toilet, they don't perceive themselves.
Thermostat perceives the temperature and that's all.
A flush toilet perceives the water level and that's all.
And the mechanism itself made out of metal or plastic or whatever does not perceive itself.
You have to have a fairly sophisticated level of perception in order to start focusing your
perception back on yourself.
Now when I say focusing perception back on yourself, I don't mean that necessarily that
you are looking at yourself, although certainly that's part of it.
I mean, I can look at my hand and say that's me and I can get some impression about my
five-fingeredness and so forth.
But I mean, that's certainly part of it.
But in the case of human beings, we have perception that goes way beyond the visual, way beyond
the auditory, way beyond the tactical.
Maybe at the very beginning of our, you know, in our childhood, in our early childhood,
I mean very early, much of it is hearing one's own voice or seeing one's own hand.
But very soon after we are beyond that stage at age one or two, maybe, we start to get
feedback from the environment about our nature.
Oh, Dougie's so cute.
Oh, Dougie's so smart.
Oh, Dougie's so stubborn or whatever.
I mean, you know, so I start to formulate or maybe just internalize what other people
tell me.
But in any case, I start to have a self-image about my properties.
And as time goes on, my image becomes very sophisticated.
And I start to be aware of all sorts of things about myself that are discoveries and that
start accumulating or creating and forming this complex structure that is my self-image.
And I might mention that, I don't know, a year or so ago, I saw some dismissive comment
by a well-known neuroscientist about, I'm a strange loop.
But it was obvious that he hadn't read the book.
It was clear that he was saying, Hofstadter's concept of strange loop has nothing to do
with consciousness.
And then he said what he thought my concept was.
And I want to, I can't quote it because I don't remember exactly, but it basically,
he said it was something like, it's when a thinking being thinks about itself, thinking
about itself, thinking about itself, thinking about itself, thinking about itself, thinking
about itself, thinking about itself, et cetera, et cetera.
And he said, that's ridiculous.
That has nothing to do with what consciousness is.
And I would agree.
That's a, if you want to posit such a state of mind, maybe, you know, we enter such states
of mind on very, very, very rare occasions if we're inclined towards being philosophical
or if we're inclined towards Zen Buddhism or Taoism or something like that.
But most of us never think of anything like that.
And we're perfectly conscious to the extent that anything is conscious.
In a certain sense, I also maintain in the book that consciousness is an illusion.
But it's a kind of a balancing act.
It depends on what one means by what is real and what is not real.
So, if I say that consciousness is real, if I attribute it to human beings, then it's
certainly not because of the fact that they think about themselves, thinking about themselves,
thinking about themselves like the, in the hotel that I'm in, the Hilton, maybe some
of you were in there too.
And then you go in the elevator, it reflects back and forth millions of times.
Well, not millions, but you can see, you know, images going down many times.
And it's amusing, but it's sort of just a triviality.
What I mean by self-perception is not just the idea of this kind of super Zen Buddhist
kind of thing or whatever you want to call it.
I mean the self-perception that we all build up of ourselves over life that tells us who
we are in this world, what we are like, what kind of person are we.
For example, I learned that I was pretty good at math when I was, you know, in, say, junior
high school or high school.
And then that was a very intense part of my self-image.
When I hit math graduate school, I hit what I called, I describe it in the book here,
an abstraction ceiling.
And it was a very unpleasant experience.
It was about as unpleasant as hitting myself, you know, when you stand up and there's an
open cupboard and you stand up quickly and it hurts like hell.
Well, that's how it felt hitting my abstraction ceiling, except that the abstraction ceiling
was inside my head because it was a property of my brain that I had never suspected.
I had always thought I was really, really good at math and I found out that while there's
comes a point in math where I tune out, can't grasp the stuff anymore.
It's too hard.
And it really was almost instantaneous.
And it hurt a lot and it forced me to change my life's pathway.
I had to get out of math.
And so that was a learning experience about myself.
It told me I'm pretty good at math, but I'm not so good as I thought.
And likewise, we learn about our skill in all sorts of things, our skill level in all sorts of things.
And we learn about, I mean, I've been told by friends things like, oh, I have a tendency to make
certain kinds of jokes or certain kinds of puns.
And so I become aware of that and I internalize that.
Or it goes on and on and on.
I mean, our self-image is built up of, you know, millions of experiences like that.
Some of it is direct feedback from what people tell us.
Some of it is feedback from seeing ourself in the mirror.
Some of it is from watching videos of ourselves.
Some of it is in reviews that people write of the books we write.
And on and on and on.
So, and some of it is being spanked by your parents.
I mean, it includes all sorts of types of feedback.
But it builds up and accretes and becomes a very important central part of our decision-making function.
And now I want to talk a little bit about this idea of causality.
I think it's important to try to think about causality.
So let me give you, let me switch wavelength for more, switch whatever you switch, channels, gears.
And give you a hypothetical story.
How many minutes do I have, by the way, Alex?
Or somebody?
Just so I know where I am.
10, 15?
10 more?
20, okay.
So I want you to imagine the country of France.
And I want you to imagine it as a being that's telling its story, its life, so to speak.
So it's going to tell you about the wars it had with Germany and with England and with other countries.
And what vocabulary is it going to use?
It's going to talk about such things as, well, Germany, for example.
It'll talk about Germany.
It'll talk about Italy and Spain and England.
It'll talk about the Atlantic Ocean.
It'll talk about, maybe it'll talk about the Rhône River or the Loire.
Maybe, if it's a smart France, let's give it some credit, maybe it'll talk about Paris.
It's unlikely to be able to talk about little tiny towns because it'll never have heard of them.
And it will certainly never have heard of any of the people who live in it.
They're invisible. They're too small.
So it knows nothing of Napoleon, nothing of De Gaulle, and nothing of people from any other country.
It knows nothing of Hitler, but it knows it had a big war with Germany
and that some property was taken from one country and given to another country and such things.
But there is a level below which it simply cannot peer.
And so France will say, and so I decided to do this, you know, whatever it might be.
I don't know, some decision in a war or something.
And at some point, you know, some French general or emperor or president or whatever you want to say,
says, you, France, what are you talking about? I decided it.
I made that decision. Napoleon says, I decided to invade Russia.
You, France, you just followed along.
I mean, I conveyed this decision to my generals and they conveyed it to their subordinates
and they conveyed it down to the soldiers.
And then we marched in. I made the decision. France didn't make the decision.
What is this nonsense?
France doesn't ever make decisions, but France doesn't know about Napoleon.
France doesn't know anything about people.
And so France attributes the causality to itself on its own level.
And it says, that's what I decided to do.
And it's perfectly happy doing so and it gets along very well in talking about things at this level.
So this is a metaphor, of course, but I think it's important because
it's obviously meant to suggest to you the analogous thing about ourselves.
Now, I don't maintain that there is a Napoleon neuron in my brain that if only I knew it,
you know, it would tell me, I decided to do that.
I decided to call it strange loop or I decided to write Goodlush or Bach.
Neurons on their own don't have that causal.
They can't make such big decisions.
I mean, they're more like thermostats or flush toilets or knee jerk reflexes.
But the thing is, though, that the way things happen in the brain is
that's where the true physical causality is taking place.
To attribute causality to an ethereal thing like an I is a kind of a mistake.
In other words, if I say I decide to pick up this book,
that's pretty weird because it sounds as if some airy-fairy thing,
some immaterial thing is making things move in this world.
What's really going on is stuff at a physical level,
is pushing around other things at a physical level.
And a nice summary for that is, you know, it's convenient,
just as it would be convenient for France to say I decided to invade Russia,
it's convenient for us to be able to say I decided to pick up the book.
But the question is, to what extent is this I thing real?
If you want to talk about causality and talk about what is real,
you can talk about macroscopic things.
For example, if somebody hits a home run,
they hit the ball out of the ballpark,
we don't need to resort to description of the event
at the level of particles or atoms or something like that.
Because classical physics applies well to macroscopic objects
as long as they are fairly simple in structure.
I mean, you can't really explain the entire behavior
of a country in a war using classical physics.
But you can certainly explain the behavior of a baseball
when hit by a bat using Newtonian mechanics.
And it works very well.
And so in that sense, the ball is a real thing,
the bat is a real thing, the contact between them is a real thing.
And it's all the explanation at the macroscopic level
is a very, very reliable thing.
And because it's so extraordinarily reliable,
it becomes very real to us.
On the other hand, things like I are far less reliable, less predictable.
Which is why people often are so tempted to talk about free will.
They want to say that there is free will and I just decide whatever I want.
And then as a function of that, the world follows.
That is, I decide, let's see, I think I will.
No, I won't.
Yes, yes, I will.
I will pick it up.
And the I decided it and that's what happened.
Free will decided where all these molecules, this two pound object,
where it moved.
How did free will push that two pound object around?
Well, in this book, I talk about that somewhat.
And I just subtract four letters from that eight letter expression, free will.
I take out the first four.
I'm happy with will, just not happy with free.
So let me take an example from today.
I was driving over from Bloomington, Indiana.
And I had to stop for gas at some point and I pulled in and I saw that I was at a place
where there's some, you know, they sell snacks as they do at most gas stations.
And there was inside me a part of me that was a little bit hungry
that wanted some potato chips.
And there was another part of me inside me that said, come on,
you've been gaining weight recently, no potato chips.
And there was a little tussle between these two forces inside of me,
as there is every time I think about eating potato chips, incidentally.
And in fact, as there is any time I think about eating anything.
And so what happened in the case today was that the potato chips side won.
I bought the potato chips.
Now, you might, so what I would say is today, why did that happen?
Why did that happen?
I can give you sort of an explanation.
That is, I would say that it's a function of how hungry I am,
the fact that I had stopped at a gas station.
If I hadn't stopped at a gas station, I wouldn't have pulled over
in order to get some potato chips.
But there I was.
I was already sort of almost there.
And then there was a question of what about the other side?
Was it how active was my upsetness about my gaining weight today, this morning?
And it wasn't too upset.
I figured I wasn't going to have any lunch today.
And so, okay, I could indulge myself with a little package of potato chips.
As a matter of fact, to be very honest, there were two sizes of bags
in different places.
And I picked up one bag and I looked at it and I said, that's too big.
I don't want to eat that much.
So I was about to say no potato chips today.
And then I remembered there was another place.
So I walked over to the other place and I saw a little bag and I said, okay,
that one's okay.
So you can see that there was a play of forces going on inside my brain.
There's no freedom here.
There are different forces interacting.
And on different days, the forces have different strengths.
On one day, maybe someday, I'll look at myself in the mirror and say,
ughh.
And the next day, I won't get any potato chips.
And on some other day, I'll look at my weight on the scale and I'll say,
wow, I'm really pretty low.
That's good.
And I'll let myself get the potato chips.
This is not free will.
This is just different factors having different strengths on different days.
And there's a tussle and the stronger side wins.
It's very simple.
There's nothing free here.
Now you might say, well, what are these will things?
Aren't they as airy-fairy as I?
Well, they're a little simpler than I because a desire is not as complex.
A desire for potato chips is not as complex as the entire image of myself
that has built up over all of my life.
A desire for potato chips or a desire to lose weight are much simpler things.
They are still very complex things inside my brain and no doubt about it.
And to try to describe those in terms of neurons would be very difficult.
And beyond anybody's conceivability at this time.
But what I am trying to say is we can imagine how inside the brain
is a set of forces of things moving around in some sense fights taking place
that are explanatory and that are more close to the physical level
than just saying I and attributing free will to it.
And it's not as physical as the ball hit out of the ballpark by the bat
where you can take the velocity of the ball and the velocity of the bat
and things like that and calculate how far it will go.
That's a very, very classical physics thing.
Whereas things about desires and fighting desires are far from the world of classical physics.
But my point is you can imagine moving downwards towards that
and seeing that there is a tale to be told at different levels of description
and that as you go, the tale gets more and more deterministic or scientific if you wish
as you get lower and lower in terms of the smaller and smaller, more and more microscopic.
And so what is real is microscopic.
And what is sort of an airy-fairy thing is not only, you couldn't even say I is macroscopic
because that would imply it has a size.
I is this vague, blurry thing that we just think of it as immaterial.
And so it's analogous to what I was saying about France.
That is, France says I decided and the story is much better told at a different level
at the level of people making decisions than at the level of the country making decisions.
But it's very convenient.
Okay.
So the strange loop notion is this idea that we need, in order to survive in this world,
we need to perceive things in a very simplified way.
That is, I have to see an audience rather than the billions or trillions of photons
or neural firings, retinal firings.
I have to be able to summarize this very rapidly in order to make decisions about what to do in my life.
Obviously, in evolutionary terms, I have to make decisions about fight versus flight, for example.
But it goes at much more sophisticated levels than just fight versus flight.
In any case, you have to be able to size things up rapidly.
And that means funneling down from billions or trillions of pieces of input incredibly rapidly into just a decision.
Oh, that person looks nice.
Yeah, I think I can trust them.
Or I don't trust that person.
Things like that.
We have to make these decisions very, very rapidly by the seat of our pants.
And that's needed.
And so we have to believe in the reality.
We're forced to believe in the reality of these things that we think we perceive.
And we may be dimly aware that there's some other level of reality down there below that.
But we ignore it because we can't afford to think about it.
We have to think about it at this other level.
So our perception of ourself, like this hypothetical France's perception of itself,
takes not only of ourself, but also of other people and of other things.
That is, France's perception of Germany, France's perception of the Atlantic Ocean,
France's perception of the Alps, and so forth, is all of these things are funneling down.
Very simplified representations of these things.
France's representation of Paris will be a drastic simplification of what Paris really is.
Paris is a seething metropolis filled with people, and France doesn't know about people.
And so it knows that Paris has a river running through it,
and that, you know, I don't know what it would know about Paris.
I mean, this is all hypothetical anyway.
But the same thing like me and my kidney.
I don't know much about my kidneys.
I sort of dimly know I have a kidney.
That's about it, or two kidneys.
And I don't know what they do, really.
And I could read about it if I wanted to, but I don't need to know.
And so self-perception is interesting because we assign causality to airy, fairy things.
And it is necessary for us to do that.
And yet the real causality, in the case of a very complex thing like France or a human being,
is really not taking place at that level.
I've sort of talked about the real causality of why I bought the potato chips today,
and I suggested that the real causality is at the level of will,
that is, desire of this versus a desire of that.
But even those things are too complex in a certain sense
because will or a desire is too airy, fairy, and notion also.
And so really the fight takes place even at a more physical and a more microscopic level than that.
But we're getting closer to the real causality when we go down further.
And I remind you this is in contrast to the baseball case
where we don't need to go down to the atoms or the molecules inside the baseball and the bat
because classical physics does a fine job.
But classical physics doesn't do a fine job in explaining the brain.
I'm not saying it's quantum mechanical.
What I'm saying is there are too many things.
The brain can be perfectly classical,
but you can't handle 10 to the 30th particles simultaneously.
You can't use classical physics.
Classical physics is not cut out to have 10 to the 30th equations being solved in parallel.
So we can't use the techniques of classical physics to predict anything.
So we wind up with a kind of a way of looking at the world
where what we see is a drastically simplified picture of the world which works to some degree
but where the actual causality resides on a different level.
I'll finish up with one image that is often used as an example of a strange loop
and I want to talk about how it's different from a real strange loop
and that'll be a good closing point.
On the cover of my book, I have a picture of video feedback
and probably many of you have experimented with video feedback
where you point the television camera at the television screen
that the image of the television screen goes on to the screen
and so then because it's a recursive process,
then you have a screen inside a screen inside a screen inside a screen
and it can be fascinating and you can get wonderful phenomena.
I won't go into it because I don't have the time.
But even just such a simple act as tilting the camera a little bit
will tilt the first screen which will tilt the second screen
which will tilt the third screen and you'll get a spiral
which is what is on the cover here.
So you get amazingly complex and wonderful phenomena
coming out of this kind of self-referential act
of pointing what seems to be a perceptual apparatus at itself
that is having it do self-perception.
What I want to do is I want to dispel the notion that it is self-perception.
There's no perception going on here
and this is where it's different from a strange loop
and this is the crucial difference.
As I said and I tried to make very clear,
perception is a funneling process
whereby a fantastically complex set of stimuli
is reduced drastically down, not always into a word
but at least into a concept.
So in the case of my looking out here and saying there's an audience,
it's a word.
Or if I hear a story and I say sour grapes,
it's a two-word phrase.
Or sometimes it'll be something that doesn't have a name.
I'll just hear a story and I'll be reminded of another story
and I'll say, oh yeah, that happened, just the same thing happened to me.
And so what I'm perceiving is something that has no name
but an abstract essence of a story that already happened to me
in a very different way at some other time.
So concepts sometimes are labeled, sometimes with one word, sometimes with two,
sometimes not even at all,
but in any case when I perceive something,
whether it's an object or a vast thing like an audience
or a civil war or a funny story or a joke that I'm told,
concepts are triggered.
And this is the funneling act that is the crux of perception
and nothing like that is going on in the case of a video feedback loop.
It's a loop for sure.
You might think it's strange because you're doing this kind of closing the circuit.
There is a strangeness there,
but it's not what I meant when I invented the term strange loop.
What I meant was a kind of self-perception where what you perceive is
there's a drastic oversimplification, not over,
a drastic simplification going on in everything you perceive
so that when I build my self-model,
it's a ridiculous oversimplification.
Well, there may be oversimplification is correct.
In any case, it's a ridiculous compression.
If I say about myself, I hit my abstraction ceiling,
that's a ridiculous, it's not ridiculous,
but it's an incredible reduction of complexity.
It's something that was very complex,
something that's almost indescribable, hitting one's abstraction ceiling.
But it's what I say, and it's my way of understanding my own experience
at age 21 or 22 when I did that.
And so that is the kind of thing that I'm talking about
when I refer to self-perception.
And it's necessary for us to perceive ourselves
in order to survive in the world.
It's necessary for us to make these drastic reductions,
these drastic compressions, throwing away things,
factors of millions or billions in terms of complexity.
That's what allows us to survive in real time.
But it gives us a very partial, obviously, truth about the world,
just as it would give France only a partial truth if it said,
I decided to invade Russia.
So our self-image is based on this notion of our eye as a causal agent,
when in fact the truth is that the causality lies at a completely different level.
But we are prevented from seeing that
because we cannot see those little things going on inside of us.
And so our image, our entire way of conceiving ourselves
is based on this drastic oversimplification,
which is just a story we tell ourselves.
And the degree to which this notion called eye is real is debatable.
And I, to use the word eye,
I'm inclined to think that it is a mirage.
It's more like a rainbow, let's say, or a mirage.
So let's use the word rainbow.
A rainbow is in a certain sense a real thing.
But it's not real in the sense, in the same sense as a book.
It's a far hazier, vaguer thing.
And I think we have to think of eye as being as maybe less real than a rainbow,
no matter how compelling it is.
And we have to realize that eye is just a shorthand for something else
that is too complex for us to understand.
And so that's where this idea of strange loops is what it's all about.
And thank you for listening.
