Hello, this is me, Ilya Prygidzin, and I'm a chemist from Russia, well, Russia and
Germany, and Belgium. It's a long story. To make it shorter, we moved away from the
Russian Revolution in World War I, and then from the Nazis in World War II. I originally
wanted to study the arts in college, but seeing my father and my brother in chemistry told
me to take a little bit of a more scientific path. I guess it was the right one because
it led me to a Nobel Prize. I did a lot of experiments in my day, but one of my big focuses
was on systems at equilibrium. In thermodynamics, systems are always breaking apart and forming
entropy, making things more complicated. Once in a blue moon, however, this chaos comes
back together to form organization. We can see this in cyclones, in hurricanes, and even
in life on Earth. I call these dissipative systems. I research, however, is not on such
complicated systems as organisms. I try to create reactions in which order is created
from chaos in order to better understand how the two concepts work together. An example
of these reactions is a subset called oscillating reactions, in which solutions dissolve, reform,
and repeat this process for several minutes, ending in the formed state. Examples of these
reactions are the Belozov-Jabotinsky reaction, and the Briggs-Rachey reaction.
Moving!
The following video may be disturbing to some muggles as it displays awesome chemistry and
a bit of magic. This reaction, the Briggs-Rachey, is that which inspired the Ravenclaw house
colors. Not really, but that would be really cool. Anyways, enjoy!
Here we perform the Briggs-Rachey reaction. Essentially, this reaction proceeds as it
does because the mixture is in a state far from equilibrium. Iodine ions are involved
as the color changes from yellow to blue. As this happens, energy is released gradually
and a reaction oscillates between these two colors. Iodine ions are produced in one process
while another process consumes them. In simpler terms, while there are more than 30 reactions
happening at the same time, when you see the iodine causing the yellow color when it is
released and the blue when it is taken back up. The low concentration of the intermediate
causes the first process to start back up again. So the reaction oscillates between two colors
as one process loops back to the other.
You can see the process starting itself from the top down here, slowed down to half the
normal speed. Here's the same reaction again, except with the stir bar. This adds kinetic
energy to the reaction and allows more oscillations to occur since a dissipative structure forms
when energy flows through the system and it creates order at the same time. It was once
thought that such an oscillating reaction was impossible because the system should not
be able to spontaneously jump out of equilibrium once it reached that equilibrium state, as
stated by the second law of thermodynamics. Prigohine pioneered the work in non-equilibrium
thermodynamics to theoretically support the idea that a chemical reaction occurring far
from equilibrium does not violate the second law because the reaction oscillates about a
non-equilibrium value as opposed to an equilibrium value. Here's the reaction again, except at
one third of the normal speed. This is to illustrate the difference between the radical process
changing yellow to blue as opposed to the slower change from blue to yellow. And the
rest is for your viewing pleasure.
.
