So, a few weeks ago, my boyfriend Igor and I, we were hanging out on the sofa, and he
turns to me and says, Liv, what do you think the likelihood is that we'll still be together
in three years' time?
So, naturally, we both took a pen and paper and wrote down our three-year predictions
and threw in our one-year and ten-year ones for good measure, and these are the results.
Fortunately, we are pretty much aligned.
And because we're both professional poker players, we're very much used to thinking
about all kinds of things in terms of probabilities, even potentially emotional topics like this
one.
But I certainly wasn't always rational around probabilities.
For example, the very first time I played poker, it was 2005, and I just graduated university
from here in Manchester, and I didn't really know what I wanted to do with my life yet,
so naturally, I started applying for game shows, and the first show I got on turned out to
be a reality show that took five beginners and taught them how to play poker.
And well, I was one of those beginners, and then we would compete for a winner-take-all
prize of £100,000, so huge money, especially for a graduate with a ton of debt.
So in one of the first games, we start playing, and I get dealt two aces, which are the best
starting hands in poker, and before I knew it, I'd gotten all my chips in the middle,
and then my opponent, they get really lucky and hit a miracle card, and I'm out of the
game.
But it's fine, because I handle it, where they come stoic dignity.
Or so I wish.
No, in fact, I end up having a complete meltdown, cry at the tables, and embarrass myself on
national TV.
And why did I do that?
Well, I did it because I was shocked.
Even though I'd been told to expect that aces will lose around 20% of the time, my internal
dial just very much didn't feel like a 20% could actually happen.
So, fortunately, I've gotten my act together a bit more since then, and that's largely
because what poker teaches you to get used to bad luck.
If you play the game often enough, you'll expect to see maybe hundreds of thousands
of hands over a given year, and so you'll see all these crazy one percenters and freak
events happen with the cards over and over.
And that's because probabilities compound, while the likelihood of one individually unlucky
event happening to us is small in a given year, like getting our phones stolen, or being
made redundant, or having one of our five closest relatives die.
If you start thinking about all the events that you could consider to be unlucky, then
actually the chances build up and up until it's quite likely that one of them happens.
And while this might seem kind of depressing, I found that remembering this mathematical
fact has helped me manage my expectations better, because then I'm less shocked, and
when we're less shocked, then we're better able to reason through a tough situation and
not spend so much of our time thinking about negative, unhelpful thoughts like, why me?
Why am I so unlucky?
Now, I'm not suggesting you all go out and learn to play poker to get used to bad luck,
but it is important to remember to look at life through a probabilistic lens, because
as the incredible physicist Richard Feynman once said, nature permits us only to calculate
probabilities, and yet science has not collapsed.
And what he means by this is that the world around us, kind of like a card game, is ultimately
governed by the laws of chance and statistics.
Even the fundamental nature of matter, the particles whizzing around in our bodies and
everything in this room, appear to behave in clouds of probabilities, and our universe
is just full of all this complexity.
And yet through science, the process of observation and evidence and reason, we can learn to make
remarkably accurate predictions by using these probabilities.
But we are not all perfect scientists, in fact, far from it, and we make many mistakes
in how we think and speak around probabilities, and it's some of these mistakes that I want
to talk to you guys about today.
So the first of these is our tendency to assume that something is a certainty when
it's not.
In other words, to assign 100 percent probability to something, but 100 percent probabilities
are extremely, extremely rare, and this is known as the overconfidence bias, where we
tend to be overconfident in the strengths of our beliefs and convictions.
And this can lead us to a cardinal sin, gambling without even realizing that we're gambling.
Perhaps the best example of this is the 2008 financial crisis, which was largely contributed
to by the assumption that the house prices across the entirety of the U.S. couldn't all
go down at the same time, but they could, and they did, and it was that that kick-started
the chain reaction that created the largest economic disaster since the Great Depression.
And it's because we knew of this bias that Igor and I decided to ask each other that
awful question about whether we think we'll be together, or the likelihood that we'll
be together in three years' time, because we're now at that critical stage where we're
thinking about things like marriage and buying a house together, or maybe moving country,
and well, imagine if we went full steam ahead, assuming we're 100 percent to be together,
but maybe our percentage is actually only 60 percent.
So it's crucially important to take a moment to question what it is you think you're certain
about, and especially if it's to do with your relationships, then, well, we have to have
these frank, quantified discussions from time to time with our loved ones about things
that are these potential worst cases, and I like to think of it as taking an insurance
policy out on your emotions, where you pay the awkward premium upfront, but you're then
better safeguarded should the worst case happen.
And another mistake we tend to make is we tend to treat near-certainties too similarly
to one another.
If you look at these two percentages, they look kind of the same, right?
But, actually, there's a huge difference between the two.
For example, if all the nuclear reactors in the world had a safety rating of A instead
of B, then instead of us having a 50-50 chance of some kind of nuclear accident every 15
years, we'd expect to have one every 1.5 years, and that would obviously be a huge, huge problem.
Fortunately, nuclear powers are safer than both of these.
But this thing that we do where we tend to treat these fringe cases a little bit too
similarly can lead us to another sin, and that's gambling for sakes we can't afford.
Certainly, it's something I've seen a lot of in poker.
And an example of this is skiing.
When I was a kid and went skiing, we never wore helmets.
This was back in the 90s, and they just weren't even offered to us.
And it wasn't because helmets were super expensive or anything, it's just more because, well,
no one really thought through these very remote, but potentially worst-case disasters
of hitting your head in the snow and what could actually happen.
But nowadays, of course, we know better, and it makes you wonder what are other things
in life that could be a helmet worth wearing?
Maybe it's just making sure we go for those regular cancer screenings or simply putting
a bath mat down in our shower, or just making sure you don't eat that piece of pizza while
you're driving.
Have it when you get home.
And just as we tend to over-simplify how we think about probabilities, we can let that
slip into our language, too.
For example, you always make us late, well, it's because you don't give me enough time
to get ready.
Well, yeah, that's because you're always on the phone with your friends, well, that's
because you just never actually spend any time listening to me, well, that's because
you always criticize me, well, that's because you never get anything right.
These conversations, they can escalate somewhat, and that's because we're speaking these absolutes,
we're trying out these alwayses and these nevers, and they're very counterproductive.
If you say to someone, you never take any time for me, you're literally saying they
have never spent any effort on you, and no one likes being accused of something that
just clearly isn't true.
So then they'll become all defensive, and they'll take the easy route out of questioning
the accuracy of your statement, instead of actually taking the time to discuss the change
you want.
When we do finally try and speak probabilistically in our languages, in our language, we're really
bad at that as well.
Take, for example, the phrase, a fair chance.
If I was to say to you, there's a fair chance of rain tonight, what's the first number that
pops into your head?
Well, I asked this same question on Twitter, and I got around 300 responses, and this was
the range of answers.
Huge.
I got answers from everywhere from 18% all the way up to 90%.
And yet, back in 1961, the exact words, a fair chance of success, were the words used
by the Joint Chiefs of Staff when briefing President Kennedy about their estimations
of a success of an invasion of Cuba.
They had met with military experts, and they recommended there was like a three-to-one
against chance.
So in other words, only a 25% chance of success, but instead of just saying that to Kennedy,
the staff told him there's a fair chance, and his interpretation of that was understandably
more positive.
And while it's not certain from history if that was the exact sort of the deciding factor,
we do know that the US soon launched after the Bay of Pigs invasion, which was a complete
catastrophe that took the world one step closer to nuclear war.
So if this vague, unquantified language can cause blunders like that at the highest levels
of office, imagine the frequency of miscommunications we must all be making in our daily lives.
We expect that our products will launch within the next three months.
OK, sure.
Oh, yeah, I'll probably be home for dinner.
Sure, we've all been in trouble saying something like that.
And that's because we all have very different interpretations of these vague probabilistic
words, words like probably or frequently or likely.
And again, I ran similar polls on Twitter, and this was the distribution of answers.
Even certainly is far from certain.
And then we have the really bad words.
These are known as weasel words.
I guess that there's a chance that maybe possibly we could do this.
These words are so bad at actually saying anything.
We should just scrub them from the language altogether if you ask me.
But if we do want to use them, then we should only do it when we are deliberately pretending
to convey information, but we know that we're not.
And most of the time we are vague with our language out of sheer unconscious habit.
But this habit makes us intellectually dishonest with ourselves.
And it opens us up to biases, like the hindsight bias or the illusion of transparency where
we think we are being better understood than we actually are.
And so now I've taken, I've tried to build a habit in myself to quantify any of these
fuzzy words when I catch myself using them.
For example, if a friend says to me, hey, Liv, do you think you're going to be able to
make the time to help me out with that thing tonight?
Instead of just saying, yeah, sure, probably.
I'll give them an estimation.
I'll say 90% because even if it feels, even if it feels like a guess, it's still better
than leaving it undefined for them.
Because when we say a number, we know that they'll hear that number.
But if we use words, we don't actually know what lands in the other person's brain.
And a handful of industries have taken to defining their commonly used trouble words.
Take the pharmaceutical industry, for example.
This is the list of standard definitions of words relating to the frequency of side effects
is what you might expect to see in your packet of paracetamol at home.
And it makes good sense because otherwise we wouldn't be able to assess the risks to
ourselves properly.
And I propose we come up with our own set of definitions as well, perhaps something like
this.
What if we could all agree to use these as a guideline in our daily lives or maybe in
our workplaces or even get the media to use them?
Because if we want our words to actually mean something, then we need to have a mutual understanding
of what they stand for.
But ultimately, if there's a situation where we can use a number, then we really should
do.
And it makes me sad that the society has taught us to think that speaking in numbers isn't
nerdy and uncool because some of us are awesome.
They give us clarity and granularity and help us weigh up our options better in the face
of uncertainty.
And you all remember that scene in The Matrix where Neo has the best bit, where he has that
breakthrough where he starts seeing the whole world as it really is in all the little green
bits of code trickling down?
Well, we too can learn to see the world in probabilities.
You can.
And then when we do, we'll actually be better equipped to handle all the good and bad luck
that life might throw at us.
Because well, we'll never be certain which path our future will take.
We can control the likelihoods of the paths that we want.
Thank you.
Thank you.
