Hi everyone, my name is Sanders Kleinfeld and I'm excited to welcome Carlo Revelli to
Talks at Google today.
Carlo is a theoretical physicist who directs the quantum gravity group at Sontre de Physique
of Ex Marseille Université.
His contributions to the field of physics include more than 200 scientific articles as well
as two monographs on loop quantum theory.
He's also the author of the bestselling popular science books, seven brief lessons on physics,
reality is not what it seems, and the order of time, which have been translated into more
than 40 languages.
He's here today to discuss his latest book Helga Land, which explores the fundamental
principles, challenges and mysteries of quantum theory, tracing its genesis back to the revolutionary
contributions of scientists including Niels Bohr, Wolfgang Pauly, Max Born, Erwin Schrodinger,
and Werner Heisenberg, whose groundbreaking discoveries on the island of Helga Land helped
kickstart the field of quantum mechanics.
Thanks so much for joining us, Carlo.
Thank you very much, and it's a pleasure to be here.
Great, great.
So to kick things off, I have to confess, I've always found the field of quantum mechanics
to be a little bit intimidating.
So as I was reading the introduction to the book, it was really comforting to see you
characterize it as difficult to understand.
And I was wondering, for those of us like me who are fairly new to quantum mechanics,
can you give us a primer of what the field is all about and why it can be so counter-intuitive?
Sure.
So the key point is that quantum mechanics is weird, is incredibly weird.
So the sense of an ease that you are referring to is not just because, you know, it's advanced,
it's science, it's complicated, it's not just that, it's weird for everybody, including
for those who work into it.
So let me say that in a couple of words, what it is, what's good about it and why it's weird.
What it is is possibly the greatest revolution in science ever, certainly one of the greatest.
It started 100 years ago, 1925, so a century.
So it's not something new.
And it has replaced the basis of mechanics, of classical mechanics.
So it's really the core of modern science, modern physics.
And it's a basis of plenty of current technology.
I mean, we're using a computer to communicate, computers are made by little electronic circuits
which are computed and designed using quantum mechanics and works thanks to quantum phenomena,
small, small quantum things.
Lasers or a quantum effect, of course, nuclear power, nuclear bomb.
Plus, it is used today for justifying the basis of chemistry, for understanding how the sun works,
white birds, to the formation of galaxies.
So it's really the core of science and it works fantastically.
It works perfectly.
In fact, one could say is the best scientific theory we have ever, we have had ever because
we don't have any single indication of where it goes wrong.
It has always went right.
Everything has predicted is correct.
And maybe it's not the final story, but we have no sense of where, when, where are its limits.
So that's a goodie.
What's the problem?
The problem is that you can use it.
You can be an engineer, a chemist, somebody studying galaxies and use it and a good student,
I mean, students go to classes at the university and take a course in quantum mechanics,
you do the exercises, you predict, you go to the lab, you do the experiment,
it works out exactly as the theory predict.
But if you think about, if you stop and say, wait a moment, what am I doing exactly?
The way the theory is formulated is completely weird because the theory is formulated,
not telling you what happens, but only what you observe, what you see.
So it's like if you treat any system, whether it's a part of the sun or a little chip in your computer,
you treat is a closed book where you look at it and you see something and then you look at it again
and you see something else.
And in between, it doesn't make sense to fit.
If you try to fit what is in between, you start saying funny things.
So it's like the way it's talked in books is that it's about observations.
But what does nature know whether we are observing or not?
I mean, is that about us?
It's very confusing.
And people came out all sorts of ideas to understand what is really going on.
And in a century, we are really in a conceptual mess.
We don't know what is telling us the best theory we have about the world.
Yeah, yeah.
So you touched on this a minute ago, but you describe quantum mechanics as an interplay
of three key principles, observations, probability, and granularity.
I was wondering if you could elaborate a bit more on the significance of each of these concepts
in the context of quantum theory and how their synthesis allows us to model the behavior of particles.
Yeah, so two are easy.
And the third one is complicated.
And the first you mentioned is a complicated one.
So let me start from the easy ones.
The easy ones are granularity.
And that's pretty easy.
I mean, that's just a discovery about nature.
Things are granular at small scale.
They literally are.
For instance, light that comes from that lamp under my face, I give a description as an electromagnetic wave
that comes from me.
I see a sort of continuous thing.
Making me shining and lighting.
But if we make a precise measurement, we see that it arrives on my face in little photons, grains, granular.
So light really interacts with me dot by dot.
In fact, if we tune down the light and have a screen, we actually see the dots one by one.
And this granularity, it's all over.
I mean, if you, for instance, the energy of the atoms in the light, it's all over.
Of the atoms, it's quantized so that it's a quanta of energy, grains of energy.
Angular momentum for anything is to stick discrete values instead of continuous values.
So there seem to be a sort of bottom level where you go down to discreteness instead of continuity.
I used to say that continuity is an approximation to many.
Infinity is an approximation to many.
Now there is always a final number, so to say.
And that's an easy thing, number one.
The easiest thing, number two, is that it came as a surprise,
but it came as a surprise just because we were used to Newtonian science.
It was discovered with quantum mechanics that we cannot predict the future exactly,
even if we have maximal information about something.
So you're talked in physics classes before quantum mechanics.
When you go to university, that in principle, if we knew the position and velocity of every
particle universe, we could compute what happened next, which is sort of true because things are
complicated. But in principle, it's true that if you had total precision on a classical,
on a physics system, the old idea was the world is deterministic.
So that determines the future evolution forever.
Well, that's wrong. We have discovered a fact that even if you measure something
maximum that you can measure, you cannot say what's going to happen next.
What you can say, it's a probability of different happenings.
And that's right, usually it's good enough because first of all, when you have many things,
probability just, you know, average up and it becomes certainty.
Average is essentially in a certain way. But as soon as you go into a small,
you have this intrinsic probability, which is a de facto impossibility for us to predict the
future. All right, so that's the second discovery. So the world is granular and is probabilistic,
cannot predict the future. So far so good. And then there's a third one, which is the hard one,
and is the one that has given all the confusion. Well, technically it's called contextuality.
And it's a fact that the theory is not about what happens, but it's about what you observe.
Even the language, when you open the books of quantum mechanics, it's in terms of
observables instead of variables. And the theory doesn't say, imagine you have a pen moving.
The theory is not that every moment the pen has a position, has a velocity, has an orientation.
Doesn't talk about that. It takes you, if you look at it, it's here, then you close your eyes,
you look at it again, it tells you where it is. But if you try to reconstruct what happened in
between, the theory doesn't say anything. It's not only that it doesn't say anything. But if you
think about it, any possible reconstruction in between seems contradictory. And the prototypical
example, Feynman said, that's all the mystery of quantum mechanics is this example. Imagine,
as he said, if there's something going from here to here, imagine there's a wall in between
with two holes. It's called the double slit experiment in quantum mechanics. So there's a
hole here and a hole here. So you see a pen in one point, you see a pen in the other point,
and then you say, well, it has gone through one hole or the other hole. It turns out that if you
assume that it went through this hole, you get the wrong answer. If you assume it went through
this hole, you get the wrong answer. So you have to assume, so to say, that it went through both.
Namely, that when you look at it as a pen, but when you don't look at it, it's a sort of wave all
over. And that's weird. That's a weird part of it. So discreteness thinks a granular probability.
We cannot predict the future and observable. The theory, it's not about what happens,
but what we observe. And the third one is a source of the mystery, which people have started in
various directions to try to make sense of it. Right, right. And that third one, I guess, is the
one that is most famously presented in the Schrodinger's cat thought experiment that you
talk about quite a bit in the book and is also achieved a lot of prominence in popular culture.
It's been in movies and television shows. And until I really read your book, I don't think I
fully grasped the implications of it. I was thinking about it as a very epistemological
type thing where you don't know whether the cat is asleep or awake inside the box,
but it's actually really a metaphysical statement. And I was wondering if you could
talk through the experiment a bit more and discuss some of the significance of it.
Yeah, it's exactly like the two holes, right? So somehow, if you say, well, I see the particle
here, I see the particle the other side of the wall, and there are two holes. So I can make a
computation and say where I should expect the particle, and I get it right if I do quantum
mechanics. But then I say, well, imagine that at the middle of the time, it went to one hole,
okay, and then I get it wrong. And then I say, well, okay, maybe it went to the other hole,
and I also get it wrong. And then I say, well, maybe went to half probability here,
half probability here, I also get it wrong. So the only possibility is that when I'm not looking,
I have to think that it's in both, right? And then people say, okay, fine, I mean,
pence up, up in a wave and through hole, and then converge, that's the solution. But that's
also the solution. Because if I look, if I look, which hole goes through, if I look, I only see
it here, and see it there, or see it there, okay? And then what happens is that since I've seen it here,
the result later is different. So this is actually done with particles with two holes in
any laboratory, in many universities that do it for the students, and you actually see the mystery.
But if you think instead of a particle going through holes, a cat having two possibilities.
So the old Schrodinger version was a, the cat was dead or alive, but you know, it's not very nice.
So if we think the cat could be asleep or awake, the theory forces you to say that it's neither awake
nor asleep until you look. And then we're going to correct that, because I think that's a wrong
take of the story. What it means exactly, it means that if you assume that at some point,
the cat is awake, then you can predict something and it's wrong. If you assume that is
asleep, you can predict things and it's wrong. You really need to, both in some sense,
there to make the right predictions. So the theory seems to say that when you don't look at things,
they are in funny superpositions, that here and also here, the cat is asleep and also awake.
And that's not clear, because Sanders, if you were in a superposition, how would you feel?
What does it mean? Yeah. And I think that brings us to a key question that you ask in the book,
where your observations are material in the science and you ask, why does nature care
whether we observe something or not? And I was curious if you could elaborate a bit on that.
Yeah. And this is somehow, let me now shift to the general agreed sort of definition description
of the weirdness of quantum mechanics to one particular way of trying to come out of this
puzzle and all the ways to come out of the puzzle are strange. So this is the one which I find
less implausible. I mean, the other is worse. And it's a fascinating way. It's called a relational
interpretation of quantum mechanics. I've worked on it. Other people have worked on it. Scientists
have worked on it, philosophers have worked on it. So the idea is the following, that this has nothing
to do with observations. I mean, the observation is the wrong language here, that we observe it's
the wrong language here. The point, the mistake, it's confusing relation with observations,
relationality with subjectivity. And to explain what I mean, think about another case in which we
use the language of observation, but it's nothing to do with observation in physics. In fact, when
we talk about velocity, no, I mean, I think everybody who has taken elementary field physics
class knows that velocity is relative to the observer, right? So if you are on a train, you
say, oh, this is velocity zero is not moving, meaning it's not moving with respect to train.
But it's moving with respect to the earth. So the velocity of something with respect to a train
is different than the velocity with respect to the earth. And it's different, the velocity with
respect to the sun and it's different for the solar velocity with respect to the galaxy and so
on and so forth. So it makes no sense to say what is the velocity of the moon? Well, it depends,
it depends with respect to what, right? So velocity is a relational concept. It refers to two things,
not one. And we sometimes don't say with respect to what because we give it for granted. I mean,
usually we say with respect to the earth, we mean velocity with respect to the earth. I mean,
if you get a ticket speeding, it doesn't say it goes that speed with respect to the earth,
but that's what it means. And if a mother on the train says to the kid, stop, don't move,
she doesn't mean jump out of the window or don't move with respect to the earth. It means don't
move with respect to the train. So yeah, all right. So, but obviously, the relational aspect
of velocity has nothing to do with subjectivity. There's not an observer here. The moon has a
velocity with respect to the earth and velocity with respect to the sun, but not because the sun
observes the moon has a brain as a consciousness, it's nothing to do with observation, just relations.
So, I and another think that the correct way of thinking about quantum mechanics
is that it tells us that all quantities are like velocity. So they're really relations
and not all physical variables are not characteristic of the object itself are
characteristic of describe how their object interact with something else.
So things have properties relative to something else with which it is interacting.
And the property describes the interaction, not what happens to the object itself.
So objects by themselves have no properties. They have properties relative to other things
and these properties mean the interaction. Now, if you take that perspective, you throw away
you throw away the idea of observers, subjectivity, we, you know, nature doesn't care if we
look at not the things, but nature does care if two things interact or not. That's a fact,
right, nature. So when the electron hits the screen, that's a fact. And that the electron has
a position with respect to the screen. Okay, if the electron bumps against the wall, it has a
position with respect to whatever it has bounced around. But the subtlety, and that's the way out
of the tunnel, is that if something has a value as a value, the variable something has a value
with respect to something, this has no influence of the value of that value with respect to something
else. So the cat, you know, in the story, the little sugar story of the cat, the cat, there is
a little poison or something that makes him make the cat sleep that may or may not open inside
in the box. So does it open or does it open or does not open? Well, with respect to the cat,
obviously, it's one of the two, not both, because it's an actual thing that happened with respect
to the cat. But what happens with respect to the cat doesn't imply anything definitive with respect
to me. Until I interact with the cat. So the fact that the poison has got to the cat or not,
it's a fact with respect to the cat. But this doesn't forbid the fact that if I want to compute
something with respect to me, I have to consider both possibility until I do the calculation.
And that's the way out. So the way out is relationality. That's why it's called relational
interpretation. Think about reality, not as a collection of things that have properties,
but a collection of objects that interact with one another, and the properties come out in the
interactions. So think of relations rather than individual object with properties. It's a relational
thinking, which is not new in a sense, but because we think relationally, plenty of things in our
life, a lot of things are relations in our life, not entities. It's surprising that somehow all
the way down to elementary physics is relations all the way down. Yeah, yeah, it's a real key paradigm
shift of quantum mechanics, a shift away from matter as the essence of reality. In the book,
I think you expressed it really eloquently. You said, there are no elementary entities that we
can describe except in the context of their interaction with something else. This leaves
us without a foothold, no place to stand. If matter with definite and univocal properties does not
constitute the elementary substance of the world, and if the subject of our knowledge is a part of
nature, what is the world's elementary substance? From where can we begin? What is fundamental?
And I guess that's the question that I'd like to throw back at you. If we're only in a world of
relationless and relational phenomena, what is fundamental? I think as humans, we are looking
for something really substantial to plan a flag on. Do you want to see your answer? Yeah. I think
we make a mistake by aiming there. You said we as humans aim at some basis, something fundamental
on which, from which we derive everything else. If there was one, we would have found it already.
You know, humankind, let me just open up the topic a little bit. Humankind has been looking
for the fundamental ground from which everything else derives. Since ever, with a long list of
attempts, right, from God to matter, to phenomenology, observations,
urban circles, whatever information, energy, at some point people say, oh, it's all energy,
it's not matter. Philosophy, it's a constant attempt to find the principle for which everything
else derives. And nobody has been able to convince everybody else about his own. Why? Because
first of all, you can start from different points and reconstruct the world in different ways. The
world admits to be reconstructed in different ways. But more importantly, the world is a complicated
set of things which we can understand a lot about. We do because science is incredibly powerful in
connecting things, right? But physics, physics is very good because it connects to everything.
We expect that everything satisfies physical laws, right? So the universality of physics
remains very strong. But physics has tried repeatedly to find the basic ingredient.
And, you know, what is the basic ingredient in modern physics? In quantum filterian
generatility and quantum gravity, it's very slippery. Because the particles, the quarks,
the electrons, they're not the basic ingredients. They're created, destroyed. They are
quantum excitations of a field. They are this, you know, granular thing that depends on the
way you look at them. And quantum mechanics come like, you know, a violent bomb there and
shows that it doesn't work. We don't have a clear ground. But that does not mean that we
don't have a good way of thinking about the world. We do have plenty of good ways of thinking about
the world which are clear with one another. So let me say this. This is a pen, right? And there
seems to be just plenty of properties of the pen itself. It's a pen. It's black. It's oriented in
this way, in this position, this velocity. It's made by atoms, whatever you want. It's this color.
Now, if we look at all these properties one by one, we start seeing that they're not in the pen.
For instance, the fact of being a pen, obviously, is because, you know, we write with it. If somebody
came from, you know, Andromeda and look at this thing, says, well, it's a thing, but it's not a
pen because pen is something you write off. So the fact of being a pen depends on our use of it.
It's black, but that's a color. The color depends on our vision. Animals see things
with different colors. So the color is really something that pertains to the way, you know,
my eyes work, the light works, bounces on the thing. All right. So it's a it's a single piece
was not true. I can take it apart. It's made by atoms, each one has its own position of velocity
was not true, because quantum mechanics tell us that the atom position and velocity depend
on the interaction with me. Does this take away the reality of the pen? No, the pen is very real,
but it's a combination of all this relash relational relations with have with everything
else. And if you think for a moment, suppose it didn't have any relation with anything else,
I couldn't see it, I couldn't touch it, it couldn't do anything with it or nobody else. So
what would it mean to be real? It's strange, you know, reality is strange notion, we can play
around. So I think that the shift you said is a major shift, because we tend to say, okay,
whatever reality is, is a set of things with with properties, the shift from that to
reality is a set of interactions. And the objects are the nodes of this interaction,
a pen is a node of all this possible interaction. So it's, it's not dramatic in our everyday thinking,
because we think in terms of interactions, but it's dramatic in our foundation of thinking. And
I think it's, it's a step ahead, it's not a step back. Right, right. Fundamentally, everything
is relational. And as you were also alluding to earlier, there's a probable probabilistic
element to it as well. And I was interested if you could elaborate a little bit more on that as
well. It's, it's sort of the quintessential question that Einstein posed, does God blade,
does God play dice? Or as you rephrased it in your book, are the laws of nature really not
deterministic? And in the book, you say 100 years after Heisenberg's and Schrodinger's bickering
on this, the question is still open. So I'm wondering what the implications are in your
mind in terms of the deterministic nature of everything that we experience in the world.
Yeah, absolutely. The, the, it's true that we're still bickering about it. I have colleagues,
in fact, that do not like this relational reading of quantum theory. And one of the reasons for
which they don't like it is because they're very attached of the idea that the world is deterministic.
So, I mean, whatever happened today determines what happened tomorrow.
And in fact, there are other attempts to make sense of quantum theory, but careful. Let me,
let me be precise here. I keep thinking about these things. Because in these other ways,
you assume that behind the scenes, so to say, there is something else which is going on,
which is really deterministic. But for one way or the other, we have no access to this or
we cannot predict it. Right. Let me just make it concrete, because there are two,
two alternative interpretations of quantum mechanics, which are the most popular ones,
besides relational one. One is the hidden variables. And as the, as the name of the
interpretation implies, there are some variables which are hidden. Okay. So something happens
that it's in principle impossible to, to access to, which determines what's going to happen tomorrow.
But it doesn't change the fact that we cannot predict the future, right? Precisely because
it's variable or hidden. It remains the fact that we cannot. So, as I can say, if you have
something you don't know tomorrow, you can always imagine there is something today that determines
it and you don't, you don't have access to it. You can add to your, you know, set of beliefs of
what exists. That's, you know, the information of tomorrow is already there today. But what do we
get? And the other popular, another popular interpretation quantum mechanic, which has
also got out in the popular press before written books about it, it's a so-called many-world
interpretation in which, you know, the cat is really awake and also asleep. Well, when you
look at it, you see only one because you yourself split in two. And so there's one version of you
that sees the cat awake and one version sees the cat asleep. So nothing is probabilistic here
because, you know, there are two of you. But it is probabilistic, the fact that you don't know
which one you're going to be tomorrow, right? Because I look at the cat, I see it awake and I
say, okay, off the tool, there's my brother who was seen, but I didn't know before which one I've
got. So I cannot make prediction because I don't know in which sense I can, I can make
it. So again, I have to make probability. So it doesn't really matter whether that's where I'm going,
whether, you know, nature is probabilistic or not with respect to God who sees everything,
assuming that she exists, she God exists. In a sense, even if the world was completely
probabilistic, you'll say, okay, well, God sees the future. So it's already determined.
So the question is not so deep after all. I mean, there were just things happen.
And it's a fact that is impossible to predict what's going to happen tomorrow,
given maximum available information today. So I think that at the end of the day,
the unpredictability which has been discovered in fundamental physics,
it's just a fact we have to confront. And there's nothing wrong with it, right? I mean,
human kindness lived for millennia thinking that the future is unpredictable. I don't know why we
should be attached to the idea that there's absolute determinism of predictivity.
It's true, true. I think perhaps maybe we just want to be able to predict the future and that's
all there is there. Oh, yeah, we would like so much to know what happens tomorrow. Of course,
maybe that's all there is. Yeah, right. Right, right. So I think any discussion
of quantum mechanics would be incomplete if we didn't at least touch on the concept of
entanglement, which you describe as a phenomenon by which two distant objects maintain a kind of
weird connection, as if they continue to speak to each other from afar. So you describe the
scenario in which there are two entangled photons, one that's sent to Vienna and one that's sent to
Beijing, each of which could be like the color red or the color blue. But when observed, they always
turn out to be the same color. So this is very, very counterintuitive, certainly for me and I
think for a lot of other people. How does this work, these connected particles that could be
separated by vast distances? It is counterintuitive and it's very subtle when you go into details.
And in fact, it's a subtle phenomenon. I even hesitated putting a chapter in the book about
that because to get it right, exactly what happens, it's subtle. But then, as you see,
it's really a quintessential quantum phenomenon, this strange connectedness.
It's no sense in which you get a sort of sudden transfer of information from one to the other.
So it's not that one of the two is blue, decides to be blue and tell the other,
hey, I'm blue, you have to be blue. That's not what's happened. We're pretty sure about that.
Neither. What happens is that there was a previous agreement, so they knew to be
both blue before. And there were good reasons for exclude that one as well. So it's something
far more subtle and what is far more subtle is that, let me put it this way,
to check that they're both blue, you should be in both places, it's instantaneously.
And nobody's in both places, it's instantaneously. So what do we mean when we say that there is an
instantaneous transfer of information? Nobody can check that. So what is the sense of that?
What do we really mean is that if whatever happened there, if we bring the information up
and then later in time, you compare them, at the moment in which anybody can make this comparison,
it sees that they're both the same. But since phenomena are relative to an observer,
it's only in the moment in which the comparison made that this has happened. Before, it's like
the cat, which is both alive and asleep and awake. So with respect to Beijing, something happened,
with respect to Vienna, something happened, with respect to whoever gets all information and compares
something happened, but with respect to each, there is a coherent story where information
never jumps. It's only when you bring pieces together and try to just deposit that you get this
apparent instantaneous transfer of information, it's not real, because you cannot, you're not allowed
to bring these pieces. Reality is really relational in this sense. Then this relationality, you don't
see it microscopically, because it's a minimal thing, you have to do super subtle experiment
to bring it up. But the world with respect to me and the world with respect to you,
cannot be made exactly coincides. There are little discrepancies, there's a
perspectival aspect that forbids a coherence down to the Planck constant scale.
Yeah, so you refer to it as basically a dance for three, I believe, where you have one particle,
the other particle, and then the observer, and we're all participating in this together, so.
Exactly, that's what we're putting in it. Entanglement is a dance for three, not for two,
because whatever compares is a third perspective, and the third perspective is
the one that compares and is the one that doesn't see the long distance information jump.
Right, right. So earlier in the talk, and also in your book, you touched really briefly on some
of the applications of quantum mechanics that have already begun to transform technology and
society. And you mentioned lasers, semiconductors, and the physics of formation of galaxies.
I was wondering, if you look 10 to 20 years down the road, are there any other groundbreaking
advances you can potentially foresee scientists making as a result of all the research into
quantum theory that you're doing? People are working on quantum computers today.
There's a huge investment in quantum computers. You can exploit this
quantum weirdness to make computers immensely faster than the current computers with
obvious applications. The theory of quantum computers is absolutely solid,
and so it's perfectly possible to do them. The technology, it's hard, because
an object that becomes quantum is an isolated object. As soon as you start to interact with
too many things, its quantum weirdness disappears. So it's diluted out in the interaction,
and you don't see it. And that's why the actual cut, the cut is a big thing.
The interference between the quantum interference between the two cuts,
it's a very delicate phenomenon. You don't see it because the cut is too big. So you can always
assume, oh, the cut was asleep, oh, the cut was awake. So big things tend to hide quantum
behavior, and that's why making a quantum computer is hard, because you have to isolate it.
So I don't know if this is technology, I'm a theoretician, so you have to ask the people
doing technology if it's actually doable as people hope, or it is more hard than one expects,
but certainly it would change a lot. I'm sure there are other applications of quantum mechanics
we haven't seen yet. They are going to come up. It takes long to, you know, general activity,
it's older than quantum mechanics, 100 years old. We have a GPS that works thanks to general
activity. Nobody would have ever imagined at Einstein time that you're going to use general
activity to find your ways downtown Manhattan, to find where is the 27th Street.
Yeah, so we'll just have to stay tuned and see what can be developed on top of quantum mechanics.
That's right. Great, great. So we have a bunch of great questions from the audience,
so we're going to pull them up now. And we have a question from Timor here.
Are the results of the double split experiment the same when the observer is not a human?
For example, a trained animal, a robot, camera, etc.?
Yeah, I'm very happy with this question, because in a sense, this is a key question,
and the answer is a resounding yes. A strong yes. I mean, there is absolutely no evidence
that there is anything special with humans when things happen. You can try to do any quantum
experience, interference or entanglement or anything else, and replace or you're looking human with a
robot, and the result is absolutely the same. And that's what strongly indicates that there are
some people who say, oh, the quantum mechanics really happen when consciousness says something,
but consciousness has to do with that. Great.
Jay-Z is wondering to build on Timor's question, do the results depend on the expectation of what
the results might be? For example, if expecting the results to be A or B, do you get a different
result versus if expecting A, B or C? Do our expectations matter?
No, they don't. Certainly they don't. What matters, let me, don't get it wrong.
So let's say the full thing. What matters is what we look at. So if we look at one thing,
if we look at another thing, the result is contradictory in one sense. But not because
we look at one thing or the other thing, because the kind of interaction that we have in one case
and the kind of interaction that, in the other case, probes the system differently.
And the system behaves, manifests itself in interactions. So whether it's an interaction
of one kind or an interaction of the other kind brings up different properties of the system,
and this might be contradicted to one another, namely one interaction cancels the information
about the other interaction. And this was completely clear in the early days of quantum
mechanics when Bohr and Heisenberg and Company were discussing on that. But they were thinking in
terms, I observe this and I observe that. I use this machine to interact with the quantum system,
this machine interact with the quantum system. Another thing to do with the machine, with the
apparatus, is just the kind of interaction, the kind of Hamiltonian interaction term that is in play
that determines which quantities are realized in an interaction. So nothing human, nothing
depending on what we expect or anything which is mental, everything is down there physical,
who is interacting with whom, and properties are in the interaction, not in the things.
Another question. David is wondering, this relationality seems similar to the fact that
we can't interact with anything outside of our light cone and relativity or the inside of a
black hole in general. Do you view this the same way? Yeah, there is quite an analogy,
even if there are differences, because the theories are different and the details are different,
but there is a strong analogy. In fact, even more because, let me put it this way, relativity,
Einstein relativity, it's a discovery that we will make a mistake when we thought that we
assumed that simultaneity is absolute. Two things happening in distant places,
we can say which one happened first or they happened at the same time. So there was a wrong
assumption. And in fact, the remarkable thing is that Einstein understood that, that's what Einstein
understood. In a formalism that was already there, because had been developed by Lawrence,
by Poincaré, by a mathematical physicist before him. So he understood what it meant.
And quantum mechanics is similar, because we have this formalism that works to describe nature,
we didn't understand what it means. And the relation of quantum mechanics is that, yeah,
we understand what it means. It means that we're making a mistake, like relativity will make a
mistake of thinking there is absolute simultaneity. Here we're making a mistake in thinking that there
is an absolute reality of the properties, independent of the interactions. So simultaneity is relative
to a state of motion with respect to which you define it. The values in quantum mechanics are
relative to the kind of interaction which are there. And in both cases, in fact, the analogy is
strong, because in both cases, we usually are, we use a language of observers, you know, relativity
is relative to the observer, and quantum interaction are relative to the observer,
quantum measurement relative to observer. Ask if it was something subjective, but there's nothing
to do with subjectivities. Relativity in both cases.
Question from Krish. If all particles are the result of fundamental interactions,
does it also apply to the fundamental point particles described by the standard model too?
Yes, very much so. In fact, I don't know if it's a physicist or not, but the popularization version
of the standard model is that, yeah, there are a certain number of particles and they bounce
against one another, and that's the world. But, you know, if you take a good
class in quantum theory and try to understand the quantum model for real, that's not so simple,
not at all, because these particles are actually quantum excitations of a field. So they're not,
the particles are not down there. The particle is what happened when the field interacts with you.
So much so, so much so that when we compute, you know, in particle theory, you take, you throw
two particles in, and then you see what comes out, and you compute it before. In the computation,
you're actually summing the different Feynman diagrams, which are different stories of what
happened in between. So to compute the probability of some outcome, you consider all possible outcomes,
and you sum all of them. So that's exactly Schrodinger-Cat. You're saying the two particles come
in, and this happened, but also this happened, but also this happened. So it's like the Schrodinger-Cat
is alive, but is also asleep, and it's also this, and it's also this, and also this, or the particles
through the two holes. It passes by here, but also here, also here. So explicitly, in quantum field
theory, if you look at it, the way we do calculations is not to add all that the world is made by
particles at both. The world is made by particles at a particle only when they interact with me,
or with an apparatus, or with anything else. In between, they open up in a cloud of possibility
exactly as I was saying before. So yes, the particles of the standard model
are not entities. Let me be precise. I mean, Google is full of smart people, so let me put it.
In fact, I'm giving this answer to you, trying to be much more sharp and precise than usual,
when I talk to the journal public, assuming that you don't know quantum mechanics, but still.
Particles are not entities in current standard model, quantum theory. Particles are modes of
interactions of the field. It's how the field interacts with something else, my machine,
my detector at CERN that measures something.
Another question. Sangamitra is wondering, does an interaction change the state of what's being
interacted with? So is there any way to actually know the true nature, state, attributes of anything
in the quantum world?
The answer to the first question is yes, and in fact, it was Heisenberg himself, which is the
true person who opened the quantum mechanic door first, who later noticed it. So in quantum
mechanics, when you interact with something, you're always affected somewhere. And for a while,
it was hoped, in fact, he hoped that that was it. That was the only thing we have discovered.
The only thing I've discovered is that there's no way to affect something, to measure something
without changing it a little bit. But that's not sufficient for understanding quantum mechanics.
This subsistence with this discussion clarified. This is true. You cannot
delicately look and not affect the system, except in some particular situation, which you can.
But that's not sufficient to explain the mysteries of quantum mechanics.
Now, for the second part of the question, again, I think that the right direction to think here is
not all right. So we affect what is there, so we don't know what is there. I mean, forget what we
don't know. We are not describing an unknowable world. If we try to fill up, we get strange nonsense
stories which are useless, in my opinion, and misleading. We should describe the phenomena.
And the phenomena is what happened interaction, not what happened before or after. And that's a key
message. Talk in terms of relations, not what is... And if I may, just a small parenthesis,
to enlarge a little bit the discussion, we think in terms of relations all the time. People who
do software, they're not dealing with entities, they're doing with relations. People who do
psychology, they're not doing with entities, they're doing with relations. People who do economy,
they're not really doing with entities, entities so far away. They do with relations between
economical actors. If you think that your family structure that's relational, it's not entities.
We use relational notions all over. And when I talk about the pen, I clarify this. So many things
we consider in the things are really, really relational. So my message is that if quantum
mechanics can be thought effectively in this way, we can look at our general way of looking at the
world and ask, let's get away with this obstination of having, of willing to find entities behind
any phenomena. Question from Bo on the many world's hypothesis. If we observe the cat asleep,
wave function has collapsed. Is this because we'll exist in the reality with this outcome versus a
separate parallel, one where the cat is observed awake? So let me distinguish. In the many world,
there's no collapse of the wave function. So the wave function never collapses.
The wave function has two components, one with the cat asleep, one with the cat not asleep.
I look at the cat and my wave function splits in two. So now there are two carolos,
one that sees the cat asleep, one sees the cat sleeping, and so on. So this means that there
are not two copies of me, plenty of copies of me that see the world in all possible ways.
This is coherent. It's not incoherent. I have intelligent friends that think this is reasonable.
But I don't think this is useful. It's multiplying copies of all of us in a way that
I feel doesn't help. From the relational perspective, there's no wave function.
There's nothing to collapse because there's no wave function. Wave function is just our
calculation. It's like the prediction of the weather. You look at the thermometer and you
change your prediction about the weather. It's not because the weather changes. You get some more
information and your prediction jumps. What is real or what we call real in the relational
interpretation is just the actual seeing the cat alive or asleep or not or some interference
fact of the cat. So again, there is no collapse of the wave function in the world. There is a
collapse in your calculations just before you adjourn your data because now you want to compute
something else whose probability has changed because something has happened.
Next question from João. Thanks for the talk. How do you suggest combating the idea that quantum
mechanics needs no interpretation and those who are against the study of the foundations of physics?
Good. So there are two arguments for quantum mechanics needs no interpretation.
One is good and one is bad. So what is good is that, well, I don't care. I use quantum mechanics
and it works. And that's a very good argument because if an engineering is studying quantum
computers, I don't care about interpretation. I know exactly what my computer is going to
speed up, speed out the probability distribution of the value outcome. And I don't want to know
what happened inside. He's right. He doesn't need to think too much about that. But science is not
only about applications. Science is about understanding better and go ahead. I do quantum
gravity. I want to apply quantum mechanics to general relativity and I need to understand
quantum mechanics better to understand how to apply to general relativity.
The objection, the second argument is, well, the different interpretations cannot be
empirically distinguished. At present, you know, relational quantum mechanics,
many walls, hidden variables, you cannot make an experiment and distinguish.
So what do we talk about? And here is my answer to that.
Is the Earth the center of the universe or not? That was a huge debate in the Renaissance,
all the way from Copernicus to Galileo, Newton. You might say, of course, it's a scientific debate.
Not only is it a scientific debate, it was an extraordinarily fruitful scientific debate because
changing our views of whether or not the Earth is the center of the universe completely changed
our way of thinking about motion, about velocity, about the solar system. We rearranged things instead
of Earth planets. We had sun, planets, satellites. So it's completely rearranging of that. This rearranging
was needed to go to do Newtonian physics, to do physics. But if you think for a moment,
the Earth being the center of the universe is a testable hypothesis. Can we measure it,
whether the Earth is the center of the universe or not? No, of course we cannot. It's a,
there's no measure that tells us that it's the center. In fact, many people at the time,
including the people who condemn Galileo, by the way, were saying, what are we talking about?
The distinction between the Copernican system, when the Earth spins and goes around the sun,
and the old Ptolemyic system with the Earth in the middle, cannot be solved empirically. And
they were right. It cannot be solved empirically because you can always rearrange this from the
point of view of the Earth. Just everything becomes already complicated. You don't go
into science. So science is not just about things which are distinguishable empirically.
Cool science need to check theories, distinguish them empirically. But the actual discussion is
how about, how about to think the world? What is the best perspective to think the world?
And the Copernican revolution, the Copernical perspective obviously was better.
History, clarify that completely. We would not have had Galileo, Huygens, Kepler, Newton,
and modern science without the Copernican revolution. So it's a similar discussion,
I believe. It is a philosophical discussion. It's a conceptual discussion, but it's a
scientific discussion. There's one perspective that I think will take us ahead in the future.
And I have my own views on that. Others have different views. But the actual discussion is very
productive and it's core of the scientific debate. So if a scientist want to ignore it,
it's fine. Let me just do something. We don't have all to do the same thing.
But if the argument is, this is not a scientific discussion, that's definitely a wrong argument,
in my opinion. Next question from Doug. Were you surprised to find echoes of these ideas in
Buddhist philosopher Nagarjuna's writings? Have his ideas changed or influenced your thinking
about quantum mechanics? I guess someone's read the book. Somebody read the book. The book is
a lot of quantum mechanics. It's not just this part that we discussed, the key ideas. It's also
about a description of the historical origin. So Heisenberg discovered the theory in the island
and Schrodinger discovered the theory while making love with his secret girlfriend and all that.
But then there's a long part of the book in which I discuss a sort of more general
philosophical implication of this relation of perspective. And one chapter I have Lenin,
and Lenin philosopher, the head of the Soviet Union in his philosophical texts,
discussing with a great Russian intellectual, which is Alexander Bogdanov, issues which are
exactly parallel to the discussion about quantum mechanics. And then I have a chapter of the book
of Nagarjuna, which is a monk, a Buddhist monk of many centuries ago, a second century in India,
which is a super classic of Indian philosophy. It's like Aristotle played a plateau for western
philosophy. It did not influence me in thinking about quantum mechanics originally. I discovered
it very late, and I discovered it because people kept telling me, I mean, this relational perspective
that you're defending, it resonates a lot with a perspective of Nagarjuna. So I read it, and I was
extraordinarily taken by this, not the mystical aspect, but this is another mystical reading of
the book of Nagarjuna. It's a logician, Nagarjuna, and it's a metaphysician. It has a way of describing
reality in terms of relations, exactly. So in a sense, it offers a rather solid
philosophical perspective in terms of which the relational interpretation,
you can think of the relational interpretation. You don't have to think of relational interpretation
in terms of Nagarjuna thinking, but it has strong arguments, for instance, counter
the objection like, oh, you cannot have a relation without having entity with properties to start
with. Nagarjuna is very clear in saying that's wrong. In fact, it's the opposite. If you have a
relation necessarily, the idea, you cannot build relations out of entities with properties.
There's something primary in the relations. So it did help me clarifying things and discard
some wrong idea. I took something out of it, definitely, but it was not influential. It was
actually coming out to me and my colleagues' ideas of relation to relational quantum mechanics.
And obviously, Nagarjuna knew nothing about quantum mechanics, I hope.
Great. So we have time for, I think, one more question.
Time flies.
Yeah. Question from Brian. How do you view time in a series of instantaneous observations
within the framework of relationships?
Ah, that's the last question. It would require a long discussion. I could give you my
perspective, but it would take time. So let me say something else.
Heisen, quantum mechanics was born in 1925, not in 1926 when Schrodinger wrote the Schrodinger
question there before. And in fact, Heisenberg got the Nobel Prize for the invention of quantum
mechanics with a spectacular paper, which he just got the right idea of observables
and non-commutativity. But then that was very, very, very confusing. It's Max Born with his
collaborators who actually put up the theory. So the full quantum mechanics is in two or three
papers written by Max Born and his collaborator in Heisenberg, in parallel to Iraq in 1925.
And the way what Max Born had in mind, and I think he was on the right track about space and time,
is that we should, when you think about quantum phenomena, it's wrong to sort of presuppose
a continuous space, positions, and time, and put into this space, the particles, and try to
localize everything. It's other way around. We should think of quantum mechanics as a set of
interactions, I would say today, observations, a set of facts, which are discrete. And the
temporal and spatial reality comes up from the large number of little facts happening. So it's
a discreteness that builds up the continuity of space and time because we have large scale with
respect to the Planck constant. That was Max Born's perspective. And I think that's the right way of
viewing that. So we should start from the realization of variables and interactions
in standard quantum mechanics, the outcome of the measurements in the language of the books,
and not put space and time before that. We should put space and time after that. And that becomes
a bit confused in saying like that, but becomes very, very clearly in quantum gravity. Because
in quantum gravity, that's exactly the case. There's just no space time continuous. Space
time continuous is built by the quantum phenomena. Well, on that note, we are out of time. So I want
to thank you again, Carlo, for joining us at Toxic Google. And everyone, please check out
Carlo's new book, Hell Go Land, now available. So thank you again very much, Carlo.
Thank you very much. This was great. And thank you for the question and also for the great
question of the public, very, very sharp and good. I enjoyed it a lot. Great. Thank you.
