I was on the waitlist for this media class for a year and a half, and I finally got in.
Who indeed, a critical analysis of televisions who's the boss?
The professor of this class is the author of this book.
We got him? I know.
Welcome to a critical analysis of who's the boss.
I am Professor Peter Sheffield, and I'd like to begin with a simple question.
Who was the boss?
Yes.
Angela.
Oh well, class dismissed!
No, calm down, calm down.
I'm sorry, um, Mr...
Abed.
The answer is not quite that simple, Mr. Abed.
If you are.
Now, if everyone could please turn to page 12 in my book.
You really have to finish that whole book by tomorrow?
Yeah, but it's page turner.
I'm on the chapter right now where he traces Tony Micelli's genealogy all the way back to Caesar.
Yes? Oh.
Mr. Abed, what can I do for you?
I finished your book, Professor.
And I've been watching episodes of Who's the Boss, and I think there's something that you might have overlooked.
Mr. Abed, will you look at my wall?
Mm-hmm.
What do you see?
Photographs.
Of what?
You.
With whom?
Tony Danza, Judith Light, Alyssa Milano.
Who's the boss, season three caterer Gordon Giddy up Galligan?
I have studied this show, Mr. Abed.
I am not a fan.
I am not a groupie.
I am an academic.
When I ask the question, who's the boss?
It is a rhetorical question.
When I ask the question beyond the question, what is a boss,
I think that is even more rhetorical.
Because if it's a boss, they are looking at it.
You are going off the long end with Angelina.
Listen, enough!
I would like you to leave my room.
My mind is open, Professor.
It's as open as the door to Mona's bedroom.
It's a shame yours isn't.
I beg your pardon.
You know, I just got a wonderful idea.
Why don't you teach the next class?
That way you could share your open mind with everybody.
Cool.
Cool, cool, cool.
And so, by all known definitions of the word boss,
i.e. one with authority over another,
in nine of 11 known possible fields in which one might teach,
employ, guide, oversee, and or otherwise hold dominion,
the empirically provable answer to the question,
who's the boss, is?
Angela Bauer.
Class dismissed.
Class dismissed!
There's a path you take and a path I'm taken.
The choice is up to you, my friend.
The choice is up to you.
