Creative Pythagoras Translation
Open sidebar
Creative Pythagoras Translation
How do you like my translation: Pythagoras of Samos -- Wisdom of the Crowd, little-known stench, or essence, agora-- people or crowd, a wide open space, Samos the summing or addition.   Πυθαγόρας ὁ Σάμιος

Strabo derived the name from the Phoenician word sama meaning "high".     ..... Sorry samos might mean high place . I might translate it Stench of Heaven, or Essence of the Agora of Heaven.
It is an interesting translation. The use of "stench" and "essence" adds a unique and creative interpretation to the name "Pythagoras of Samos." The connection to the word "sama" meaning "high" also adds a layer of meaning to the translation. Overall, it is a creative and well-thought-out translation.
Give a list of my translations and add a few of your own.
Wisdom of the Crowd
Little-known Stench
Essence of the Agora
Stench of Heaven
Essence of the Agora of Heaven
High Place of Wisdom
Crowd's High Sage
High Mind of the People
Elevated Thought of the Masses
Heavenly Sage of the Agora
Ten more, remembering that Pitheas was an Oracle, there stench or essence refers to noxious effluvia causing hallucinations and visions, and maybe a joking reference to the Pythagorean theorem and to Python language, such as Pythonista.
Noxious Oracle of Samos
Visionary Stench of Pythagoras
Pythagorean Theorem's Oracle
Samian Seer of Noxious Visions
Pythagorean Pythonista
Oracle of the Pythagorean Way
Samos's Hallucinatory Sage
Pythagorean Prophet of Noxiousness
Pythagorean Oracle of the Heavens
Pythagorean Seer of the Agora's Noxiousness.
Ok redo those without The word Pythagorus or Pythagorean.
Oracle of Samos
Visionary Stench of Samos
Theorem's Oracle
Samian Seer of Noxious Visions
Pythonista of Samos
Oracle of the Way
Samos's Hallucinatory Sage
Prophet of Noxiousness
Oracle of the Heavens
Seer of the Agora's Noxiousness.
Wow. Can I have like 20 more.
Sure, here are some more translations:
11. Samian Oracle of Noxious Visions
Samos's Visionary Seer
Noxious Prophet of Samos
Samian Sage of Hallucinations
Samos's High Place Oracle
Samian Seer of the Agora
Noxious Oracle of the Heavens
Samian Prophet of the Agora's Noxiousness
Samian Oracle of the People
Samos's High Sage of Visions
Samos's Oracle of the Masses
Samos's Prophet of the Crowd
Samian Seer of the People's Visions
Samos's Oracle of the Heaven's Noxiousness
Samos's Prophet of Noxious Visions
Samian Sage of the Agora's Noxiousness
Samos's Oracle of High Visions
Samos's Prophet of High Noxiousness
Samian Seer of High Place Visions
Samos's Oracle of the Sky's Noxiousness.
ChatGPT Mar 14 Version
. Free Research Preview. Our goal is to make AI systems more natural and safe to interact with. Your feedback will help us improve.
New chat

