You know, Dennis is one of my heroes from a long time ago,
back from the very earliest works.
My name is Astha Symes and welcome to Live Longer World.
I really enjoyed your book, Dance to the Tune of Life.
I think it's such an eye-opening book.
And I know one thing you mentioned in the book
is why neo-darwinism is a reductionist approach
to biology and is, for all practical purposes, incorrect.
And instead, you're advocating for a more integrative
systems approach, which I'm sure we'll dive into.
But I wanted to ask you one thing on your journey,
which is that you, in fact, say that you started
from a reductionist camp when you were studying
ion channels and cell membranes,
which you did pioneering work in.
So my question is, did some of your work
studying ion channels inform the approach
you take to systems biology now?
It does, but realizations later than occurred at the time.
You see, amongst the physiologists I was working with
at University College London, I was regarded as doing
close to the most reductionist account
of a biological process as you could have
single channels in membranes enabling processes to occur.
And it seemed as though investigating the processes there,
representing them by sets of differential equations,
was automatically a very reductionist approach
compared to those who are looking at the effects
of hormones on a system as a whole.
Those who are looking at the whole gastric system,
those looking at the whole immune system,
you can begin to see why that was characterized
by others largely, but accepted by me at the time
that this was effectively a reductionist approach.
It was later that I came to realize that if you come
to understand that all of that is integrated
through the cell surface voltage,
which is a global property of the cell,
you are not being reductionist at all.
You're actually saying the accumulation
of all of that movement of charge is contributing
to that electrical phenomenon.
And therefore, in the end, what you're doing
is talking about a higher level of causation
than the components of the cell.
So that's why in the end,
I came to see it as being a top-down process.
But it wasn't the way I viewed it
when I first published in 1960.
I would have been shocked if somebody told me then,
then you are the most non-reductionist physiologist possible.
Well, that would have deeply shocked me then.
But it doesn't shock me now.
And in fact, I see the Hodgkin cycle,
which is that interaction
between the electrical global property of the cell membrane
and the individual components of the ion channels
as being one of the prime examples
of a global property influencing the molecular properties.
Interesting.
So say there's a young researcher who comes to you
and says that Professor Dennis,
I am looking at ion channels and their role in cancer.
And I also want to take the systems level approach.
Would you say that it's okay
on recognizing that the cell voltage
and the voltage of cell membranes is a global property
and then applying that
with the more specific reductionist approach?
How would you, what advice would you give
to combine the two approaches perhaps?
Well, you have to combine the two.
I don't reject the reductionist approach.
You need the upward causation
from the individual molecular components
as well as the constraints from the global property
of the cells, tissues, organs and so on.
So I don't reject the reductionist approach.
I incorporate it into what I see as inevitably
a multi-level approach to causation in biological systems.
So I am still at heart, therefore,
a reductionist in the sense that I want to calculate
how those ion channels contribute
to the function they contribute to.
But at the same time,
I recognize that they are constrained
not only by the particular potential of that cell,
but also through connections between the various cells,
the properties from a global point of view
of the whole tissue and then of the whole organ and so on.
You cannot, for example, understand a cardiac arrhythma
like a ventricular fibrillation
at the level of a single cell.
You have to understand how waves of re-excitation
can travel around the ventricle.
And that depends on very many things,
the particular fiber structures that occur
in the ventricle of the heart
and which pathways are likely to be good and which not.
And the variations in the ion channel mechanism
that give rise to differences in the duration
of the electrical event in different parts of the heart.
That is, as it were, beautifully orchestrated
to try to prevent re-excitation,
which is to say that the very structure of the heart
as the density of ion channels varies
from, let's say, the base of the ventricle
to the tip of the ventricle,
how those changes are orchestrated
is itself a way of trying to prevent those arrhythmias.
So once you see all of that,
you naturally see, in that case,
an organ level constraint of the molecular processes,
which means you just can't understand
the ventricular arrhythmia
just from the reductionist's viewpoint.
Yeah, so maybe now is a good time actually
to talk about some of the flaws you think
with neo-diarrhenism,
because that seems to take a very reductionist approach,
only perhaps looking at molecules in the DNA.
So what would you say is wrong with neo-diarrhenism?
Oh, absolutely everything.
Let me clarify that a little bit.
Well, it's got so many assumptions
about molecular biological processes
that I think are simply incorrect.
Number one, it claims as Dawkins does in his books
and as many of the more, how should I put it?
I mean, there are different varieties of people
who favor the modern synthesis as it is often called.
And some are very much neo-diarrhenists, some are less so.
But taking in a broad way,
one of the critical claims is that DNA
can replicate itself like a crystal.
That was introduced by Alvin Schrodinger in 1942.
He didn't know the genetic material would be DNA,
but he did know that it would have to have been
at a molecular level in order for there to be enough
information to be transmitted down the generation.
So at that time, of course, physicists were using
X-ray crystallography to understand
the structure of very big molecules.
I remember watching Dorothy Hodgkin here in Oxford
at the time when she was working on insulin
and then later on penicillin and working out the structures
as those complicated systems by using X-ray crystallography.
Now, what that led Schrodinger to do was to say,
well, there's no problem about reproduction
of the molecular sequence of whatever the genetic material is.
Of course, we now know it's DNA.
It's just that, as we now realize,
the base pairs come to join each other up together
as the system unravels and forms a new pair of DNA molecules.
Well, up to a point it does.
And that point is known to be accurate
to about one in 10,000 base pairs.
Now, if you and I wrote an article,
and there was only one typo in a 10,000-word article,
we'd be very pleased.
But this is nowhere near enough for a DNA sequence
of three billion base pairs.
There would be half a million, at least, of errors
at the rate at which self-replication can occur.
What happens?
The cell orchestrates a system of cut-and-paste enzymes
which come in and, well, one says laboriously,
but actually they do it very quickly.
I mean, they work systematically,
going along the loops of the DNA as it's unraveled
and then put back together
and correcting all of those errors.
Now, that's a system property.
We don't know how to reproduce that outside a living organism.
So I would say to the near Darwinist,
DNA does not self-replicate.
It can't.
And it needs a living cell to do so.
And indeed, outside a living cell,
if you put all of my DNA,
as Richard Dawkins told me two years ago
in a debate with him,
then we could inscribe your DNA in blocks of granite,
the C's, G's, A's and T's,
and we'd keep those blocks of granite for 10,000 years
and then we'd be able to recreate you.
I said, no, you can't.
Why not?
Well, where would you get my mother's egg cell
as it was in 1936?
Well, you can see the point here.
It led people to a very simplistic idea
that from DNA, you could automatically recreate
a person, an organism,
exactly as it is in its first incarnation, if you like.
We can all be reincarnated as many times as we wish.
Well, one might sort of wish to be a bit of a Buddhist
in order to get away with that,
but I don't think even the Buddhists would accept
that that was the way they were going to do it
if they do it at all.
So I think there's the first break,
it seems to me, in the Neodauanist mode.
DNA simply does not replicate like a crystal.
You have to have a living organism to enable it to do so.
The second one is this lovely thing called the viceman barrier.
That's the idea that the germ cells in the future,
egg and sperm, are protected from any changes in the body.
Well, Darwin never agreed with that.
He actually introduced a theory,
which he couldn't prove at the time.
He admitted he couldn't prove it.
He invented the idea that the body naturally transmits
information from its cells to the germ line
to enable information to be passed on to the next generation.
He was ridiculed for that idea by Wallace,
one of his co-discoverers of the theory of natural selection
and by viceman.
And viceman particularly, just after Darwin's death in 1882,
in 1883, he proclaimed the necessity of the viceman barrier.
That is, there's no way in which cell tissue
and organ properties can be transmitted to the germ line.
Well, we found the vesicles that do that
and for around 20 years now,
we've known that all cells in the body
are pouring out tiny packets
that give a snapshot of many of the control molecules
that are concerned with the metabolism
and other processes occurring in those cells.
And those vesicles have been shown to transmit
down to the germ line to carry RNAs,
even DNA to the germ cells.
So I think the viceman barrier is not any longer a barrier.
Now, I forgot what the third one was,
but I have around three molecular biological mechanisms
that the near Darwinists assume
that just don't work when you work them through.
Those are two of them.
And I'm sure during this conversation,
I'll remember the third.
Koresk, Dennis, on that last point,
are you emphasizing that there is a parallel heredity
mechanism functioning alongside DNA
in terms of these vesicles?
I mean, there's other cytoplasmic components,
cytoskeleton, of course, and so on.
Or are you emphasizing the idea
that once you've passed on that material,
it can actually get integrated into the genome
and then also pass along along the conventional route?
Like how important is that aspect?
Yes, both I think can occur.
And we know that because after all,
we have a huge amount of our DNA.
It's more than the DNA involved in protein coding
that's come from viruses.
I mean, it's clear that incorporation of new DNA
from other organisms into the germline
has occurred many times during the process of evolution.
So I think we can say there's both occurring.
Epigenetic inheritance, of course,
which would be, let's say, RNAs determining
how much of a gene is expressed
will be transmitted down through the germline.
And the possibility of actual new DNA
being incorporated into the germline,
I think both can occur.
Now, I think we need to emphasize another major point here.
You're going to have to give space
for those future experiments that characterize that
in greater detail to occur.
Even major standard evolutionary biologists
will now accept epigenetic inheritance.
Pratuma has done so just last year
in a review article that he published.
He's one of the big textbook writers
from the modern synthesis point of view.
His textbook is called Evolution.
Holds 600 pages of it.
He's now accepted that we have to take into account
epigenetic inheritance in addition to the DNA inheritance.
But I would say we now need to make it possible
for people to get the grants necessary
to pursue these ideas in more detail
than has been pursued at the moment.
The reason is very simple.
The point I would make is this.
We can follow with fluorescent labeling
of RNAs, DNAs and proteins.
We can follow around two, three, four,
perhaps a little bit more molecules at the same time.
But that's a tiny fraction
of what any vesicle can contain.
So it's tedious work.
You have first of all to decide
which of the molecules you're going to label
with fluorescent labels.
And you're limited in the number you can do
that have different colors of fluorescence
if you're going to identify those molecules in the vesicles.
And indeed, that's the only way
you can visualize the vesicles
because they're too tiny to be visualized
by standard microscopy.
Labeling of fluorescent dyes
is about the only way we can easily identify
what molecules have been passed down
from the vesicles to the germ cells.
But that's very restrictive, you see,
because there will be millions of different molecules
in a single vesicle to be faced
with only being able to label three or four of those
otherwise we can't make out the differences
is very tedious.
So I think we're going to have to be,
well, first of all, people investigating
those kinds of processes are going to have to be given
the funding and the space necessary to do it.
It's very important to do it.
But at the same time, it's going to be tedious
and take time to really work out.
So that's why I think the presumption,
which, well, I interact now with a whole group
of around a dozen younger academics working
in trying to get the funding for the experiments
they want to perform.
And almost universally, they say
that most of their grants are rejected.
And the reason is very simple.
It is that the rejection will be on the basis
that it just simply disagrees with standard theory.
Well, we have to break out of that mindset.
Dennis, in your estimate to just ballpark,
what percentage of the information that is used
by an organism, let's say embryogenesis onwards
is genetic versus all other sources put together?
What would you guess as a breakdown?
I guess.
Yeah, just the relative weighing of how much you do think
is actually in the primary DNA sequence
versus all the other epigenetic stuff that can exist.
I don't think we really know.
See, even if you just ask the question,
how does a developing embryo
from the earliest stages, let's say,
initially two, four, eight and 16 cells,
eventually gastrulation into a three-dimensional object,
how do all of those differentiations occur
into what in the adult may be around 200
different types of cell,
distinguishable by the protein concentrations,
the variations, therefore, in gene expression?
And clearly that is enormous as a range of variation.
We're talking, aren't we, about in some cases,
cells with long fibrous tissue
that can form a nerve cell
compared to a liver cell,
which is focusing on metabolism.
And so I would say the epigenetic inheritance
that has to occur there and how it occurs
must be contributing a very large fraction indeed
to the differentiation process.
But what do we know at the moment?
We know that the cells do start to differentiate
and that as they go from being stem cells to being,
what shall we call it, specific types of stem cells,
and then finally into the adult cells,
that all of that is orchestrated by epigenetic processes.
It seems to me that the potential information there
is at least as great as the three billion base pairs of DNA.
I don't know how to calculate it really.
And I sometime ago published a paper on the,
well, what I called the analog and digital information
in single cells.
And of course, the digital information in DNA
is easy to compute.
You've got three billion base pairs.
You can convert that into a binary form
and get an idea of the total amount of information
with the analog information,
which is the structure of it all.
And an egg cell is an exceedingly complex structure
with all of the organelles inside the cell
as well as the cell itself.
I mean, you can represent it, of course,
almost any degree of information
if you convert that into digital information.
It's analog in the sense that it's not how best to put this.
I mean, yes, at an individual molecular level,
you could imagine computing it all digitally,
but that's too fine a grid to really be useful.
At any reasonable grid density
for determining the total amount of analog information,
I think it's easy to show,
and I have shown that,
that the total amount of information
can easily exceed the three billion base pairs of the DNA.
But then how do you do the comparison?
I mean, one is, as I said, analog the other digital.
It's never going to be possible
to come to a precise way
of representing the comparative influence
of those forms of inheritance.
I mean, yeah, one thing that makes it hard to quantify
is that we have to first agree on what the observer is
that's interpreting the information.
So it's easy for DNA because we've decided
that it's the specific base pairs
and the groups of them that matter,
and so that's what we quantify.
But in these other scenarios,
we have to first say,
what is the actual observable
that the rest of the biological system
is interpreting as information
and probably many of them overlapping, right?
So that makes it much harder.
But I wasn't even trying to quantify the information.
I was just sort of imagining,
like imagine the biology textbook for 50 years from now.
And so let's say it's a thousand pages long.
And so now the question is,
how many of those pages are about DNA
and all the DNA associated material
versus how much of it, you know,
where is the emphasis?
That's kind of, I like to try to think forward and say,
I think that, yes.
Now that's not too difficult to answer, Mike.
I think they're going to be at least equal.
That's my best guess.
And that sometimes those textbooks
will have to be written to take that into account.
I'm curious when you say that
it probably lies in some of these epigenetic processes.
I mean, do we know or have theories
on what the epigenetic processes entail,
some of the more specifics of what it includes?
Well, the original definition of epigenetics,
of course, was Waddington's way back in 1950s.
And he saw it as a general constraining
of the actions of individual genes
by the organisms as a whole.
He didn't have the concept of epigenetics
that we have today, which is that of marking
of particular parts of the DNA with methylation
or whatever other process might occur
and the marking of the histone molecules,
both of which can alter DNA expression.
So now I've already forgotten what your question was.
Sorry about this.
Yes, can you remind me again?
Yeah, no, I was asking more if we know some specifics
of what epigenetics and epigenetic processes may include.
Maybe it's like one piece of it is say,
iron channels and bioelectricity.
Maybe there's another component of it.
Well, I would say it's occurring everywhere.
Wherever there is a need to alter gene expression
is epigenetics that will do it.
When I exercise, for example,
I am telling my muscles to make more actin and myosin.
I mean, I'm not telling them as it were deliberately like that.
Well, in a sense I am, I'm exercising.
And I know as a matter of fact
that that will tell the relevant cells
to grow more of those proteins.
So it seems to me that this must be ubiquitous,
that it's like a continuous rain
of epigenetic effects on the organism and its cells,
not just an occasional intervention
that we might think about.
And so I take the view that at base, the DNA information,
that's the sort of hard inheritance,
if you want to call it that,
with the epigenetic being sometimes described
as soft inheritance.
That's as it were, the basic,
which without which there wouldn't be the proteins
that we make anyway.
And that's straightforward.
This bit of DNA codes for this protein, that's fine.
We can quantify that pretty accurately now.
But the epigenetic processes are not like that.
They're almost continuously variable.
And it depends in my case,
how often do I go to my dance club tutor
and get trained in prancing around the dance hall?
Well, I do that as often as I can now
because I'm trying to look after my health.
There's another fact.
But the point I'm making is that this will vary enormously
from individual to individual.
And so when I think about it,
I usually feel that the epigenetic changes
are far and away, the bigger ones.
So I know both you and Mike disagree that DNA,
or agree that DNA is not the blueprint for life.
It doesn't have the code for life.
I'm curious then, do you think there is
a code for life somewhere else,
perhaps in some of the epigenetic processes,
or is that not fair to say?
No, I don't think of it that way.
I think life itself is the creator of life.
Now, you might think that's a bit of a get out,
what it is, and I understand that.
But at the same time, I think we've got to recognize
that living organisms have certain properties
that are just almost by definition true of them.
They have purposive behavior.
They have the ability to alter what their DNA is doing,
possibly even altering their DNA.
Well, immune systems are doing that all the time
when we get invaded by a new virus.
We quickly create new DNA to enable an immunoglobulin
to tackle that new virus.
I would say that not only is life definitively capable
of purposive behavior, but that it's definitively capable
of altering what it is doing.
And that's difficult, philosophically speaking, isn't it?
I mean, so much so that when you read Fatuma's textbook,
he has of his 600 pages, he has only one page
which is devoted to philosophical issues.
And the statement on that page is quite straightforward.
There is no room for purposive behavior in science.
Full stop.
Any justification of that statement?
No, any thinking that there might be a philosophical need
for a justification of that,
and to at least say, is that characteristic of life or not?
No, not at all.
It's as though, oh dear.
It's as though these people are thinking
in a philosophical vacuum, to my mind anyway.
But there we are.
There is my comment on,
and I've already commented on Fatuma's book.
It's got many other errors,
complete misrepresentation of what Lamarck thought,
but there's another aspect of the story there.
Now, the more I have studied the texts
and including the text books,
but also some of the more popular texts,
like Jerry Cohen's Why Evolution is True,
like Richard Dawkins, his many books on selfish gene
and similar ideas,
and the various editions of John Maynard Smith's,
The Theory of Evolution,
which was a standard text to many people as I was growing up.
The more I see that there is almost an agreement amongst them all
to rule certain things out of court,
that you cannot even talk about them.
So you cannot talk about Lamarck
because he was totally wrong.
Well, and they make the mistake of attributing to Lamarck.
Actually, the theory of his great opponent in Paris
all of those years ago, Georges Cuvier.
I researched his work to that degree.
So first of all, I don't trust them
on what they say about the history of their subject,
and in particular, what they say about Lamarck.
He was not, incidentally, a man favoring the idea
that there was some special energy in life.
He's often presented that way,
as though Le Pouvoir de la Vie is what he expressed in French,
the power of life.
He was a materialist.
Even I am not a materialist in the same sense as Lamarck,
but the idea of attributing to Lamarck
a kind of form of spiritualism,
I think, is just way, way outside the range
of what people should say about Lamarck.
I'm about to try and publish articles on Lamarck
that say all of this, incidentally,
and I think on the major principles of evolution,
he and Darwin were not in serious disagreement.
That's the extraordinary conclusion I've come to,
but there's just a major fact about the textbooks.
I've also carefully studied the four editions
over 40 years of John Maynard Smith's book,
just called The Theory of Evolution.
He wrote that because he was not himself originally
a biologist, he was an engineer trained to build aircraft,
and that's what he did during the Second World War,
or design aircraft, from an engineering perspective.
He wrote The Theory of Evolution
in order to teach himself the biology.
Now, moreover, I think of all the textbook writers
or popular book writers,
because I suppose the theory of evolution
is more like a popular book than a textbook,
or many people have used it as a textbook.
It's interesting to see the process of a very clever thinker,
and John Maynard Smith was a very clever thinker
about evolution, coming so close at various points
to disowning the modern synthesis,
but he never actually made that switch.
What he did was to say, I don't agree with Weisman,
so he never accepted Weisman's barrier idea.
He certainly did not think that epigenetics
was mere will of the wisp,
something that wasn't very important,
and when it came to questions like,
does DNA replicate like a crystal?
I'm afraid on that, he just simply went along
with the standard story.
He'd never appreciated the difficulties
with the concept that DNA replicates like a crystal,
but that is characteristic of nearly all
the neo-Darwinist modern synthesis
or whatever you want to call them.
I therefore think that actually,
it's time we rewrote textbooks.
I'm even discussing with one of my own associations,
the International Union of Physiological Sciences,
how that might now be done, because I think it's necessary.
So Dennis, we've talked about a number of ideas,
which or maybe something else do you think
is really the most fundamental?
In other words, if you had one thing
that you could sort of wave a magic wand
and get people to change their mind about one thing,
what do you think is the most fundamental thing
to get things going in a better direction?
Is it the causality?
Is it the purposiveness?
What is the one thing at the top of it all
that you would like to change?
Well, I think I would say, Mike,
that rewriting the textbooks is the most fundamental thing
because that's what people learn from.
And if you don't teach the various developments
that have occurred that are outside the range
of the modern synthesis, then generally speaking,
you won't have people looking to do the work
that would be necessary.
So I'm reluctant to try and put my finger
on the major thing to do now.
What I've done instead of that, Mike,
is to gradually accumulate around a dozen
younger people around me, not to work under me.
I'm not asking them to do my work.
I'm trying to encourage people to think
in ways that the textbooks haven't really taught them to think.
And I find that very exciting.
I leave it to them as a new generation
to define what you're asking for,
what would be the most important thing to do.
And I probably can't tell them that anyway,
even if I wanted to, because as I look at the ways
in which research has changed in biology,
even over the last 20 years, since I retired
from an official position in my university,
it's changed out of all recognition.
Who now, folks, well, maybe you do, Mike.
I don't know.
Maybe you do still.
But who pulls tiny tubes over a Bunnison burner
to create a one micron electrode
to try to stick it into a cell that's reluctant to take it.
Anyway, this is how I started, of course,
recording from single bikini fibers in the heart
way back in 1960.
I'm just out of date on the various techniques
that are now possible, including, as I indicated earlier on,
the fluorescent microscopic techniques,
which are so beautiful, but I think so limited
because there's only a limited number of molecules
that you can label at any one time.
And how are we going to deal with that kind of problem
when we want to work out all of these questions
about epigenetic inheritance,
what passes down from the body to the germline?
I would feel my role is to encourage others
to think out of the box,
but I'm certainly not going to aim to say
what I think is the most important thing to do.
So in a sense, I'm rejecting the question, Mike, aren't I?
But I think I've learned enough now to know
that people like me looking back on it all
are not the best people to judge where it should now go.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, I think that,
I agree completely as far as the details
of where it goes and so on,
but I think in your work and in your writing,
you've emphasized a couple of really fundamental changes
of perspective that I think have so many trickle-down effects
if they were more widely recognized.
So the incredibly important role
of goal-directed activity in biology,
the top-down causation to work on,
no privileged level of causation.
I mean, I think these are incredibly fundamental ideas
that once they get on, people take them on board,
they make you see biology in a new way,
and that then informs all the specific things
that you may do later, you know?
Yes, and of course, on that, I'm very firm
on what I say about those general principles.
And I look forward very much to a day when,
well, let's see what I really want to say here.
A lot of time has been wasted,
but I say that advisedly.
When I helped to organize a meeting in 2016
at the Royal Society here in England,
it was actually a joint meeting with the British Academy,
which is the Academy of the Humanities and Social Sciences,
particularly including the philosophers.
We build it as a discussion meeting
on what we call new trends in evolutionary biology.
I was subjected to the most extraordinary attempt
to get that meeting cancelled.
We went through the committees,
the standard committees of the Royal Society
and the British Academy to organize a discussion meeting.
And 21 other fellows of the Royal Society,
so those are top people in the field,
wrote to the president of the Royal Society,
this meeting is organized by Dennis Nobles,
it should not occur.
Full stop, I spoke with the chair of the committee
that approved the meeting,
and his position therefore was in something
of a difficulty anyway,
because after all approved his committee
had approved this meeting with enthusiasm.
And in the end, when I said to him,
there's no problem, John, you can invite,
they can come to the meeting, it's an open meeting,
nothing's to stop anybody coming
and talking at the meeting.
And we're open to add further speakers to the meeting,
but that of course is not what they wanted.
And it took nearly a year to sort out that.
It was a complete waste of time in the end
because the meeting occurred
almost as a gladiatorial confrontation.
That is not how discussion meetings work.
We discuss when we have an agreed basis for discussion,
we can't manage if people are coming largely
just simply to ridicule the other side.
I think that's a great shame,
and I think it's a big blot on the landscape of academia
here in the UK that that happened.
The meeting incidentally went ahead
and it produced a good publication by Interface Focus.
There was no, in one sense, no problem in the end,
but the bitterness that that generated has never gone away.
And I regret that.
I think we do our best science
when we respect each other's views and ideas.
We don't do it when what you're faced with
is more like a gladiatorial confrontation.
But having said that,
since that time,
the attempts to denigrate people like me
have almost disappeared.
I think there's now a more,
how should I put this?
There is a greater realization
that there is an important case here.
I spent nearly
three months earlier this year
interacting with a Forbes journalist, Andrea Morris.
And it was three months of interactions
because she was doing what a top journalist should do,
probing every single major idea and assumption
in what I was saying to test it, to destruction, all this.
And what she did in the end was extraordinary, too.
She rearranged all of that into a coherent video
about which accompanied her Forbes article.
What I found from that interaction
was if you've got the opportunity
to take somebody who's quite naive,
because initially she was,
she knew there was a big argument.
She knew that there was major disagreement.
She probed and probed until she got down to two things, really.
First of all, I think your major discussion,
your major difference from the other side
is you think purposive behavior in organisms
is a characteristic of organisms, and they don't.
Well, she was quite right on that, of course.
But then I said, well, but in addition to that, Andrea,
there are about three major processes
at the molecular biological level
where I think they've got it completely wrong.
And I went through the ones I did earlier,
the self-replication of DNA,
which simply does not happen in long DNA genomes,
the existence of the Weissman barrier.
And I'm afraid I've still remembered,
I've forgotten what the third one was.
I'm sure it'll come back to me when this meeting is over.
Is that epigenetic inheritance?
Is that part of the origin of the barrier?
Yes, that could well be.
There is epigenetic inheritance, yes, exactly.
Well, I actually think that maybe the prime basis of speciation.
You see, the main point of evolutionary biology
is to explain speciation.
That's what Darwin thought is why he called
his book, The Origin of Species.
But then you know, the funny thing was
he never thought he had answered the question
of the origin of species.
Why not?
And that's a very interesting question.
He didn't think he had because, as he well knew,
the artificial breeders, artificial selection,
had led to new varieties,
but never to branching speciation.
And then he realized that the reason why they got their varieties
was that they were preventing interbreeding.
So he understood that for speciation to occur in a branching way,
there would have to be something that stops the interbreeding.
Now, of course, in his Galapagos Islands,
he knew what was happening there.
The islands are separate.
So he could get branching speciation just through
a particular finch species developing in a different direction
on the different islands.
But of course, he realized the rest of the world is not like that.
You've got to have some mechanism by which the interbreeding
can be stopped.
Now, an interesting physiological fact,
many epigenetic changes can influence the reproductive likelihood.
And that's just a physiological insight.
It's a very sensitive thing.
It can be just a psychological change in that variety of the organism
that leads to them just not wishing to mate with their former colleagues,
if you want to call them that.
Or it can be just actual physiological changes in the reproductive system.
That may not happen too often,
but you don't need it to happen too often to get branching speciation,
which is what I think has happened.
So I actually think that epigenetic changes may well have led speciation.
But that's a speculation.
I can't prove that.
I put the idea into an article I did last year.
And it's up to other people to find out whether it's possible
to prove one way or the other.
It may be very difficult, though,
because we'd have to do what has been done in the case of the Galapagos,
which is to follow particular species over many generations,
and that has been done with the birds on the Galapagos,
with Mike Skinner's work looking at how far apart
the different pinches on the different islands have grown
and how many of those changes were epigenetic and how many were hard DNA.
The interesting thing is both, almost equally,
that itself doesn't prove that the epigenetic changes led the DNA changes,
but at least it's possible that is the case.
Anyway, I'm good at throwing ideas out, I think.
I'm not so good at doing the experiments that could now prove them.
Wouldn't modern synthesis also say that it's random mutations
that leads to speciation?
What do you all say to that?
I don't think it can.
Random mutation, other than in, for example,
controlled mutations such as the immune system,
controlling the rate of mutation in the B cells,
other than that, random mutation is an exceedingly slow process.
One of the points I put to Richard Dawkins two years ago
was, you know, Richard, I agree with one of your calculations.
They said, which one?
I said, well, you calculated how long it would take
for monkeys typing away randomly on a typewriter
to create a particular sentence in English.
It was actually from Shakespeare.
Me thinks it looks like a weasel, 28 characters.
And he calculated, of course, that it would take billions of years
that to happen, I mean, just by chance,
unless somehow the system knows when a monkey had got the right key
in the right place and could hold it.
And of course, he realized that couldn't be the way it's done anyway,
because what does the holding?
I mean, it's obvious that that cannot be totally random.
Now, I think that, yes, natural selection with random mutation,
totally random mutation, is a background process and must occur.
So I don't deny that natural selection in that sense occurs,
but I do say that it would be exceedingly slow.
And I think other processes, epigenetic included,
have speeded the process up.
And you can see that just from looking at the first comparisons
between genomes way back in 2001,
when the nature paper on genome sequencing of the human
was published together with a very interesting comparison
with everything from yeast, through flies, through to worms,
through to higher organisms, and then finally to the human.
And what do you find?
The two categories of protein that were studied in that way,
the chromatins and transcription factors,
they've grown by accretion of whole domains of functionality.
The modern versions of those proteins, if you want to call them modern,
the latest as it were in the evolutionary process,
are vastly more complicated with many more domains
with particular structures that enable them to be receptors, channels, or whatever.
And it's impossible to see how that could have occurred by chance.
I think there must have been processes during the evolutionary process
that enabled organisms to rearrange their genomes under stress.
And Barbara McClintock showed that over half a century ago,
when she was investigating corn.
And so we've known about this kind of way of speeding the process up
for very many years.
Incidentally, she eventually got the Nobel Prize for mobile genetic elements.
That was in 1983 when she was aged 81.
So she'd managed to stay alive during the whole of 50 years
in which her experiments were rubbish,
turning to be awarded the Nobel Prize in 1983.
Was she then taken seriously?
No.
There's another extraordinary fact.
The fact that she was given the Nobel Prize for mobile genetic elements
has not led to people seriously taking into account
what the sequencing of the human genome has shown
in comparison with other genomes.
That is, rearrangements of the domains has occurred during evolution.
And that's not point mutation by point mutation.
It's taking whole chunks and reassembling them as though you are using...
Well, in my days, it was bits of Meccano.
Today, it would be bits of Lego, wouldn't it?
Giving a child a construction kit.
And if it's already got stuff that's reformed, preformed bridges,
preformed tunnels or whatever it might be,
a child will get there to build a new structure very quickly.
If it's got to work with the tiny original Lego bricks,
it will take ages.
There's the difference.
Just as we're heading towards the end,
I just wanted to see if you want to say a couple words.
I know that you have a lot of interest in various kinds of Eastern thought
and approaches to these kind of bigger questions.
And I'm curious what, if anything, you want to say about that
and how that interest actually dovetails or informs
or is informed by the biology that you've been doing
and the philosophy of biology that you've contributed to.
Yes.
I think it's been unfortunate that philosophy and science have diverged.
I've interacted with some very good philosophers
and they have succeeded over the period of time
in which I've interacted with them.
Anthony Kenney is one of them.
Alan Montefiore, another.
Charles Taylor, another.
What they have contributed is, of course, not new discovery
that we shouldn't expect of philosophers.
It's clarity of thought.
And for Fatuma, for example, to write,
purpose has no use in science, full stop.
It seems to me, without any justification,
without any discussion of what it would mean
for an organism to be purposive,
which I think is largely the anticipatory process
of knowing what other organisms are doing
and be able to nimble enough and click enough to react.
And I see nothing as a problem in that in science.
We now talk of building AI systems that can do that
and giving them the intelligence to do it.
Why don't we think that it must be characteristic
of living organisms?
I've come to many of the positions I've come to, Mike,
through what I see as important philosophical mistakes
made by the reductionists.
First of all, for denying there's any other way
of looking at a living system,
that it must always be through reductionist analysis.
And there is no philosophical basis for that.
There's certainly no philosophical basis
for dismissing the idea that organisms,
cells, tissues, organs, and so on,
naturally constrain the molecules within them
to do what they do.
And that doesn't seem to me to be particularly controversial.
It must happen.
But it is, in essence, also a philosophical point.
You cannot have a complex system
without levels of interaction.
Once you've got levels of interaction,
you've got downward as well as upward causation.
But there we are.
I don't know whether that answers the point, Mike,
but I've always been fascinated by some aspects of philosophy
since being a student and being introduced
by the philosopher Stuart Hampshire many years ago
at University College London where I was a student
who introduced me to Spinoza.
Now, Spinoza was the main opponent of Descartes.
And that's very interesting because in Descartes
you can see the beginning of the Weissmann barrier.
He wrote,
if I knew what was in that sperm,
I would be able to predict the organism.
And that is very much the idea from the DNA
you would automatically predict the organism.
Spinoza very clearly said no.
It was in a letter that he wrote to the Royal Society
in 1663 or 5, I can't remember exactly now,
a little worm in the blood.
This little worm would understand the interactions
between the particles of the blood,
but he would have absolutely no idea
that the function of the blood was to circulate.
It is a statement of the principle of seeing the whole,
not just the parts.
Now, in those days, of course, a scientist and a philosopher
was not a separate person.
And I suppose what I am saying is I largely regret
that the two have diverged.
I'll just close with the last question,
which is more just practically speaking,
I know you stress the importance of studying
biological networks and functional networks.
And I'm wondering for people who want to actually apply this
towards curing disease and for therapeutic potential,
maybe you can touch a bit about why it's important
to actually be looking at functional networks
and biology for that.
Very important indeed.
I like that question a lot.
And I think we need to get back to what we were doing
before the genomics revolution.
What we did then was to study the networks
and ask the question at a network level
what could modify this functionality.
My own work around 30 years ago
indicated that sufficiently clearly
to a pharmaceutical company, Selvier in France,
that they spent a considerable amount of time
looking for chemicals that would be able to interact
with an HCN1 protein.
That's a channel protein that conducts both sodium and potassium,
which was one of the mechanisms that we found
in the heart underlying rhythmic activity.
And what we showed was that if you could produce
a drug that could block that mechanism,
you would only produce roughly a 10 to 20 percent
change in frequency.
It would slow the heart just a little.
Even better, it would slow it greatest
when exercising with a lot of adrenaline
because then the effect is larger.
And that's exactly what they did.
They produced Eva Bradin,
which is a drug doing precisely that.
It helps people who need their heart rate to be reduced,
particularly during exercise.
Otherwise, they're more likely to have heart attacks
because of ischemia and associated problems.
I think that came from a systems analysis.
And so did some of the early work of Jim Black
in producing...
Well, that was largely on gastric treatment
and related to pH.
And it was, as he always admitted,
largely a functional analysis that led him
to several major drugs that he developed
during that period,
way back in the 40s, 50s, 60s.
And he always said,
you've got to get back to that kind of analysis.
At the DNA level, I don't think it will work.
And that's been shown recently.
There's a paper by Hingarani and colleagues
from University College London
published just last year.
October, the British Medical Journal published it.
What they looked at was the ability of the polygenic scores
that is adding together all the contributions
of particular genes to a given function
to see whether those polygenic scores,
because a single gene doesn't do it.
So the next idea is to say,
okay, add a large number of gene effects together,
all their association scores.
And ask the question, does that predict?
It doesn't.
It's a very important paper.
October, 2023 in the British Medical Journal.
What that tells us is that that's too lower level
at which to see the functionality.
I think we've just got to get back to network analysis
and what we were doing before the genomics revolution.
Reasonably well, it seems to me.
But that's a very important question.
I would love to see us move back to that kind of approach.
Look for ways in which one might cure Alzheimer
from restoring function up here.
Don't bother about whether or not
you can do it from a DNA level.
You probably can't, but somehow try to restore the function.
People are trying to do that now
with the idea of possibly creating stem nerve cells
that could replenish the brain's function.
Who knows whether they will succeed.
But it seems to me that going deliberately
for restoring function might be a better way to proceed.
And do we need to succeed?
Yes, we do.
Those illnesses are now creating in aging populations
a cost to health services that is beyond what we can afford.
There are too many of us, me included, living a long life
and in the end forming a burden to the rest of society.
But we haven't focused on those diseases.
We haven't succeeded in getting the curse for them
and we need to do so.
So I don't think you could ask a more important question.
Perfect.
I think that's a very important point to end on
because it also puts it in practical perspective for people
that why is it that we're not able to solve so many diseases
by just focusing on DNA and genes
and what could we be doing instead,
which is important to everyone.
Sure.
And that Hingorani study is quite stunning.
The problem is, yes, there are some associations
but there are many that are false positives as well as positives.
So it's rather like looking at a drug
and whether it should be approved for treatment by the FDA
and using exactly the same criteria
and what they showed in effect is the polygenic scores
are almost useless.
What's happened to 23 and me, they're collapsing.
Why?
Because it isn't predictive and they know it.
Well, but that's another story, isn't it?
It is.
Dennis, thank you so much.
This was great.
Okay.
My thanks.
Hi, everyone.
If you wish to be notified of future podcast episodes
and my writing on longevity and the frontiers of biology,
please subscribe at livelongerworld.com.
And if you're enjoying the show, please leave a rating
on Apple, Spotify, or elsewhere.
Thank you for listening and I will see you next time.
