Donnie, what's up, man?
Welcome back.
How you doing?
Doing great.
How are you doing?
It's a question.
I'm better than ever, dude.
I'm actually 12 days clean off of fentanyl and I've got my family back.
My son's here today.
I'm just so positive, dude.
I can't even begin to explain.
I want to get into motivational speaking and I want everybody to know my story and how
far I've come and just how proud I am with that.
You should be.
You should be.
I mean, to take so much responsibility for everything that you've done.
I mean, I never thought in a million years I would even get clean.
I thought I was going to be a sad statistic.
I mean, I wind up dead in a public bathroom or something horrible like that.
I'm glad I get the second chance to be a better role model than my son and just get
that opportunity.
How old are you now?
I'm 33.
33?
Yes, sir.
You're still a young man?
Yeah.
I still got all the time in the world to make that change.
I was always told if you want to succeed, I have to change the people I hang out with.
I have to change everything about myself.
I've been a pretty good failure up till now, so now I'd like to be a pretty big success
if I can.
Yeah, and your path might be a crooked one, but as long as you're helping some other kids,
I think it could be great.
Definitely.
I would say that's a fair assumption.
Yeah, my story is a little colorful to say the least, but you know what?
If I can reach anybody and help them to detour the horrible decisions I made, I'm all for
that.
Do you see all your decisions or a lot of your decisions that you've made in your life,
do you see them that way?
Horrible?
Well, definitely, drug-induced decisions were not a good idea.
It led to, I could say that addiction ruined a good part of my life, and now I'm just trying
to just mold it back together and keep my family together now and just try to not be
so petty like I was.
I used to just argue about dumb things, things that didn't matter until I got homeless by
myself is one thing, but when I had my family out here with me, that's when the real responsibility
set in.
I was like, oh my god, my son, he has to eat every day.
I can't have him around junkie friends of mine.
I'm not talking bad about my friends, but we all know we're not the most suitable for
underage kids.
What you're willing to tolerate for yourself is one thing, but what you put your wife and
kids through is very different.
Absolutely.
Every little bit of money I get is now just to make sure that they're all right.
I had a bad falling out with my relatives, which was where we were staying, and it put
me out by myself, and I just realized how not ready I was.
If I, for one, owe a big thanks to my girlfriend who locked me in the room and held me down,
like even threatened me with violence if I leave, and she did that for me and I'm forever
grateful for that.
So you're on Suboxone now?
Yes.
12 days now.
That's great.
Yeah, it really does.
It's a miracle.
I thought methadone was the way for me, and I realize now that that was just another means
to an end.
Suboxone was the way to go, because now I can approach my days from the not sick standpoint.
I hated waking up every day, and before I even open my eyes, I'm already thinking about
my fix.
I mean, that's horrible.
My son's waking me up and wanting to play with me, and I'm thinking about just getting
high.
What do you think helped you make the change?
Realizing that the ones that I have close to me, that I hold dear to my heart now are
what was really important, and I kind of backburnered them for a long time.
I think Suboxone just opened my eyes, realized how selfish I was being and how just not
good of a dad I was being.
Me and my son have a great relationship, but I haven't been always the best role model,
and I know that.
It's interesting to see someone who, hear someone who looks like you do, face tattoos
and all the other crap you've been through, to be speaking so clearly.
You're so clear-headed now, and you see things like...
Yeah, yeah, that's the craziest part for me.
I was just so clouded with just no thoughts of the future of any kind and just wasting
away pretty much.
I was just trudging along, I guess, until something bad happened.
Thank God I realized ahead of time that drugs weren't what was going to make me happy.
My family is what's making me happy.
So you're optimistic now for your future?
Absolutely.
The love I have for my son is something I want to, in some way, give back to...
I want to get into motivational speaking, and on a big stature, I would love for anybody
to get in contact with me that could point me in that direction of...
If anybody thought that I changed their lives in any way here in my story the first time,
I would love to reach as many people as I could.
What do you think the secrets are to walking a straighter path to living a better life,
for you or for other people going through similar things?
Well, first, I wrote down goals, like realistic ones.
What do I want within the next six months?
I put down an apartment, a vehicle, a job.
I put four or five things down, but they're all realistic goals that...
Now that I'm sober, I can actually try to reach these goals, but I realized, dude, I
don't know the first...
I don't know how to buy a house.
I don't know how to be a grown-up.
Have you ever had a job?
No.
No.
I mean, under the table, street positions, tattoo artists or something, I've never had
a legitimate job, never worked a nine to five and never earned a paycheck, basically.
So I mean, all this is new to me.
You see that you deserve something better than what you've been given yourself, right?
Absolutely.
I can't believe I...
Dude, I'm actually embarrassed I let myself win as far as I did.
Was it tell me about your childhood again?
You didn't come up from the best circumstances?
Well, yeah.
My mom was an addict in the early years of my life, and my dad was always in prison.
My mom, she did the best she could, you know what I mean?
I just try not to have any...
I have no hard feelings towards them not being there, you know what I mean?
There's no bad blood there, it's just we don't even speak really, and not because I'm angry.
I just, I don't know, I guess I'm just wrapped up in my life trying to figure it out as they
were, I guess, you know?
And now that I'm an adult myself, I try to put myself in their shoes, and I realize
now it wasn't as easy as all that.
I probably made some hasty decisions about my feelings towards my family, but I mean,
all in all, I mean, they did the best they could.
Yeah, I mean, after doing all these talks, I've learned that shame is a huge factor in
all these stories.
Shame on your parents' part for what they did or didn't do.
Shame on your part for mistakes you've made, but forgiveness is what erases it all.
Yeah, I think...
It leaves a room for something good to happen.
Absolutely.
Yeah, forgiveness is the biggest thing for me.
I don't want to have any harshness of any kind in my heart now.
Like I've grown up surrounded by violence in the streets, fast-paced living, the drugs
and quick money and all this.
I used to think that that was like the Hollywood, you know, like the rock star lifestyle.
And I mean, it's all well and good if you're actually the rock star, you know what I mean?
Otherwise, you're just a fucko.
And I think I'm a pretty good poster child of that up till now.
You know, I like that I've shown that I can be an A1 fuckup, but I want to also show that
there's more to me than that, that I actually have something to say and that I want to know
that my existence mattered in some way.
You know what I mean?
Yeah, that's great.
How important is your inner deep belief in what you deserve in life, a factor in all
of this?
Because when you were getting all these face tattoos in prison, I assume you probably didn't
believe you deserved a whole lot better than what you were getting.
And now you seem to speak very differently.
Yeah, you know, in the beginning, I kind of felt like when I first had my accident and
I went to prison, you know, doing my term and I felt like I was never going to go home.
I kind of felt like I was going to get wrapped up in the system and wash myself up, you know,
I mean, and never see the light of day again.
You had no hope.
Yeah, pretty much.
And then I don't know, man, like the years went by, dude, and all of a sudden I'm going
to get released.
And I'm like, I'm a little looking in the mirror and I'm like, oh, my God, like, what did I do?
You know what I mean?
Like, and I never noticed it before.
Like, because when you're in prison, face tattoos and things that are common.
I got a rude awakening when I got out after five years, dude, and I was the only tattooed
face in the room, you know what I mean?
Like, I felt like everywhere I went that all eyes were on me.
Like, and, you know, in the good sense and the bad, you know what I mean?
Because, like, it made me like, you know, like, oh, God, like, you know, like, I feel
like people were already passing judgment on me.
And, you know what I mean?
Like, for the way I look and I mean, I just realized that the way I look isn't going to
define me.
I want the message that I have and the things that I stand up for in my heart to, you know,
like, things of substance that matter.
You know, I want to be remembered for that.
And, you know, like, I think that's why I could actually like help, you know, young
and up and coming kids that are just, you know, a little troubled and, you know, maybe
because I think, I don't know, I'd probably be a good help to them because I'm not the kind
of person to sit there and say, hey, don't do this, you know, don't do that.
And, you know, tell you why, you know, I can just be like, you know, hey, do it.
But I did it.
And this is what I got for it, you know, I got a wheelchair and a whole, you know, a
whole bunch of tears and lost years.
Yeah.
No, but you're able to smile now.
You're able to see things better.
Yep.
I realize now that families, families forever and with, with my girl and my son in my life,
I feel like I could accomplish anything.
I really feel that, you know, that I could have the, you know, white picket fence lifestyle
and, you know, like that, you know, if my life is ever a book that, you know, it can be like
looked at as a success story, you know, like, you know, like we can all come from turmoil
and like, or just go through turmoil and, you know, come out on top.
Did talking on my channel help you see things different?
See things different?
Yeah.
Ever since, ever since meeting you, dude, has changed my life.
And I can't even explain to you how positive way.
Really?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I, when I first, when I first, you know, when I first met you and we did the first interview,
I, I had no idea.
I, you know, I had, I had never even heard about it.
You know what I mean?
Like I didn't know who you were.
And then like, I just, you know, like I seen on, you know, on YouTube, how like, you know,
you talk about like, how you created, you know, how you created soft white underbelly
and like just like, I don't know, dude, I was like, I was like, fascinated and like, I was
like, man, like, I want to be like that too.
You know what I mean?
Like.
No, but the talk helped you see things better or clearly?
Absolutely.
Absolutely.
You know, hearing, hearing people's, um, you know, in the comments and the comments
were very positive too.
Oh yeah.
Man, like that, that, that changed my life, dude.
Like I, I read every single, you know, every single comment and there's thousands of, you
know, I read every single one and, you know, I took in like every, every one of them, you
know, I mean, like, and thought about it and like, you know, like how much I appreciate
like the fact that somebody even wanted to listen to my story and, you know, how grateful
I am to you that I get to even tell my story, how grateful I am that people wanted to listen
to it and wanted to hear more that it touched them that, you know, like just that I could
be, uh, just so that I could be a positive anything to somebody is, I'm, I'm really happy
with that, you know, um, getting, getting sober is a scary thing because it let me realize
how empty my life was, like how like, like meaningless my life, what like, you know, like
to me, like all I cared about was getting high and, and I didn't, I didn't see the damage
that it was doing to me or my family and, you know, I just, it's scary.
I'm learning how to be a grown-up for the first time and that's, that's real brand new
to me.
Can I bring your son in?
Absolutely.
Let me go grab.
Yeah.
I'm so proud of him.
He's the top of his class, man.
He's so smart.
What's up, baby?
Who's this?
This is my son, Eddie.
Say hi, baby.
Hi.
Tell him your name.
My name's Edward.
Hey, Edward.
How are you?
Good.
Are you happy that your dad's getting his life together?
Yeah.
Tell me about your life.
Tell me about your dad.
My dad feeds me good food and he's, he's the best dad ever I had and.
You don't have to, like, you can tell him how dad really is, like, I mean, do you love
dad?
Is he your buddy?
Yeah.
Yeah?
Uh-huh.
He's your best friend?
Yeah.
Is he there for you?
Yeah.
Do you love him?
Uh-huh.
I love you too.
Very cute.
Eddie, thank you so much for coming in, saying hi.
Donnie, I'm proud of you.
Thank you very much, man.
Stay on the right track.
Yes, sir.
Keep it up.
We'll do another update.
Absolutely.
Down the road.
Maybe, uh, maybe who knows, maybe you get some speaking engagement.
I would love it.
You, I welcome all the positive, you know, feedback I can get.
You're a pretty great example of somebody who's trying to transform their lives and
making their stuff good.
I appreciate that.
I appreciate you saying that.
You know, I, it feels really good to, to matter in, in anybody's life, especially people
I know and complete strangers.
It's, it's awesome.
All right, you guys.
Thank you very much.
Say bye, buddy.
Bye.
Bye, Eddie.
Bye.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
Eddie.
