So last year, while playing the Xbox One version of Doom, I encountered this weird
glitch where none of the textures for anything in the game world seemed to load, resulting
in this pitch black, but still shockingly playable, version of the game. Enemies were
reduced to barely visible silhouettes, siphon grenades took on this new use as a tool to
illuminate enemies in the environment, and glory kills flooded the screen with that blue
and orange light. It was really beautiful to behold, and at the time neither I nor
anybody else really knew what caused this glitch.
Now a lot of time has passed since I uploaded that video, and looking over the comments
I realized that there are basically two camps of people out there. People who had not encountered
this glitch but would love the chance to experience Doom in this unique way, and people who were
suffering this glitch and desperately wanted a solution to return the game back to normal.
The goal of this video is to help both of these people, while also digging a little
bit into what exactly caused this glitch in the first place, and one ambitious individual's
quest to recreate this glitch in the form of a mod for the PC version.
First, let's start with the people who want to fix their Xbox One copy of Doom 2016.
This, as it turns out, is pretty easy. And take note, Xbox users, because if you want
to cause this glitch for yourself, this is how you recreate it.
See, it turns out the cause of this glitch is a very specific set of circumstances. It
only happens while attempting to play Doom while the game is still downloading. Basically,
if an Xbox player of Doom boots the game up before the install is complete but after
the ready-to-start pop-up appears, you end up booting into the game without everything
downloaded, which somehow produces that weird pitch-black look.
So that's how you cause it, but what about for those who are trying to fix this glitch?
You might think that the solution is to just let the game finish installing and go back
to playing, but for a lot of people with this issue, that solution doesn't work. See, despite
completing the install and turning their console off and on, for most players, the game ends
up still being quote-unquote stuck in this black, textureless mode.
Now, the reason this happens is that unless you go out of your way to do it, games on
the Xbox very rarely close all the way, and instead are more often put into a sleep state.
Luckily, there's an easy fix for that. All you really need to do is press the Xbox Guide
button, scroll down to Doom, press Start, and then scroll down and press Quit. Next time
you boot the game up, boom, back to normal.
Now let's say you're not an Xbox player. What about that hypothetical PC mod I mentioned?
It's funny, my original video about this has received over 1,000 comments demanding specifically
that somebody should make a mod for this. People spoke about it like it was an inevitability.
It seemed like this mod idea was basically a no-brainer. Unfortunately, Doom 2016 is
a notoriously tricky game to mod. On top of that, Doom 2016 also shipped without any official
mod tools whatsoever. So despite people pleading, and pleading, and pleading for this mod to
exist across YouTube, Reddit, and everywhere in between, it seemed like it was just never
going to happen.
But as is so often the case, right when things seemed darkest, this happened. A few months
back, a Doom fan, who goes by the name Swip Swap Saponi, aka Sapi, released a mod called
Black Doom 2016. Basically, a Doom mod inspired by the exact glitch I'd experienced that
purported to perfectly recreate that glitch in the PC version of Doom.
Now I was a little skeptical at first, but I figured this was worth trying, so I reinstalled
the PC version of Doom and followed the instructions to install it. Of course, since there's no
formal mod support for Doom 2016, you have to jump through a few steps to get this up
and running, but soon enough I had it installed, and after a lot of anticipation, I booted
up the game. And...
It worked! Not only did it work, it actually looked exactly the same as what I'd experienced
on Xbox One last year, but this time it was running on PC at an uncapped resolution and
with an unlocked frame rate now accessible any time I wanted without having to fiddle
with half downloading the game on Xbox and intentionally pausing the download.
This was exciting, because I had gone in just a few short months from not knowing how this
glitch happened and losing it forever to having it on demand now, but I still had a huge question.
How did this mod exist? Wasn't modding Doom 2016 supposed to be nearly impossible?
And most importantly of all, how was this person able to replicate this Xbox One glitch
so perfectly on a completely different platform? Whoever created this mod apparently knew
enough about Doom 2016's internal workings that they were able to intentionally replicate
a bug like this, meaning they might be able to tell me what specifically causes that weird
visual effect you see in the first place.
So I reached out to Sappy, the modder behind Black Doom 2016, who told me that he made
his mod after seeing my original video. Sappy also owns and operates the Doom 2016 Plus
modding Discord server, and he told me that he also came to the decision to make this
mod after getting multiple requests from people who would join the server asking whether or
not this mod could theoretically exist.
Now according to Sappy, the question of Doom 2016's modability is not actually quite
so simple. Quote, Doom 2016 is actually very moddable, but we don't really have tools
to modify anything other than raw text. Luckily, almost all behavioral data and information
in Doom 2016 is stored in raw text files. However, the game still requires a lot of
technical know-how in order to understand what to modify to get the results that you
want, and even if you have that technical know-how, it's really tedious and confusing
to do much more than just swap a few numbers around, which is why there aren't many mods.
Now lucky for all of us, Sappy is one of the few people on Earth who has that technical
know-how, and incredibly, he was able to manipulate the raw text in Doom to replicate my bug perfectly.
So I asked about that, what exactly was it that was causing this visually striking bug
in the first place?
It turns out the answer has a lot to do with a specific quirk of idTech, the game engine
used by Doom's developer idSoftware. IdTech6, the version of the engine that Doom is running,
uses a proprietary technology first introduced by id back in 2007 called Megatexture. While
most video games texture their in-game objects individually one at a time, Megatextures allows
developers to texture the entire game world using one truly enormous image. Megatextures
can be upwards of 32,000 by 32,000 pixels or larger, and a single Megatexture will take
up at least 3GB just by itself. Now the benefit to Megatextures is that a game world generated
using them can be entirely unique without a single pixel of repeated terrain anywhere
in a level. The downside it seems, at least in this very specific case, is that if a Megatexture
file is in any way incomplete, the effect on the game can be severe. Here's Sappy again.
Quote, your video has you playing Doom 2016 on your Xbox One before the Megatextures were
downloaded, resulting in the game reading them as nothingness or just constant streams
of zero, which to the game engine means black or transparent. My black Doom 2016 mod replicates
it by making the Megatexture reading code in the shaders also return zero. And the result?
The game you see before you now. Now I know what you're thinking, what about making a
similar mod for Doom Eternal? Unfortunately, there's a major pickup here. See, for Doom
Eternal, it switched up their graphics API from OpenGL to Vulkan, and none of Zippy's
Doom hacks work with Vulkan. And believe me, he's tried. Sappy told me that while he's
tried to modify the rock text that controls Doom Eternal's Vulkan shaders, he has had
no luck in getting it to work despite multiple attempts. Now, obviously that's a bummer,
but there is a small ray of hope. See, way back at QuakeCon when Doom Eternal was first
announced, director Marty Tratton said that mod support for Doom Eternal was something
that he really wanted to see happen eventually. Marty revealed that his team has quote, spent
the last several years making technical decisions that get them back towards being able to do
mods. Now, in the same breath, Marty was also very careful to clarify that he would not
make any promises that Doom Eternal would see official mod support now or ever. But
the fact that it's on id's radar and that it's something they've made concrete steps
towards implementing is a really exciting idea. Sappy tells me that were they to eventually
do this, even if it's months or years down the line, creating another mod like Black
Doom 2016 in the Eternal engine would probably be quite easy. So when it comes to this happening
someday, the ball is firmly in id's court. That means that if mod support for Doom Eternal
is something you'd like to see happen down the road, the best thing you can do is let
id know that you want it. Remember, the original Doom back in 1993 went on to be one of the
most widely modded video games of all time. So if this were to happen, it would not just
enable things like Sappy's texturless mod, it would enable all sorts of cool stuff. Stuff
we can't even imagine yet. So if this is something you want, I think the answer is
to do your part and let id know.
Looking back on this whole experience, I think what I appreciate most about it is that when
I uploaded my original video, I truly thought that my experience was a singular one, a one
off glitch with no clear way of duplicating it and something that I would never get to
experience ever again. But thanks to the people who watched that video and the comments on
that video, not only were we able to pin down a way to recreate the original glitch, but
a talented modder took the time out of his day to create a perfect recreation of it on
PC for anybody who wants to try it for themselves. Personally, I think that's really cool.
Thanks for watching, and PS, if you own Doom 2016 on PC and are interested in checking
out Sappy's mod, I threw together a super quick video tutorial about how the process
works. Here's a link to that tutorial if you're interested, it's super easy and should
only take you like 2 minutes maximum. Thanks for watching, and have a good week!
