A lot can happen in a year when you're the world's biggest search engine.
Here's everything Toxic Google did in 2021.
In January, Google came under fire for removing 10,000 one-star reviews from the
investment app Robin Hood's profile in the Play Store.
These reviews came from angry customers who were blocked from trading GameStop shares
while trying to collectively drive up the price to screw over an investment firm
who bet millions that the price would drop.
Yeah, I know there's more to this, but I'm interested in the Google element of the story
and not the Wall Street Bankers element of the story.
It turns out tech giants are able to identify and purge troll content on mass,
so they just choose not to when it's an individual person they don't care about.
Interesting.
It did feel quite interesting for a second to watch everyone unite in their anger.
It felt much like the Titanic staff were frantically deleting TripAdvisor reviews
after they'd hit the iceberg.
Google then threatened to remove their search engine from Australia if a new law went into
effect that would make them pay for any local news articles that appeared on their site.
Imagine not being able to Google while you can't Google.
Given Google's requirements to get paid were too high for almost all indie publications,
it looked to us outside us that this was just a way for the government to give Murdoch
publications a kickback for simply existing.
This would mean that all the main messages Australians would get would heavily lean right
wing, which doesn't sound great, but I can't think of a time in history where a right wing
echo chamber has caused a big issue.
No, can't think of one.
And R.S.Jeeves heard what was happening and tried to make a comeback.
After months of will they won't they, Google caved and agreed to an amended version of the law,
calling it a constructed path forward.
And by constructed path, they mean the one of least resistance,
where Google will pay some news providers for some of their content,
but they get to pick which ones and how much, so they're very much the hero of this story.
And finally, Google purchased Fitbit for 2.1 billion.
Can't believe they spent all that money on just one Fitbit.
February might be the shortest month of the year,
but Google still managed to cram in a ton of controversies,
starting with the announcement that their phones can now track your heart rate and breathing,
as if it was a good thing.
They failed to take into account that me knowing my phone can now monitor my breathing
will make my heart rate spike quicker than a GameStop share.
Trump's campaign app was then suspended from the Google Play Store because it didn't work.
Much like its entire presidency.
And Google finally added the iOS privacy label to its Gmail app.
Ah yes, the incredibly helpful other data category.
Google rounded off the month by firing its AI ethics founder for moving sensitive files
outside of the company.
Google was quick to say that this had nothing to do with her ethical criticisms of Google,
or the pesky campaign she was running to get more diversity within their organization.
This meant that Google has removed two ethical leads in as many months.
But don't worry, her replacement will be selected soon,
by a completely impartial AI bot.
March rolled on, and Privacy-led browser DuckDuckGo then accused Google of spying on its users,
to which we all went, duh.
If this is the kind of useful information I can expect to get on DuckDuckGo,
I'll give it a miss.
Then Google announced they'd be phasing out the use of cookies and not tracking us in the future,
to which we all breathed a sigh of relief,
until our phones buzzed because they noticed a change in our collective breathing patterns.
In completely unrelated news, Google's Nest Hub now has a sleep tracking feature,
to tell you how well you slept the night before.
Again, I'm not sure they've taken into account the fact that I always sleep
badly when an AI robot, who may or may not be able to fire me,
is analyzing my unconscious body all night long.
To try and create some positive PR for its AI bot,
Google decided to battle the great British bake-off winner in a dessert face-off.
The robots are coming for your job, Mary Berry.
April had a world first, with the UK government breaching its own privacy rules,
and the update to the NHS COVID tracking app being blocked by both Apple and Google
for breaking its terms of service.
There was something bittersweet about Apple and Google giving our government a lesson about privacy.
It must have been nice for them to have the more high ground, for a second.
In May, Google announced it'd be opening its first physical store in New York City.
The shop opened in June and featured a black curtain at the back for incognito browsing.
People who have visited the store have commented on the amazing customer service,
which is unsurprising given that all the staff knew your full name, address,
favorite songs, mother's maiden name and porn preferences,
without you having to tell them anything.
Google's AI reared its creepy code again and released an app that can detect skin conditions.
According to Google, it can detect up to 26 skin conditions as accurately as any dermatologist,
but still struggles to detect tax evasion.
I'm guessing they're trying to take traffic away from WebMD
by not just telling everyone they've got cancer.
In an attempt to get more positive PR,
Google claimed they were concerned that not enough people were getting the vaccine,
so they decided to add a song detailing the plus points of the jab to their assistant.
Because this works so well at the start of the pandemic,
nothing sets my perineum to cringe faster than tone deaf celebrities singing at me.
Google has said that stopping the misinformation spreading on YouTube is their plan B.
And in completely unrelated news,
Google said that they're going to try and make their image processing software
more inclusive, or less racist, depending on which press release you read.
I'm guessing that racial profiling is one of the 26 skin conditions they're able to detect.
It's June, and while not enough of us were waxed and waxed having a hot girl summer,
the world's shittest boy band, the G7, announced they might be raising taxes on Google.
And because they've not paid taxes in so long, this was apparently news.
The word might is going unnoticed and is doing a lot of the heavy lifting in this sentence.
Not unlike Google's underpaid shadow workers, but we'll get to those later on in this video.
The G7 said that they would tax Google and other tech giants on their profits,
but they could still buy things to lower their tax bill.
So Google spent actual money on this photograph of a seagull eating a chip for its next ad campaign.
Once again, my shots of Pigeon in Chrisbag and Pigeon Rat Album cover got overlooked.
But both of those are available as NFTs.
Linked below.
Speaking of digital assets, Google Pay added support for Coinbase,
so people could buy things using crypto.
And for some reason, they thought two wallets scissoring was an appropriate logo.
After pushing the benefits of its AI and bragging about how accurate it is,
Google had to admit that sometimes its algorithm misidentified people
who had the same name as a serial killer.
But to be fair, if you're going to name your kid Ted Bundy or Harold Chipman,
you're just asking for trouble.
Google handled eating humble pie with grace until, to add insult to injury,
they discovered the baker was the great British Bake Off winner.
Humans won, artificial intelligence nil.
Great joke, right?
Hi, editor Simon here.
To remind you to like the video, subscribe to the channel.
And if you've got an extra second in your life to spare,
join my subreddit or Patreon communities.
Both of those are linked below.
I've been editing for five days straight now, and I feel like I'm going mad.
So any and all support would be massively appreciated.
You're not mad.
Really?
No, you're just an editor who's talking to a version of himself that you scripted
while begging for online validation from strangers.
Help me.
At the end of the month, Google was investigated over fake reviews,
which will shock anyone who hasn't been to fiverr.com.
It's almost as if a company that has an entire department dedicated to finding bot accounts
should know how to fake a review online.
But here we are.
In July, Google Maps were criticized for suggesting routes up their nevus,
which were potentially fatal that directed people off a cliff.
Personally, I think they should have doubled down,
as anyone who walks off the edge of a cliff because Google tells them to,
isn't someone I trust to do up their own laces, let alone walk up a mountain.
When I was a kid, my mum would ask,
if everyone walked off a cliff, would you follow?
I'd say no.
But 20 years later, apparently I'd do it if Google directed me to.
From mum news to dad news, and Google announced it would be banning sugar daddy apps from the
play store, which screams like a CEO who was caught cheating by his wife,
and this is the only way she'll trust him again.
All these apps in question are now hosted by GoDaddy.
In August, Google, like most firms,
was stuck in a game of will they won't they when it came to returning to the office.
In the end, they said anyone returning to the office would be required to have the vaccine.
What's wrong, Google?
No, I'm feeling lucky option.
If employees wanted to work from home, they could.
But then they sent them a salary calculator to show how much their pay would drop,
based on where they live.
In response, all the work from home employees busted out their productivity calendars and
adjusted it accordingly.
Google capped off the month by banning tracking tools and apps that sold users location data,
saying, that's our job.
In September, Google underpaid thousands of international shadow workers
violating labour laws around the world.
It's pretty amazing how many of these headlines we see,
especially when we compare it to the low number of headlines we see that say,
company A was not given the option of a fine and was punished for the crime they committed.
Google actually barred the temporary workforce from talking to full-time employees
and made them wear red badges.
According to one shadow employee, this instilled a sense of shame within the workforce.
Don't be evil has aged really well.
Next up in OK, thanks for doing that news.
Google locked email accounts owned by former Afghan government officials
and refused to give the Taliban access to them, even though they asked nicely.
Google has said that it won't be giving any other government's access to this email address either.
But if you'd like to send through any thoughts or critical memes,
the address is osamaataliban.gov.
Finally, lawsuits showed that Siri and Google are listening to us all the time.
Except when we complain they're not paying their taxes.
Then they're happy to zone us out.
It's October and as climate change headlines continue to dominate the news cycle,
Google's CEO came out saying that we're losing time in the climate fight.
This led to a world first where the usually rational and down-to-earth Twitter community
shouted at him for hours on end asking what he was going to do about it.
But we didn't have to wait long for Google to put their advertisers money where their mouth is
as they announced they'll be cutting off ad money for climate change deniers.
But curiously, they still allow the content to appear on the platform.
So a good alternative headline would be,
YouTube promises marketers their adverts won't appear on climate change denial content.
Personally, I was happy with this move, but just remove the content from the platform
rather than allowing climate deniers to burn up fuel running your servers
to watch demonetised videos rather than you trying to have your cake,
eat it and get a blowjob from it as well.
Something that has famously never worked.
As a result of this move, every climate denial video is now sponsored by NordVPN.
Then we discovered Google colluded with Facebook to bypass Apple's privacy changes.
To be fair, they're just doing what any faceless corporate entity would do
when they can act without accountability when someone threatens their current business model.
And I for one, stand with Fougal.
In no shit Sherlock news, it was reported that Google is the most searched word on Bing,
according to Google.
Which feels like a biased statistic.
I mean, it might be true, but the source definitely has a vested interest.
In a statement, a Bing spokesperson said,
at least people are using us for something other than searching for porn.
And the delivery drone from a Google sister company was attacked by a raven,
forcing it to suspend some deliveries in Australia.
Malcolm was right, life finds a way.
Animals fighting drones that are trying to replace human workers for Amazon
is my newest kick that I didn't see coming.
And next, Google attempted to help future presidents hide their drunken teenage photos
by launching a new safety feature that allowed under-18s
to request a removal of images of themselves from the company's search results.
I'm not sure why we all can't have this feature, but progress is progress.
Next up, Google gave data to police based on search keywords.
And by giving, they mean complying with a search warrant signed by a judge.
Also, Google gives data to everyone based on search keywords.
Right? Am I missing something?
In short news, Alphabet then put robots to work cleaning up the Google offices.
About time, lazy fucking robots.
And finally, YouTube announced it would be hiding the dislike counter from videos,
claiming it was to help smaller creators.
But many suspected it was actually to protect content created by brands, governments and advertisers.
I'm guessing we will get a YouTube rewind this year after all.
Now people, right in the comments, like this comment if you dislike the video.
And life has found a way.
In December, we got more no shit Sherlock news when YouTube revealed that millions of videos
were getting hit incorrectly with copyright claims.
Shocked face.
But they didn't solve it.
They just hid the dislike button instead.
YouTube is acting like that fuck boy who acknowledges he's bad at texting,
but still leaves you on red.
And for some reason, you can see him online replying to other advertisers.
In other news, YouTube has confirmed that water is wet
and the Pope does take a shit in the woods.
Then Microsoft came out swinging saying that their edge browser is more trustworthy than Google's Chrome,
which they dubbed So 2008.
Ooh, how edgy.
Next in, of course they fucking did news,
Swedish telecom company, Mitt or AG,
were trusted by Google and Twitter to send text codes to millions of users.
But it turns out they also ran a side hustle helping governments secretly
surveil and track people via their phone numbers.
Can we stop the planet?
I want to get off.
And in palette cleansing, good ish news,
photographer to Wanda Kanhima spent $5,000 of his own money to photographs in Barbway
to get it on Street View.
Talk about putting your hometown on the map.
He said he wanted to collect images of his country
and share them with the largest number of people possible.
So Zimbabwe was not missed off when people were trying to get a sense of the world.
No judgment here.
We all needed a lockdown hobby.
Thanks very much for watching.
I hope you enjoyed that.
If you liked it, like it.
And don't forget to subscribe to the channel for more quality content.
This is one of three videos that I'm releasing in December.
And if you'd like to see everything toxic that Amazon and Facebook did in 2021,
there should be some links to my left.
And if they're not live yet, you can ring the bell below
and YouTube will let you know when they have.
If you don't trust YouTube to notify you when a video goes live.
And frankly, I don't blame you.
You can join my subreddit or Patreon.
Both of those are linked below.
By joining my community, I can talk to you directly
and tell you when I'm releasing new content.
And that way I don't have to play the algorithmic games
on this and other platforms that I create content for.
Thanks so much for all the support and for all the help this year.
Godspeed and I'll see you all next week.
