Experience
Author(s): B. A. Farrell
Published by: Oxford University Press on behalf of the Mind Association
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
access to Mind

II.-EXPERIENCE
I WANT to deal with a question that bothers physiologists and
psychologists. It is a familiar question for philosophers, but I
want to deal with it as it appears to them, not to us. Consequently, I shall begin by explaining at some length how the
problem does arise for them.
Adrian, in The Basis of Sensation, said many years ago that
"whatever our views about the relation between mind and
body, we cannot escape the fact that there is an unsatisfactory
gap between two such events as the sticking of a pin into my
finger and the appearance of a sensation of pain in my consciousness. Part of the gap is obviously made up of events in
my sensory nerves and brain." In his Waynflete lectures,
The Physical Background of Perception, he purports to fill the
gap even further by telling us about the structure and activity
of the brain. He discusses the nature of the mechanism which
would be needed to copy the activity of the brain-in particular,
the activity of recognising significant relations and of learning
skilled movements. After suggesting the sort of material events
and changes that must occur in the brain to account for this
sort of activity, he says " Yet there remains the formidable
problem of the intervening events. The human mind comes in
somewhere in the chain of causation between the physical events
in the sensory and the motor pathways." Mental events, he
goes on, must be closely connected with the material process
going on in the cortex, and we must try to make such a connexion
seem plausible. In an endeavour to make this connexion seem
plausible, he discusses the suggestions of Kenneth Craik and
says that " Craik could only suggest that consciousness comes
in at certain points in the process of neural transmission where
the physiological patterns have a particular kind of definiteness.
On this hypothesis, we could tell what someone was thinking
if we could watch his brain at work, for we should see how one
pattern after another acquired the necessary brilliance and
definition."
This attitude of Adrian's seems fairly representative among
physiologists working in this field. They sufler severely from
the occupational disease of traditional dualism.1 Adrian's talk

I See also, for example, Morgan (of Johns Hopkins) Physiological
Psychology, McGraw Hill, 1943.



is also illuminating because it brings out the acute difficulty
these neurologists are in. They would be only too thankful if
they could ignore the intervening mental events altogether.
What they would like to have is the assurance that they-as
physiologists and neurologists-can in principle give a complete
account of what happens when we think, recognise t-hings,
remember and see things; and that they are safe in ignoring the
mind and all intervening mental events whatever. But the road
to their professional heart's desire is blocked by what seem to
them overwhelming objections. In particular, there is the old
objection. To assert that a complete account of thinking, of
having a sensation, and so on, can be given in physiological
terms alone appears to entail that mental events are either
reducible to physiological and neural ones (which is absurd), or
else do not exist (which is false). So physiologists are reluctantly also ready to agree that any physiological and neural
account of what happens when we think, etc., even if it is a
definitive one for the time being, will leave out certain essential
parts or aspects of the total process-the parts or aspects " where
the mind comes in ". They might be inclined to express their
dissatisfaction with their own accounts like this: "When a
person sees things, thinks, and so on, it is obviously not true
that all that is going on are the material processes that we
physiologists describe. Certain mental processes are also going
on. He is having certain sensations and feelings. In general,
he is having certain experiences. And it is this that we have to
leave out and cannot cope with."
But at this point the physiologists,, like the plain man, are apt
to get an idea, and to turn with relief, if not with hope, to
psychology. " It is the business of psychology ", they may say,
" to deal with our sensations and feelings. And if it would only
hurry up, then, with the physiological account of the neural
basis of experience, the two sciences jointly might be able to
ofler a presentable account of what happens when we see and
feel ", etc. This is a very reasonable and obvious appeal for
assistance, since the psychologists do almost invariably and expressly accept " experience " as falling within the subject matter
of the science. Almost invariably, they describe the subject
matter as covering both " behaviour and experience ".1 Presumably therefore they do claim to give a scientific account of both.
1 This conjunction soon becomes familiar to anyone perusing the textbooks, e.g. Thouless, General and Social Psychology, Ch. I. In Boring,
Langfeld and Weld (ed.), Foundations of Psychology (1948), the conjunction appears as " behaviour and consciousness ".


Let us remind ourselves how psychologists do set to work to
deal with " experience "-with our sensations, our feelings, and
so on; and what sorts of discoveries they make about them.
Consider sensation. What a psychologist does is to take a
Mr. X and use him as a subject in a laboratory. He might use
Mr. X as a subject by, for example, subjecting him to the important classes of stimuli that aire likely to affect X's sense organs
z., mechanical, thermal, acoustic, chemical and photic
stimuli. In this way he will discover from X's responses and
discriminations whether X's sensitivity is normal or notwhether, for instance, X is colour blind or not, or has abnormally
acute acoustic sensitivity, and so on. Or he might vary the
stimuli in respect of their quality, intensity, extension or duration in order to discover whether X's responses show corresponding variations. The sort of generalisation the psychologist
produces is exemplified in the Weber Law about differential
thresholds, and later modifications of this; or in a generalisation
about the primary qualities of the stimuli in question from which
all other qualities are obtained (e.g., " in vision, the primaries
are red, yellow, green, blue, white and black ").
In experimenting on X as subject, it is not necessary for the
psychologist to make X talk to him. In principle, everything
he wants to know can be discovered by making X behave like a
dog and depress keys or open lids or perform some such motor
response that shows the psychologist he has made the discrimination in question. Just as we can discover that a dog can
distinguish between red and green colours by successfully
training the dog to distinguish that the red light over a door
means it is open, whereas the green light means it is shut, so the
psychologist can in principle discover that X is or is not colour
blind, can or can not react to this or that variation in the stimulus
and so on. But of course, it is ever so much more convenient,
and indeed very often necessary at present with our limited
experimental techniques, to ask X to report what he does see.
Provided that these reports are of the very simple Yes-No
variety, and the psychologist has good reason to believe that X
is co-operating with him, there is no methodological objection
whatever for not also using X's verbal reports.
One further thing a psychologist also does. Quite often he
places himself in the role of subject. For laboratory purposes
it is often convenient for Wim to play the role of X. Now it may
or may not be the case that, when he does so, he makes observations of quite a different sort to those he makes when he merely
observes X reacting to the same stimulus-e.g. a red disc. I

EXPERIENCE


will come to this later. Wh
playing the role of observe
to the discoveries of psych
principle obtain from the
concepts

tion

are

reveals

revealed by his observation of X.

required

which

to

are

deal

not

This, then, though very roughly, is how contemporary psychologists go to work. They investigate remembering, learning
and thinking, feelings, attitudes and traits, temperament and
personality in the same sort of way as they investigate sensations.

But this seems to psychologists an awkward and ridiculous
situation. For it means that the science of psychology does not
deal with " experience " either. Thus, in describing how subject
X reacted to different types of stimuli, it is clear that we were
not dealing with X's sensations at all, but with his behaviour;
and the discoveries that psychology claims to have made about
sensation " have not been about " sensation " at all, but about
the sensitivity of organisms to physical stimuli. To describe
all this work as being about " sensation " is just false. This
situation is awkward because it means that we are no nearer
dealing with the facts of experience, which brain-physiology
leaves out; and so no nearer providing a scientific account of it,
which could supplement the account given by physiology, and
thereby provide a reasonably complete picture of what happens
when we have a sensation, or feel, etc. This situation is ridiculous because, while psychology purports to be the scientific
study of experience, and lip-service is paid to this attempt in the

usual definitions of its subject matter, the science, in effect,
does not include experience within its purview. What psychologists feel the science should somehow also include is, for
example, the sensation-quality that X undoubtedly experiences
when, rat-like, he discriminates a red disc; and the mental

state he is in when he thinks, and not merely his behaviour; and

(to quote Stout 1) the "unique kind of feeling-attitude towards

an object " which we experience when we are in some emoticrnal

state, not merely the readiness and dispositions we exhibit

towards, the object of our emotion. Moreover, psychology

should also aim at giving us the laws governing these sensation
qualities, emotional states, and so forth. But all this is just
what contemporary psycshology does not include and do. The
fact that the subject X and the psychologist himself both have
sensations, and so forth, is simply ignored.
1 Manual of Psychology, Bk. III, Ch. IV (5th Edition).


B.

A.


No doubt all this sounds stale' and naive to puzzle-wise professional philosophers. But to date we cannot flatter ourselves
that we have done much to help the psychologists, poor animals,
out of their maze. Like the physiologists, the -ordinary working
psychologist would be quite pleased in a way to get rid of sensations, feelings, etc., as items of experience, and deal solely with
reactions, discriminations, behaviour-readinesses, and so on.
But he cannot bring himself to do so. For he sees himself faced
by the old unpalatable alternative. To get rid of " experience "
can only be done by denying that we have sensations, etc., or by
refusing to bother with them. But to assert that we do not
have sensations, or that no experiences occur, is to assert what
is palpable false; and to refuse to bother with them is to leave

out certain phenomena, or aspects of phenomena, that psychologists are supposed to investigate.
Some psychologists, chiefly American I think, have paraded

their embarrassments (being less inhibited than their British
colleagues), and have tried to deal with them. For example,
Tolman (of California), in his Purposive Behaviour in Animals
and Men, distinguishes between discriminations, discriminatory
readinesses and so forth, on the one hand, and what a psychology
of discriminations leaves out on the other. What it leaves out
he calls " raw feels ". These raw feels, he says, are not capable
of scientific treatment, and he admits at the end of the book that
he does not know what on earth to do with them. He suggests
three scrap heaps on to which they may be thrown. They may
be ignored as scientific will of the wisps. They may be assumed
to correlate consistently with our responses and response readinesses, so that in so far as X and Y behave alike they have the
same sort of experience. Thirdly, "Raw feels may be the way
physical realities are intrinsically" so that, e.g., experienced
qualities may be " the intrinsic nature of a nervous process ".
By contrast, Boring (of Harvard) will stand no such metaphysical'nonsense. In The Physical Dimensions of Consciousness
(note the word " physical "), and again in a more recent article,'
he has argued like this. In the early stages of our physiology
and psychology, interaction seems the obvious answer, because
we find stimulus causing sensation and sensation causing movement. But as our knowledge advances, psycho-physical parallelism is suggested, because sensation then seems to parallel
some middle part of the series of material events, between, say,
the prick of the pin and the jerking away of my arm. But
1 " Mind and Mechanism" in The American Journal of Psychology,
April, 1946.

EXPERIENCE


were our knowledge to be complete, so that we had a perfect
correlation between sensation and neural process, we should
then identify the two. We are not inclined to do so now, but
we will, when the time comes. And he proposes to hurry up
the transition a bit by doing some propaganda himself and
saying " Neural process and sensation are identical ".

First steps: "behaviour " and " experience ".
Well, what can be done about this ? Let me simplify the
question by talking for the most part about that form of experience we call sensation.

Suppose subject X is asked in a laboratory: " Please tell me
what you are seeing now "; and suppose he answers: " I see
a red patch ". Now take the sentence: " If we merely consider
all the dif[erential responses and readinesses, and such like, that
X exhibits towards the stimulus of a red shape, we are leaving
out the experience he has when he looks at it ". I shall call
this sentence 'A' for short. It is, no doubt, only a sentence
that someone doing psychology would ever utter. But, when we
appreciate this, it seems quite a straightforward sort of remark,
with nothing odd about it. It has this appearance because it
seems to resemble quite ordinary remarks like the following.
Sentence 1. " If you merely consider what Y says and does,
you leave out what he really feels behind that inscrutable face
of his." Sentence A resembles sentence 1 in that both are
apparently saying that, if you rely only on the publicly observable behaviour of the person, you will be ignoring his private
experience; and you may be wrong in the guesses you make
about it. It is quite sensible and often true to utter sentence 1,
or something like it. Why not also sentence A ?
Sentence 2. " If you only consider the obvious overt behaviour of an ape when solving one of KShler's problems (e.g.,
getting the banana from the roof by piling up boxes on each
other and climbing up), you leave out that when it sat still once
or twice, it was obviously doing something like 'cogitating'
about the problem." And
Sentence 3. " If we just treat a small child as a bundle of
reflexes gradually being conditioned a la Watson, we are in
danger of forgetting that the child also has feelings and vague
wants of its own, and is not just a performing rat."
aie similar to those between sentences A and 1. I deliberately
chose two technical examples that have cropped up in the
history of the subject, because it is these that are apt to influence


B.

A.


psychologists more immediately than those- from ordinary discourse.

But of course sentence A is also quite different from sentences
1, 2 and 3. Take sentence 1. What we leave out here is some-

thing that Y can tell us about. We might say of him: " Can't
he be persuaded to be a bit more open and tell us what he really
feels about our proposal ? ". Or " If Y goes on being so secretive
and withdrawn, I shall persuade him to go for psychological
advice. Perhaps the chance to talk to a sympathetic person
may help him to get things off his chest." Contrast this with
X in sentence A. What is left out here is something that X
cannot in principle tell us about. He has already given us a
lengthy verbal report, but we say that this is not enough. We
want to include something over and above this, viz., X's experience. It is useless to ask X to give us further reports and to
make further discriminations if possible, because these reports
and discriminations are mere behaviour and leave out what we
want. It is obviously pointless, therefore, to recommend X to
go to an analyst, so that he can then tell us about the experience
he has when he looks at a red shape and that we have so far
ignored.

The same sort of differences hold for sentences 2 and 3 as
well. This can be seen by imagining that the ape and the child
were suddenly given the gift of human adult speech and the
discriminatory capacity that goes with it. They would then
give us the same sorts of reports that X gives us in the laboratory,
and tlhereby enable us to include what we might have been in
real danger of leaving out of our account of how they (ape and
child) solve problems-viz., that they too cogitate, have wants
and so on. Again, therefore, it is quite obvious that what we
were in danger of leaving out in the cases of the ape and the
child is quite different from what we feel we are leaving out in
the case of X.
At this point the commonsensical objection is useful (that
we must be leaving out X's experience if we only consider his
behaviour) because it emphasises that we do not normally use
" experience " and " behaviour " as synonyms, but more often
than not as contrasts. Thus, e.g., you might say: " I did nothing
but felt a shiver down my spine "; or we might say: " Those
factory hands who do a routine job usually have a rich day
dream life "; or " He plays tennis quite well but he still does
not enjoy it ". In these examples, it would be quite wrong, or
odd, English to describe your shiver, the day dream life of the
factory hands, or the joyless experience of the tennis player as

EXPERIENCE


"behaviour". This contrasting use of " behaviour " and
"experience" reinforces our tendency to say that behaviour
sentences inevitably " leave out " the person's experience. But,
of course, when we look more closely at the sentences where we
do use " experience " in a way that contrasts with behaviour,
already mentioned, also differ from sentence A in the same sort

of way. The experiences of the factory hands and the tennis
player are describable, the " left out " experience of X is not.
This normal use of " behaviour " and " experience" draws
attention to the odd and stretched use of " behaviour" we are
now employing. For, in order to show that what we are alleged
to be leaving out is something very odd, we stretch the word
" behaviour " to cover, at least, the covert verbal and other
responses of the person, his response readinesses, all his relevant
bodily states, and all the possible discriminations he can make
to the presented red shape. But, in spite of this stretching, we
are still dissatisfied. We still want to draw a line between X's
behaviour in this sense and his experience. We want to do so

because this distinction still seems to have a point here. For
example, we still want to pose the schoolboy question: " When
X and Y both look at a red patch, and show no discoverable
differences of response, how do we know that what X sees is
like what Y sees ?-that their experience is qualitatively identical ? ". We still want to say that when a congenitally blind
person has his sight restored, it is not simply the case that he

now does and can respond differentially to a new range of stimuli.
We want to say that his experience is now qualitatively different.
We still want to distinguish between robots and men by saying
that the former have no sensations. We also want to use this
distinction between " behaviour " and " experience " whenever
we think of the Martians, or of the " men whose heads do grow
beneath their shoulders " and wonder what it would be like to
be one of them. To stick to this distinction seems to be the
only way of satisfying our wants here and of talking like this.
So even if it be true (as Mace alleges it is 1) that " statements
about mind or consciousness just turn out to be, on analysis,
statements about the behaviour of material things ", we still
feel like retorting that this is at best only true for psychological
purposes, and in any case, so much the worse for the psychology
that demands such a result.
Now I could go through these queer and difficult cases at once
1 " Some Implications of Analytical Behaviourism ", Arist. Soc. Proc.,
1948-49.



B.

A.


in order to discover whether we do need the distinction between
" behaviour " and " experience " to talk about them. But this
may be. a little premature and produce unnecessary resistance.
So I shall try another tack first.

Why this experience is so odd.
I shall say that the experience of X, which we are alleged to
be leaving out, is featureless. This is in contrast with the
experiences referred to in sentences 1, 2 and 3 above. The experience of X is featureless because there is nothing about it
that X can discriminate. If he does discriminate something
that appears to be a feature of the experience, this something

at once becomes, roughly, either a feature of the stimulus in the
sort of way that the saturation of the red in the red shape is a
feature of the red shape, or a feature of his own responses to the
shape. X merely provides us with further information about
the behaviour that he does and can perform.
But surely this is mistaken ? Surely it is wrong to say that

it has no features F For, even if it is always false to say of the
experience we are leaving out that e.g. " It is red ", or " It is
extended ", what of the so-called " formal " predicates or properties- ? No doubt we cannot say of it that it stands in spatial
or causal relations to anything else. But surely we can say, e.g.
"At least X's experience happens ". Surely, that is, we can
say that it stands in " temporal relations " to other events or
processes ? No-this will not do. For to say that " something
or other happens quite frequently " is to say that the something
occurs at diflerent times. To say this is to say that this something is in principle datable. How now do we set about dating
the occurrence that is X's experience at any time ? All we
can do is to date X's responses. But suppose X, as subjectobserver, sets himself the task of dating the onset of a certain
raw feel experience, for example, the one that is supposed to

happen when he sees two changing shapes as equally elliptical.
When X times himself here, say by stopping a stop watch, all
that he can time is his " seeing "-e.g., his subvocal " Ah !
that's it ", his accompanying release of breath and muscular
tension, and so forth. What, therefore, he dates is the onsct of
his seeing the shapes as equally elliptical. Difficulties only
multiply if we now retreat and say " But we time the experience
indirectly by timing the behaviour that it accotapanies ?"
E.g. What sort of " accofhpanying " does this ghost do ?
*But surely we can say: " x's experience (in the raw feel sense,
of course) is not identical with Y's" ? The answer seems to be

EXPERIENCE


" No)" again. Obviously we cannot be saying here that. X's
experience differs qualitatively from Y's, because admittedly
neither have the sort of features that permits them to differ
qualitatively. If we are saying that X's experience is not
numerically identical with Y's, then presumably we are. saying
something like: "Oh no! Mr. Shaw is our grocer-not G.B.S." !;
"Its the same cheering you heard a minute or so ago"; "It was
the same explosion we both heard " I.e., we are presumably
talking about tbings, or processes, or events. But X's and Y's
experiences are not things, processes or events. We notice the

difference if we ask: "As they have no properties like 'red',

'long', 'loud', etc., how, in the first place, do we distinguish

these two processes (or events), viz., X's and Y's experiences, so
that we can then assert that they are not the same ? " In the
case of the cheering, or explosions, it is possible to do so. Here
it does not seem to be.
But I have been saying quite a lot of things about experience
in the course of this paper-if not positive, then at least negative,
things. Thus, for example, I have said: " X's experience is
such that there is nothing about it that X can discriminate ".
If this is to be true, then presumably I am saying something
about experience, if only in the indirect way that negative
assertions do say things. But observe that, when I do come out
with this assertion, and others like it, what I say is easy to
follow and seems plausible because we are comparing it unconsciously with an assertion like " Ultra violet radiation cannot be
discriminated visually ", or " When I play a chord on a piano,
X just experiences a blur-he cannot discriminate a note ".
Yet my assertion about experience is quite unlike these examples
obviously. Because of this, it is a confusion-producing
assertion. It gives us the impression that we have been told
something about the raw feel experience, just as we really are
told something about ultra violet radiation, or X's experience
on hearing a chord.
Yet I have suggested that we say " X's (raw feel) experience
is featureless ". Should I have said this ? No ! It is equally
muddling. For it looks like saying: " The landscape in a dcsert
is featureless ", or " The faces in his paintings are quite featureless ", or " The Times is almost featureless ". But to say this
sort of thing is compatible with the something talked about

having all sorts of other "properties; to say " X's experience is
featureless " is not. If it is suggested again at this point that
what we can do is simply to reject it as non-existent, we are in
trouble too. For to say that X's experience does not exist, or is


B.

A.


unreal, or that 'There is not such thing as X's experience', etc.,
is quite unlike saying:
1. Unicorns are unreal, Johnny.
2. There is no such process. as perpetual motion.
3. Dodos don't exist any more.

4. There are no round squares.

5. No prime number exists between 19 and 23.

Unicorns are unreal because they are the creations of legend
and heraldry. Perpetual motion is a physical impossibility.
Dodos are extinct. There are no round squares because the
concept is self-contradictory; and there is no prime number
between 19 and 23 for logical reasons, since it can be proved
quite simply that there is not one. 'X's experience' is quite
unlike these cases. For one thing, we know what it is we are
denying in these cases; with X's experience we do not. The
snag is that we cannot discuss the question without using a
substantive, like " experience ", and the pronoun " it " (as in

" It is featureless "). Bat this at once traps us into supposing
that we are talking about some thing, process or event or state
of affairs (or what not), to which this noun and pronoun, like
other nouns and pronouns, are being used to refer. Obviously
they are not being used in this way here, however difficult it is
to get clear just how they are being used.

The upshot so far, then, is that to talk about X's experience
as a process, or an event etc. is just confusion producing. It
is foolish to say that it has, or has not any, features. It is
foolish to label it as a shadow or ghostly process on the model
of Ayer (in Thinking and Meaning), and then deny that it
occurs. In particular, it is foolish to say that physiology and
psychology ignore it and leave it out. There is no need whatever for Adrian to imagine that he is in danger of leaving anything

out; and it is folly for Tolman to invent a special term, " raw
feels ", to refer to this unreferable something. For X's experience
is not the sort of thing that can be ignored or noticed, left out or

included. It is not the sort of thing of which one can fruitfully
say " It is a sort of thing ", and for which it is appropriate to
use nouns and pronouns at all.
The objection of the indescribable experience.
" But is the man crazy ? The argument so far has simply
not shown that experience is featureless. All that it has shown,
if that, is that our experience has no features that can be de-

scribed, or discriminated, or reported in a laboratory. But the

EXPERIENCE


fact that it lacks such features does not entail that it' lacks all
features. For it may still possess features with which we can
only be acquainted. And this, of course, is the case. When,
for example, we look at a red patch, we all just know what it is
like to have the corresponding experience, and we all just know

how it differs from the experience we have when looking, at a
green patch. We cannot describe this difference. But what of
that ? The fact that we cannot describe it should not be used
to suggest the absurdity that nothing of the sort exists. We
only land in this absurdity by restricting the sort of observations
psychology can make to the observations of a third party (or
subject), and by restricting acceptable observation-sentences to
those in the third person. If we do this, it is no wonder that
we are restricted to the observation and recording of behaviour
and that we feel we are leaving out experience."

What makes this plausible ? The fact that this situation
appears to resemble stacks of cases where we. do say or believe
that some experience can only be appreciated at first hand, and
cannot be described at all. " Oh! I cannot possibly begin to
tell you what it was like-you must experience it for yourself."
And the 'it ' here may be anything from the beauty of the Alps
or the thrill of ski-ing, to the prophetic character of the Epilogue
of R. Vaughan Williams's Sixth Symphony and the esoteric
pleasures of the professional philosopher. This sort of remark,
moreover, is a well-established response with all of us, since it
goes back to childhood. The child is continually being put into
situations in order to appreciate them and learn about them;
and he is continually being told: " Oh, you must wait until you
are old enough to go to a pantomine yourself, and then you will
know what it is like ". Clearly, descriptions are pitifully poor
conveyors of the qualities of an experience, especially to a child,
because, to say no more, descriptions invariably do an injustice
to the discriminations actually made and to the excitement with
which they are made.
But is the indescribable experience of seeing a red patch like
any of these ? No-it differs in the relevant respect. When
we say " We can't describe the experience of seeing a red patch "
(in the raw feel sense) the " can't " is logical. When we say
" We can't describe the prophetic character of the Epilogue of
R. V. W.'s Sixth Symphony, you have to hear it for yourself ",
the 'can't' is the " hopeless " can't. No matter how carefully
and intelligently the critics talk about it, they cannot work me
up in the way the Epilogue itself can. If, however, X's seeing
red patches in the past had occurred in unpleasant circumstances,


B.

A.


and X had acquired a horror of the things, then I might say:
" I can't describe the unpleasant character that a red patch has
for X ". And then I would be using the " hopeless " can't.
The " hopeless can't " seems appropriate where -our discriminatory repertoire is poor, and where, from whatever causes, the
stimulus (or object in question) produces emotional responses
that a description cannot do, no matter how imaginative the
listener may be. This points. out where the distinction between
" We- can/We can't describe the experience " is useful. It is
useful to say we can't describe the R. V. W. Epilogue, in order
to distinguish it from relatively simple and humdrum experiences
like going for a ride on a bus or having pins and needles. It is
useless to say we can't describe the R. V. W. Epilogue, if we
wish thereby to stress the likeness between the raw feel experience of seeing a red patch and the experience of hearing the
Epilogue.
Let me try to deal briefly with this in a different way. Suppose
we still feel like saying (Moore-wise, perhaps): " But we just
do know what it is like to have the experience of looking at a red
disc, and we just do know how this differs from looking at a
green one ". Presumably we would say that a rat, once trained
to discriminate between a red and a green disc, had the experience (in some primitive way) of seeing a red disc. But we

would hesitate to say that it knew that it had this experience

or knew what it was like to have this sort of experience. Well,
then, what is true of us that is not true of the rat ? Looking
at it psychologically, we can react to our own responses to the
.disc by means of substitute, or symbolic, behaviour, and the
rat cannot do so. When I, or you, claim to know what our
experience of looking at a red disc is like, we imply, in part,
that we are able to react symbolically to our response of " looking
at a red disc ". What we react to in this way is the pattern of
stimulation produced by this response of " looking ". Again, I
may react symbolically to a pattern of stimulation that is called
" a behavioural readiness " to respond to this red disc as I have
responded to others in the past; and I may then say: " Oh,
there's something very familiar about this red disc ", or something of the sort. When, therefore, I say: " I just know what
it is like to have the experience of looking at a red disc ", I am
saying, for psychological purposes, that I have the capacity to
discriminate my own responses in the same sort of way as I
discriminate the features of the red disc when I say of it, for

example: " Oh, -its bright, uniformly red ", and so on. If we
overlook this capacity to react symbolically to one's own re-

EXPERIENCE


actions, or if we say we. are doing " introspection " and do not
enquire what actually happens when we do so, then we are
liable to assert, with a flourish and an air of -importance, that
" we just know how looking at a red disc differs from looking
at a green one ". In other words, we are then liable to mistake
features of our responses to the disc for some indescribable and
ineffable property of the experience.
One consequence of all this. It makes no difference if a
psychology allows or emphasises observation-sentences in the
first person. " Experience " still remains featureless, and our
observation and our recording cannot include it no matter how
hard we try.
It is appropriate at this point to return to the difficult cases
where it still seems to be essential to keep the distinction between
"behaviour " and " experience ". I only have space to consider
two of these cases-the Martians and the robots.

A difficult cztse. The Man from Mars. (a) " What it would be

like to be a Martian ".

Suppose we had obtained from our Martian visitor all the
information that we, as psychologists and physiologists, could
obtain about his smnsory capacities. We should probably still
want to say: " I wonder what it would be like to be a Martian
-with his pseudo-radio sense, able, for example, to listen to
whatever wave length he chooses. Extraordinary! ". This
seems to be a perfectly sensible remark. But if there was nothing
-more to be discovered about the Martian than his actual and
possible responses, then this would not be a sensible remark. We
would know what it would be like to be a Martian and there would
'be no point in wondering about it. So there is something more
to be learnt about the Martian, and that is what his experience
is like. Similarly for our wonderings about babies, mice and
lice.
Ntow we treat this remark (" I wonder what it would be like
to be a Martian ") as perfectly s3nsible because it resembles
remarks like:
1. " I wonder what it would be like to be an opium smoker."
2. " I wonder what it would be like to be, and hear like, a bat."
In 1 and 2 the only sort of answer that will satisfy me is the sort
of answer I will get if I became an opium smoker or a bat myself.
That is to say, I am imagining myself in the role of observersubject, i.e., the role of the privileged observer, and I will be
satisfied only with the sort of answer that I can then obtain.
The demand for this sort of answer here is quite reasonable,


B.

A.


because it is a contingent fact that I.am not an opium smoker
or a bat (after all, a witch could easily change me into a bat for
a day or so). Hence there is nothing absurd in the supposition
that I should become a privileged observer here. Similarly, my
wonder about the Martian seems to be the sort that can be
satisfied only by a privileged observer's answer. What.makes
this answer seem so imperative is that the Martian's experience
differs, ex hypothesi, from mine so much more than the opium
smoker's, or even the bat's. It is this vast difference that
inclines us to reject any attempted description of the Martian
experience as feeble and inadequate. Moreover, as with the
opium smoker and the bat, it is perfectly sensible to suppose
that I should become a privileged observer here also; and it is
this wonder what it would be like to be a privileged observer
that leads us to say there is something more to be learnt about
the Martian, namely, " What his experience is like ".
But our wonder about the Martian is quite different from our
wonder about the opium smoker. For what we want to know
about the Martian is something that no privileged observer can
give himself or us. Suppose I become an opium smoker and I
then say: " I now know what it is like to be one ". What do
I know here ? In part, I know the sort of thing I could embody
in " Confessions of an Opium Smoker "; the' sort of dreams the
smoker has; how habit forming goes on so that ultimately his
whole life becomes dominated by the drug. If I am confronted by
another alleged opium smoker, my knowledge is such that I may
be able to uise it to help determine whether the other man really
is an opium addict, or whether he is just lying or putting over
an act. In part, also, what I know here is something that can
be discussed in a court of law or by medical psychologists. My
claim to have this knowledge may be rejected by them, wrongly,
as bogus, or it may be accepted as veridical, when in fact it is
bogus. In short, when I take up opium smoking and learn
what it is like to be an opium smoker, what I learn is a lot about
the expandable and describable experience of the smoker. Or,
to put it differently and paradoxically, I do not learn anything
more about it except what the scientific methods of the nonprivileged observer are still too clumsy to discover for themselves. All, therefore, that happens when I become a privileged
observer is that I give myself the opportunity of making certain
observations for myself. I give myself the opportunity of
making the same discriminations, etc., as the opium smoker, of
learning to react to these' as he does, and so of coming to " know
what it is like to be an opium smoker ".

EXPERIENCE


-What, however, we want to know about the Martian is quite
other than this. It must be, because if it were not, there would
be no point in distinguishing between " behaviour " and
" experience " in our talk about him. The ' " experience " of
the Martian would then be assimilable under " behaviour " in
the way we have just suggested for the opium smoker. It is
perfectly sensible to wonder what it would be like to be a Martian
if we are thinking of one of us becoming a privileged observer.
But clearly we cannot only be thinking of this because this supposition is not enough. In fact, it is not what we want at all.
For, as we have seen, if I were to become a privileged observer,
I could still only come to learn what it was like to be a Martian
as I come to learn what it is like to be an opium smoker.
I would still not have learnt what the Martian's "experience "
was like in the sense in which we purport to be interested. The
same puzzle, of course, can be raised about the opium smoker
also. We can wonder what it would be like to be an opium
smoker, in the sort of way in which we would remain dissatisfied
with the knowledge that a privileged observer comes to possess.
But it is easier to spot the sources of the puzzle here than in the
case of the Martian. So when we feel the urge to say that
" there is something more to be learnt about the Martian than
his actual and possible responses " (viz., " what his experience
is like "), we feel this urge partly because we have overlooked
the difference between saying: " I wonder what it would be
like to be a Martian ", and " I wonder what it would be like to
be an opium smoker " -.a difference that makes the former
wonder pointless and the latter sensible.

(b) " Knowing at first hand ".
But this still leaves us dissatisfied for various reasons. Consider one of them. "When I take up opium smoking, I do not
only get the chance of making certain discriminations, etc., that
otherwise would not be open to me. I also come to know at
first hand, or become aware at first hand of an experience that
I could not otherwise have known. When, therefore, I wonder
what it would be like to be a Martian, I am wondering what it
would be like to have first hand knowledge of the experience of
a Martian. What I am aware of here is not the sort of thing
that can be talked about at all. If it were, there would be no
difference between hearing a description of it, and knowing it
at first hand for oneself. But obviously there is a world of
difference between the two-a difference that we recognise if we
are not suffering from Left Wing perversity. And it is this


B.

A.


immediate experience that I am interested in when I wonder
what it is like to be a Martian."
This objection is puzzling because' it is so very compelling

and yet hardly bears looking at. What is it " t6 know something
at first hand " ? When we say, for example, " I know at first
hand what it is like to smoke opium ", we are normally.saying
that other people need not tell me what it is like, because I
know this already; that I could, if pressed, produce a lengthy
description of it; that, if deliberately given some other drug I
could tell the difference unaided, and, if asked how I told the
difference, say: "This stuff hasn't the kick of opium" or
something of the sort. And so on. But this is not the use of
" know at first hand " in this objection. For here " to know at
first hand " of the experience of the opium smoker and the
Martian is to know something that other people cannot tell me
about, that is not describable at all, and that is such as to make
nonsense of the question: "How do you. tell the difference
between opium and the stuff you are smoking now ? ". Again,
when we normally talk about " knowing at first hand ", we are
contrasting this with " knowing at second hand ", i.e., learning
from someone else. But with what is " knowing at first hand
of the experience of the Martian " to be contrasted ? Not with
" knowing at second hand ", because this is logically impossible.
Not with " knowing it from my own description ", because this
is also impossible. However, we now see that it is not contrastable with anything, because " to know the Martian's experience
at first hand " is the only way in which I can know it at all.
But then this objection simply has not given a use to the expression " to know at first hand ". We think it has because we
are mistakenly supposing that this expression is being used in
the normal way in this objection. Similar difficulties break out
when we look at what it is that we are supposed to know at
first hand, and ask whether we can be mistaken about it, and so
forth. Similar difficulties also break out for the other favourite
expressions used, such as " immediate experience ", " immediate
awareness ", "direct experience " and " direct apprehension ".
These expressions are given no use either; and because of this
they have disfigured discussions about Behaviourism and the
subject matter of psychology.' Then, because these terms do
not contrast with anything, some of us fall into the trap and
say: " Ah! we are obviously dealing with a unique and fundamental mode of cognition. Terms like 'immediate experience'
'For such a discussion see Carroll C. Pratt, The Logic of Modern

Psychology (MacMllan, N.Y., 1939).


are confusing because we continually suppose them to function
here as they do in ordinary speech. We had better, therefore,
invent a special technical term to do the job-say ' enj oyment '."
And then we are sunk in the traditional philosophical bog!
(c) " The experience of the Martian " and " the red shape"'.
But what impels us to produce this objection about knowing
at first hand? What is its point ? What impels us is the likeness between "the red shape " and " my experience " or " the
experience of the Martian ", and the point of the objection is to
draw attention to this. A red shape presents a stimulus pattern
that I react to immediately, in contrast with the surrogate
reaction by means of symbols. My experience is like a structured series of such stimulus patterns, including those produced
by my own responses, to which patterns I seem to react in the
same sort of immediate way. We now identify the properties of
the whole with the properties of a part, and suppose that " my
experience " is just like " a red shape ". We are assisted in
this by the parallel talk we use about " a (the) red shape " and
" an (the, my) experience ". We talk about "noting a red
shape " and " noting an experience at the time "; " attendinrg
to the red shape " and " attending to the experience " ; " very
conscious of a red shape" and " very conscious of my own experience at the time "; "laughing at the red shape " and
"laughing at the experience ". And so on. That is, both
expressions function as objects of " awareness " verbs. Naturally, therefore, we are tempted to say: " I can know my experience at first hand ". The usefulness of this is that it brings
out how, for psychological parposes, " my experience " is like
a series of non-surrogate reactions to a series of stimulus patterns; and how it is like the reactions of an organism that is
only capable of reacting in a non-surrogate fashion to a series
of stimulus patterns consisting of red shapes. This comparison
of " my experience " with " a red shape " also helps us to understand why we resist the psychological move to talk about
" experience " as reactions to stimuli. For if " my experience "
is to function like " a red shape ", then this move is like sayiig:
" When you see a red shape, what you are doing is to see a mass
of almost invisible red dots ". To this the objection is that you
are then not aware of a red shape at all. So we object to this
move on the ground that it leaves out our experience altogether.
However, we do not really want to compare " an (my) ex-

perience " to " a red shape " at all. We do not really want it
to function like a stimulus word. For if it were to function like


B.

A.


this, it would be sensible to ask the embarrassing question:
" What receptors do you use to observe it ? ". Moreover, we
can see the point of saying: " I know at first hand the experience I have when I know a red shape at first hand ". But
what is the point of saying: " I know at first hand the experience I have when I know my experience at first hand " ? This is

an odd statement in that the main clause is redundant, precisely

because we are using " my experience " here to embrace everything that I know at first hand, including " my experience of my
experience ". Yet, when we are aware of a stimulus, we may
or may not also be aware of our reaction to it, and hence of our
experience when we react to it. Further, if " my experience "
were like " a red shape " here, we should be able to talk about it
in the same sort of way as we can talk about a red shape. But
then the whole point of saying that " I know my experience at
first hand " is lost, since " my experience " is now somethinrg
describable and not just a " raw feel ". Finally, this comparison
with a red shape suggests that, when I say " I know my experience at first hand", all I am saying is: " I am reacting, or can
react, in a non-surrogate fashion to a certain stimulus pattern,
viz., my experience ". But, as we saw, this suggestion is the
very one we resist as "leaving out my experience ". Hence to
treat " my experience" as a stimulus word or expression, like
" a red shape ", as the sort of thing that I can know at first hand,
is to destroy the whole point of the distinction we want to draw
between " experience " and " behaviour " when we wonder what
it is like to be a Martian.
Incidentally, this should help to make it clear that we cannot
use introspection to observe " experience ", since this is not an
observable something. It is not the case, therefore, that when
an experimenter studies a subject he is observing the latter's

behaviour, but that when he studies himself in the role of subjectobserver, he is observing his " experience ". In both cases the
experimenter is responding to organisations of stimuli, with the
difference that in the case of the subject they are produced by.
another person, but in the case of the subject-observer they are
self-produced and the observation-response to them can only be
made from a privileged position. Consequently, what an
experimenter observes when he takes note of a subject X
reacting is not nearly as different as we are apt to think from
what he observes when he plays the role of the subject-observer
himself.'
1 In Ch. I of Found&tions of Psychology, op. cit., Professor Boring says
that " consciousness is what you experience immediately ". This comical

EXPERIENCE


The conclusion, then, is that our wonder about the experience
of the Martian does not require us to draw this distinction
between " experience " and " behaviour ". Our difficulty about
his experience is very like our difficulty about that of babies and
animals. The diagnosis we have outlined for the former applies,
I think, mutatis mutandis to the latter also. But while there is
yet no such subject as the psychology of Martians, there is of

babies and animals. These branches of psychology are closely
beset by the philosophical difficulty about experience that I
have been dealing with. The advantage of considering the
Martian is that this is a much more difficult case, and one on
which we are apt to fall back if we start off with infants and mice.
A difficult case: the robot.
Now what about robots ? Is there any point in keeping the
distinction between " experience " and " behaviour " in order to
distinguish between robots and ourselves'? It looks like it
because we are inclined to say: " If a robot were to behave
just like a person, it would still not have any sensations, or
feelings ". And this seems to entail saying that we have experience (in the raw feel sense), and that the robot does not have
it. But this will not do. For we mean, in part, by 'a robot'
that the thing in question has no sensations, etc., in the ordinary
sense. That is, we normally use the word 'robot' in such a
way that while it can duplicate our overt behaviour, it cannot
duplicate our internal or covert behaviour when, e.g., you say
" I'm having a funny sensation in my tummy ". But we are
not aware of this when we are inclined to say: " If a robot were
to behave just like a person, it would still not have any sensations ". When we say this, we seem to be talking simply about
the overt behaviour of the robot. But we want to talk about its
covert behaviour as well. It is only if we do this that the
objection has any force. Yet, if we do so, we depart from the
ordinary use of 'robot'. The first thing to note, therefore, is
this. All that is entailed, on the ordinary use of ' robot ', is
that while we can make the internal discriminations etc. required

for us " to have a sensation ", the robot cannot. Obviously, it is
not necessary to use the notion of " raw feel " to describe this
difference. We are only tempted now to use this notion if we say
" Ah, but 'to make a discrimination', etc., is not identical
and pathogenic remark is the result of overlooking the differences between
" consciousness " and stimulus words and expressions like " red shape ".
" Consciousness " does not seem to be the sort of thing that we experience,
or know immediately or directly.


B.

A.


with 'having a sensation '-it leaves out something ". But this
is an old objection by now, which we have already dealt with
in principle, and which is, in any case, quite independent of
puzzles about robots.
The second thing to note is how the unobserved departure
from the ordinary usage of 'robot' is apt to muddle us and to

make us overlook how we do use the word. If we found an"alleged
robot that behaved, overtly and covertly, just like a person as
far as adjusting to stimuli like red shapes and loud noises was
concerned, we would be in some doubt, and might say at least
two different things. We might say (a): " This thing obviously
has sensations, and is not really a robot at all, but some new
sort of thing altogether-some new type of organism ". That
is, we might keep to the present use of 'robot' ('machine ',
etc.), stretch the use of 'organism' to cover it, and stick to
our usual criterion of " having a sensation ", viz., manifesting
the appropriate behaviour-readinesses, and covert and overt
behaviour. However, we might say (b): "This thing can't
really have sensations because we know it is a machine and not
a living thing ". That is, we might stretch the use of 'robot'
(or 'machine') to cover this different case, and thereby, by
implication, introduce a new criterion for " having a sensation ".
For a thing " to have a sensation " it must now not only exhibit
the appropriate internial and external behaviour, but also be,
and hence in other situations behave like, a living thing. If we
say (a), then clearly robots give us no reason for retaining the
distinction between " behaviour " and " experience ". Likewise,
if we say (b). Suppose we are asked: " If the robot hasn't any
sensations at all, and yet behaves in respect of a red shape just
as X does, what is the difference between them ? Surely you
have to say that Mr. X has a certain experience in addition to
merely behaving ? " Then the answer is: "No, we are not
obliged to say this, since the criterion of 'having a sensation '
has altered ". To say " X has certain sensations when looking
at a red shape " is not now only to say: " X exhibits appropriate
internal and external behaviour in respect of it ". It is also to
say that X exhibits other behaviour characteristic of an organism.
And this is the difference to which we point to distinguish
between X and the robot. X's behaviour towards the red shape
is part of the stream of behaviour of a living thing; the robot's
is not. If we now construct a slide and start supposing the
robot to be more and more like a living thing (e.g., eating food, not
oil, showing affective disturbances, and so on), then at various
points on the slide different individuals will switch to saying (a)

EXPERIENCE


and so giving it " sensations ". General agreement to say (a)
would perhaps be obtained when we reach a machine that exhibited
the robot-like analogue of reproduction, development and death.
If we overlook semantic points of this sort, we are apt to be
confused and taken in by arguments like the one of Broad's so
often quoted.' " However completely the behaviour.- of an
external body answers to the behaviouristic tests for intelligence,
it always remains a perfectly sensible question to ask: Has it
really got a mind, or is it merely an automaton ? . . . Since
the question can be raised, and is evidently not tautologous or
self-contradictory, it is clear that when we ascribe a mind or a
mental process to an external body, we do not mean simply that
it behaves in certain characteristic ways.'' This argument is
persuasive because (i) Broad is using " external body " (and, by
implication, also " robot " and " machine ") in the ordinary
sense which entails that it has no mind; and (ii) he makes us
concentrate unwittingly on the overt behaviour of the external
body or robot. But if a robot were produced whose covert
behaviour was also like ours, then the question: " Has it a
mind " will cease to'be sensible for those of us who take line
(a) above and say: " This thing is a new sort of organism ".
For to say that something is a sort of organism entails saying
that it exhibits certain mental functions of some order, low or
high. On the other hand, for those who take line (b) above, and
say the thing is just a new sort of robot, the question: " Has it
a mind " remains sensible but Broad's argument becomes
irrelevant. For to these people the criterion of " having a
sensation " or " mind " is not merely that the thing should
satisfy certain behaviouristic tests, but that it should also be,
and hence behave like, an organism. Consequently, the question:
" Has it a mind ? " remains sensible, and has a negative answer.
But now this argument is of no use to Broad. All it establishes
is that by " mind " we do not mean " external bodies behaving
in certain characteristic ways ". It does not help him to establish that by " mind " we do not mean " organisms behaving in
certain characteristic ways ". But it is this question in which
Behaviouristic psychologists are interested; it is to them that
1See The Mind and it8 Place in Nature, Ch. XIV.
2 Confusing talk on this topic, however, is not the monopoly of the
philosophers. Boring and Hull have both argued that psychological
subjects should be regarded as robots, and Boring has suggested substituting "robotology " for "psychology ". See Boring, Amer. J. of
Psych., op. cit.; and Hull, Principle8 of Behaviour, Ch. I.

B.

So far I have pointed to some of 'the causes of the philosophical difficulty we are in about " behaviour " and " experience ". There are many others. Here are a few of the many.
1. "If, when I see a red shape, I am supposed to be behaving
only and not experiencing anything, what is this stimulus to

which I am reacting ? If you say it is the physical enerigy or
the light waves, then I don't react to these at all-I may know
nothing about them. If, on the other hand, you say it is the
red shape, then this red shape is not a physical stimulus, but
a ' seen ' or ' experienced ' something. So I am not just
behaving. I am experiencing something."
2. There are all the sentences where we use predicates of
sensations, e.g., " The sensation was intense ", " It was a painful
sensation ". These sentences are used for all the sensory
modalities 'and for all the respects in which " sensations " vary
in quality, intensity, extensity, and duration. These sentences
lead us to want to say that there are such things as mental
states, processes and events with properties, and so lead us to
resist noting how the experience we want to talk about has no
properties at all.
3. There are all the sentences where we use " feeling " and
" emotion " words and expressions in ways comparable to the
ways we use "' sensation " words and expressions.
4. There is the array of sentences where we use " conscious
of ', " aware of " and their variants.
5. There are the sentences where we say, e.g., " I was ashamed
of myself ", or " I was acutely self-conscious at the time ", or
"That child is still charmingly unself-conscious".
All these sentences in 2 to 5 can be used to frame an indefinite
number of specific objections of various sorts to the diagnosis
offered-as I have done in 1. I shall not consider any more

objections here. What I have said, therefore, is inevitably
something of a hit or miss aflair. If the sources which I have
discussed are also the chief sources for any given individual,
then what I have said may help him to become aware of, and
acquire control over, the sources of the difficulty in the special
form it takes with him. I shall venture the hypothesis tha;t
when an objection is raised, it will be obtained from some sources
that I have not noted. Hence I suggest -that when one is
raised, it should not be looked on as an objection to a philo-

sophical thesis, because" I have not produced one-although
misleading language in places, adopted for brevity, may convey
this idea. I suggest, rather, that an objection be looked on and

pr

EXPERIENCE


treated in the sort of way I have tried to do above. In the course
of doing this, the gaps in my diagnosis of this philosophical
problem will be amply revealed.
The relevance of this account.

Let me summarise the bearing of all this on the problem that
faces the physiologists and psychologists.
We noted the crucial difficulty that faces the physiologists.
If their science is to give a complete account of what happens
when a person, for example, sees something, this mental event or
process of " seeing " is either reducible to, and so identical with,
some neural events, or else it does not exist. Neither alternative is acceptable. Hence it cannot give a complete account.
Now, if it is said that a simple reflex reaction, like the knee
jerk, is just a matter of certain neural events or processes, and
can be completely accounted for in neural-terms, neither plain
man nor physiologist resists this suggestion. But if it is said
that " seeing " is just a set of neural events, no matter how
complex, we all protest because we want to say that " seeing "
is not just a matter of reacting, as the knee jerk was, but something else as well, which is now being left out. I have tried to
point to some of the sources of this protest. If we appreciate
them, we may then be readier to appreciate the futility (a) of
saying: " But when I see something, all that is happening is
that certain neural events (or processes) are taking place "; and
(b) of adding: " This is false " (or " absurd " or some similar
remark). It is futile to say (a) because the ordinary discourse
of plain men and physiologists makes it patently false. This
leaves them very uneasy about the proposed identification with
nervous processes, and vulnerable to the usual objections against
it. Their uneasiness becomes intolerable when they are trapped
-into discussing the question by means of the antithesis of
" mental " and " material ", or " mental " and " neural ". For
this use of " mental " is itself a product of the dualistic tradition
in philosophy. Hence to argue for identity by means of the
words "mental" and "material " is to use self-destructive
weapons. But it is equally futile to say (b) "It is false (absurd)
to identify ' seeing ' with any neural events ". For this suggests
that it is quite all right to presuppose there are two sorts of
events here anyway. But, if pressed, we can only defend this
presupposition by falling back on " seeing " as a raw feel experience. I hope this is clear from what has already been said.
When we do appreciate this, we also see the point of saying
that mental events are identical with neural ones. But if the


B.

A.


" mental events " are the queer " raw feels ",.that we have discussed, then we also see that it is absurd to try to identify them
with neural ones, because they are not the sorts of things that
can be identified with anything else. They a2re not like the
transmission of an electric current that can be identified with
the passage of a nervous impulse. So even to talk about "seeing "
etc., and "neural events " in the way that this traditional
Adrian-cum-Ewing line 1 does talk about them will just produce
intellectual confusion.
Similar remarks apply to the parallel difficulty that confronts
psychologists. (i) If all that goes on, when X looks at a red
shape, is that X is just discriminating, is in a state of behavioural
readiness, etc., then he is not experiencing anything at all.
But (ii) if he does experience something, then it is false to say
that this experience is identical with his behaviour, etc. The
first alternative is compelling because if all that happens is that
Mr. X behaves, etc., then by our ordinary use of " behaviour "
and " experience ", it is true to say: " X is not experiencing
anything ". But this alternative is silly, because if we were to
discover an X who was producing all the usual behaviour,
internal and external, we would hesitate and want to say: " X
is also experiencing something ". The objection to this (" But
to say this is to go beyond our evidence ") can only be supported
by now using " experience " in the unusual raw feel way. Alternative (ii) moves us because we normally use " experience " and
" behaviour " as contrasts. But this alternative is also silly
because we can only give it the force we want it to have by unwittingly restricting the use of the word " experience " to " raw
feels ". Only by doing this can we go on defending the view
that "experience " and " behaviour " are not identical; and
this line of defence is hopeless. It is futile to try to rescue ourselves by admitting that " When, e.g., I see something, all that
is happening is that I am reacting, etc."; and it is equally futile
for anyone to retort : "But this is absurd (or false) ". These
moves are futile for reasons similar to those that make the
parallel moves futile for the physiologist.
It should be apparent by now that "experience " is a nonobservable something to a physiologist or psychologist; and that,
unlike concepts such as " homeostasis " or " the unconscious ",
he has no need to use or postulate it. Contemporary science, in
short, does not seem to require the notion of " experience ", and
is getting to the brink-of rejecting it, in effect, as " unreal " or
1 For Dr. Ewing again, see MIND, Jan., 1949.

EXPERIENCE


"non-existent ". If the
this direction, and if W
than

it

is

quite

possible

t

generally discarded as
present philosophical di
is just because we are i
the notion that we can
without absurdity or f
of " experience " can be
" witchcraft " in a prim
of being acculturated t
about "witchcraft " in such a community can be found and
constructed that parallel in an uncanny way the difficulties con-

fronting us about " experience ". So if we are puzzled by the
question: " What does this notion of experience resemble ? ",

we may find it useful to notice the likeness between the capacity
of men to have experience, which we still accept, and the capacity

of men to exhibit witchcraft, in which primitives still believe.'

Scme recommendations about language.

If the confusion we are in at present about this whole question
leads us to talk in foolish ways about some concepts in physiology and psychology, how should we talk instead ? Now merely
to recommend that we talk in this way rather that that is not
much use. Merely to recommend, for example, that we talk a
Behaviourist jargon will only arouse opposition and do little, if
anything, to treat the intellectual confusion we are all in. It is
partly for this reason that the recommendations of Physicalists
and the American Behaviourists have been of such little help.
The place where recommendations are appropriate (when they
are appropriate at all) is at the end of a diagnosis of a philosophical difficulty. For we can then better appreciate their
value and their limitations. The few recommendations I shall
offer briefly must be placed and read in this context.

The negative ones first. Do not contrast mental and material
(or physical) events, or mental and neural (or physiological)
events. Do not therefore talk about " gaps " between them, e.g.,
the gap between the sticking of a pin into my finger and the
appearance of a sensation of pain in my consciousness. Do not,
talk about intervening mental events in the chain of causation
between the physical events in the sensory and in the motor
1Reference to a work like Evans-Pritchard's Witchcraft, Oracles and:
Magic among the Azande (Oxford 1937) makes this parallel easy to see,

and to work out.


B.

A.


pathways. Do not speak about consciousness coming in at
certain points in the process of neural transmission. Do not
use the double terminology that is so common, e.g., " visual
sensitivity " and " visual experience ", "intensity of response"
and " intensity of experience ". For psychologists in particular,
I suggest the following. Do not succumb to the current-physiological talk about " sensations " and " feelings " because of the
prestige of physiology as the science that is foundational to
psychology. Accept physiological discoveries gratefully, but do
not feel committed to using the terminology in which physiologists express them or talk about them. Do not, e.g., take over
Adrian-like talk, as S. Smith Steven does, and speak of the
sense organs as " windows " that " start the messages along the
nerves, the highways to the brain ", which " bare messages
themselves . . . we call sensations ".1 Do not use the double

terminology indiscriminately-" responses " and " sensations ",

" sensitivity " and " experience ", and so on-under the pretence
that psychologists can safely ignore the question, or in the hope
of impressing readers with your open-mindedness. Indiscriminate talk will just confuse, and open-mindedness just be exposed
for the muddle that it is.
Some positive recommendations. Talk about neural events
(or processes) and behaviour or conduct, or responses of an
organism or person. Of, if you like, talk of physiological and
psychological events (or processes). In this case the distinction
is one of present convention and convenience only-between
those events that are dealt with by people called neurologists or
physiologists and those dealt with by psychologists. Get rid of
the nuisance words like " sensation ", "experience ", and so on,
by defining them provisionally by means of concepts like:
stimulus patterns, a discrimination by an organism, a readiness
to discriminate, a discrimination of a discrimination. If we must
talk ' causally ', talk of one causal nex-us that assists in providing
" the basis " of the capacities and dispositions of the organism.
When a neural impulse reaches the cortex, certain other neural
events are produced, and these in turn contribute to produce the
organism's total response that is its " seeing " or " recognising "
or " having a pain ". Talk about the gap in our knowledge as
lying between the neural discharge in the cortex and the organ1 This ghastly quotation comes from Boring, Langfeld and Weld, op.
cit. To those who know the work of Professor Stevens (of Harvard) and
who appreciate his sensitivity to questions of method, it is all the more
astonishing and unfortunate that this remark should be in a chapter that
he prepared.



ism's total response-for this is an empirical gap. Say that when
we can fill this gap, we will be able to give the physiological basis

of the capacity of the organism, e.g., to recognise- something, and
of the correlate of his recognition of it on any occasion. Say
that when we can do this, we may be able to offer generally
acceptable definitions of psychological concepts in physiological
terms. Say that when we possess a definitive psychology and
physiology, the relation between the two sciences is likely to be
this: psychology will use " conduct " or " behaviour " notions
and no "experience" ones; and these will be definable in
physiological terms, so that psychology will be a sub-theory
inside physiology.1 Instead of including " experience " and
" behavioui " within the subject matter of psychology, regard
the subject matter as including " behaviour " only. But add
the proviso that this view will cease to have any point as it
becomes generally accepted and successfully eliminates the notion
that contrasts at present with " behaviour ".

Final remarks.

The conclusion, therefore, for Adrian and Tolman and Co. is
that their worry that they have left out, or are in danger of
leaving out, something is needless. Their fears are groundless
that their sciences cannot in principle provide accounts that are
complete. They can get rid of mental events and experience.
But they get rid of them in a queer way-by realising it is just
foolish to suppose that there are, or are not, any such things.
When they have given us a definitive psychology and physiology,
what they will have done is not an impossible and absurd correlation between physiological and mental events. What they will
have done is to have given the physiological correlates of behaviour. This is quite a feasible thing to attempt; and there
is nothing else to do.
This conclusion has a bearing on various philosophical
questions. It makes obvious the foolishness of the traditional questions and answers about the relation between
mind and matter, and mind and body. So the variants of
Materialism, Epiphenomenalism, Interactionism and so forth are
left behind as inadequate treatments of the problem involved.
It shows, for example, in a new way just what an extraordinary
1 It should be obvious that when I speak of " psychology " here I am

speaking of " foundational " psychology alone. My remarks at this point,
therefore, do not apply to social psychology and to subjects like the
psychology of personality.


doctrine is Reductive Materialism, and how equally extraordinary is the usual refutation of it. This conclusion also
reveals the queerness in a question like: How do I know I am
conscious?; and suggests, as we have noted, that "my
consciousness " is not the sort of thing I am immediately aware
of. It also has a bearing on the " other minds " puzzle. For
the question: " Do you feel pain when you squeak ? " is bogus
in so far as it is a question about a " raw feel "; but it is empirical
and difficult in so far as it is a request for further information
about your covert responses.
A point about method. I have already mentioned one respect
in which my remarks in this paper may not be of help. There
is another, even more obvious respect. I said at the outset that
this paper would be an attempt to deal with a problem felt by
physiologists and psychologists. But what I have done (in fact)
is to treat the difficulty as I felt it by doing some " self-analysis "
(to borrow Karen Horney's term). The paper represents a
summarised record of some of that self-analysis. This will only
be of service to physiologists and psychologists in so far as I
have appreciated the problem as it confronts them. To obtain
this appreciation I have tried to observe their behaviour in
respect of it. But this is a very difficult thing to do well; and
my effort at what social anthropologists would call " field work "
was quite certainly not careful enough. So my appreciation of
the psycho-physiologists' problem is likely to be defective. Consequently, my self-analysis may not be nearly as helpful to them
as I should like it to be.

