3.3-4.1
.
How are you today? I hope you are doing good, stay safe and healthy wherever you are.
Okay, so today I am at Bali Airport and here is the domestic terminal.
Since I need to pick up someone from the domestic terminal, I would like to show you the situations.
And also I will visit the international terminal guys since we had few international flights to Bali.
So let's see what is happening there.
And here on the left side as you can see there are a lot of taxi outlets.
So if you need taxi to drive you from airport to your hotel, you can get it from here.
But anyway you can always book your driver before you arrive in Bali like what we do.
We normally will make name sign for our guests and wait for their arrival and drive you to your hotel guys.
Okay, so before I continue at this domestic terminal let's see how is our international terminal.
So this is the situations at our international terminal.
As you can see guys still very very quiet. No one is here I think even though we have received few international flights to Bali.
But today or this time still no one is here.
And a lot of outlets are closed, mini-mart closed as well.
And I remember this street used to be very very busy, a lot of cars lining up before and now as you can see no one is here guys.
Really sad to see this. Hopefully things will get better soon.
We can have our tourism back and more flights will come or arrive in Bali.
Okay let's have a look inside for a moment. Let's see what is happening there or how it looks like now.
But as you can see from here I think there is no one there guys. It's very quiet.
And here as you can see there is a small renovation. I think they are preparing this airport so that it looks good.
Anyway I have read very very good news today regarding the quarantine and also FISA on arrival.
Our government have decided to remove the quarantine requirements earlier from the schedule from 14th of March into 7th of March guys.
And also they'll do the same for the FISA on arrival starting from 7th of March.
But for the FISA on arrival they will do it for 23 countries. You can see the countries in the picture.
And for the no quarantine requirements you need to have complete vaccinations including booster.
And then you need to show that you have hotels booking which is paid already for 4 days.
And you will have a PCR test on your arrival in Bali.
And you can wait the result at your hotel and probably the result will be the first day.
And if it's negative you can go out from your hotel and enjoy the places.
And then for the third day you will have another PCR test.
If it's negative again you can go out from Bali to enjoy your holiday guys.
Okay so let's go back here as you can see some shops are open.
And if you need sim card during your visit in Bali you can get it from here.
This is from XL provider.
And here is nice painting guys. It is ketchup and fire dance.
And here in front of us there is another sim card outlet from a different provider.
It is from Telkom cell. So you have some options.
Either you want to do or you want to go with XL or you want to choose Telkom cell.
You can buy it here guys. Or you want to buy it outside also it's fine.
Okay so here they have Starbucks now.
If you like Starbucks coffee you can get it from here.
And this is the place that people like to take picture guys.
Because it's written here Bali Islands of Paradise.
A lot of people like to take picture there for their social media like Facebook, Instagrams and etc.
And this is the situations at a domestic terminal.
Only few drivers today waiting for their guest.
So by doing visa on arrival and also no quarantine requirements starting from 7 of March.
I think it's really good news and a good move from our government.
I hope things will get better soon and our tourism will be back.
And in the end it will have our Bali economy and everyone can come back to work again guys.
Okay so that's all for this video from Bali Airport.
I hope you enjoyed it.
Don't forget to support me by subscribing this channel.
See you again in the next video.
Thank you very much and bye now.
