Every time I come into one of these big box stores,
there's something that just bugs me to the core.
And it's this.
Six and a half horsepower?
Really?
Five horsepower?
I know that number is not right,
but what's the actual number?
So today I've decided, you know what, I'm taking one home,
I'm gonna figure out what the real horsepower is.
It looks like our range is two and a half to six and a half.
So let's go at four and a half
and we'll see how it performs.
Let's go.
Welcome to my lab.
Today, we test this guy.
Here we have our shop back assembled
as it would normally be used,
except I didn't put the wheels on it
because I'm gonna destroy this thing in just a few minutes.
On the back, melted into the plastic permanently for you
is again that 4.5 peak horsepower,
which bugs me so much.
Okay, let's take this guy apart.
And here we have our tiny,
tiny four horsepower motor.
Oh, oh, this just hurts my soul.
It really does.
Nice.
Well, I must say I've taken quite a few of these apart
and that's been the easiest one so far.
Why engineers, did you change the screws here?
I don't understand.
And here we have the final product.
So this is a mount that I designed
in order to hold on to this guy
after a whole lot of trial and error.
Since the shaft doesn't have a key or anything,
I decided to weld these nuts onto the end
and then I 3D printed this coupler
and based on the recommendation of one of my neighbors,
I reinforced the legs with these steel pins.
I actually have two of these motors
and this one's after a lot of destructive testing,
which you'll see here in just a minute.
Before we go any further though,
it will be helpful if you understand what horsepower is
and I've actually explained this really well
in a previous video.
And so there's a link in the description.
In fact, you know what?
I will put a clip right here for you
so you can just watch it in this video.
It's now horsepower and watts are exactly the same thing.
Sometimes people are a little bit confused about that
but they're both measures of power
and a horsepower rating or power ratings
are composed of two things in terms of electric motors.
And that is the speed or RPM and the torque.
Torque is a measure of how much force
is being applied to twist the shaft
and how far away that force is being applied.
And this is why our wrenches come in different sizes.
So if you pushing a little six millimeter bolt,
you get this little tiny baby wrench.
But if you want to push a 25 millimeter bolt,
you're going to get a much bigger wrench.
This allows the same person to apply the same amount
of force but get more torque
because their lever arm is longer.
Same thing on a seesaw.
You put a fat kid on a seesaw and a little kid,
the little kid can sit further away
and balance out the heavier kid
because the little kid has a greater distance.
He's applying less force but they both have the same torque.
Hopefully that makes sense.
So if you take the twisting force applied to the shaft
and multiply that by the speed at which you move the shaft
then now you have your power rating
and that's what it is.
So why is it that this motor being so much larger
than this one can actually have a lower horsepower rating?
Well, that's because this guy is rated for 2,700 RPM
and this one's rated at 3,600 RPM.
This one can spin considerably faster
but with much less torque.
And this one applies way more torque
but not nearly the same amount of speed.
And this is why we have,
this is part of the reason why there's such a difference.
And then also efficiencies and some other things.
If you want to see more details about how I built this rig
or even how to make one yourself,
there's a whole video dedicated to this project
and I'll put a link in the description for you
so you can check that out.
All right, ladies and gentlemen,
I think we are finally ready to test this motor
for horsepower.
There's a couple of variables we need to know
in order to test this motor correctly.
On the back of every electrical appliance
there's a voltage and current rating.
So we're gonna use that because we know that
that should be the optimal performance range for this motor.
Also because this is a universal motor
I'm gonna need to slowly dial up the voltage
instead of just hitting it with 120 volts.
Otherwise it'll spin out of control
and give us a big spark show.
Let's fire it up.
100
0.2
We got it
I'm cool
I'm good
I'm cool
I don't feel Evil
I'm okay
I'm okay
I'm okay
I'm okay
I'm great
I'm okay
I'm okay
man that's loud okay so I was so excited when I saw the number I already forgot
seriously 0.86 that's like 600 hold on 640 watts it's not even half oh my gosh
so it was like 1250 watts from the wall 640 like we're talking 50%
efficiency approximately I'm rounding some here all right let's take a quick
side note here efficiency is a number you are interested in you just haven't
thought about it in terms of your motor what this number tells us is that
barely half of the power we're drawing from the wall is actually being converted
into useful work at the motor you do the same thing with your car you put
gasoline in and you track the miles per gallon because you want to know how
efficiently your car uses the gasoline some of it's being converted into useful
work and some of it's being exhausted out of the tailpipe some of this being
converted into heat and you're wasting even more energy trying to manage the
heat in your motor when you put a log on a fire it's the same thing you get some
heat and light what you want and you get some ashes and smoke what you don't want
when you eat food same thing some of this being converted into energy which
you may or may not want and some of is passing through your body as waste what
you don't want this motor is actually wasting half of the electricity that
it's drawing from the wall I would not have expected the number to be quite
that low all right let's jump back on track here for a second they're calling
this peak horsepower instead of horsepower and I know from looking into
this that there's no official definition of peak horsepower interestingly
though they've been down this road before because they have defined peak
horsepower for us right on the box and at the bottom of their website let me
show you all right we're on shop vacs website so I'm going to put the text on
the screen for you so that you can see what I see but basically it says that
it does not denote operational horsepower which is the number I just
measured but rather the horsepower output of a motor including its inertia
contribution achieved in laboratory testing an actual use shop vac motors
do not operate a peak horsepower I've been reading and studying up on electric
motors for several years now and I have no idea what they just said I'm not
going to give up that easy we're gonna figure this out
hello yeah is this customer service wait for shop vac oh sorry I must have
dialed the wrong number sorry about that hey my name is Jeremy and I am trying to
figure out how to measure the horsepower on one of your shop vac motors at the
bottom of the website it says that this was achieved in laboratory testing but
I can't find anything that describes how the testing was done is there a way is
there someone I can talk to to help me figure out like how to duplicate their
results
yes let's see here I can give you a model number yeah on the back of the shop vac
it says MOD dot I'm assuming that's model SL 14-450
email our tech and what's your phone number I'll see it and call you back you're trying to duplicate the testing results
yes so I'm just trying to figure out what I'm doing differently why I'm not
getting the same results okay maybe she'll call me back ladies and gentlemen
she called me back Sarah if you ever watched this video by the way fantastic
conversation and thank you so much for your help you are super kind the
conclusion we came to is that we're not going to get any more information beyond
the actual text that's on the website however there are some clues that we
can draw from the text that they've given us the most important one is it
clearly describes the output of the motor that means that it can't be any
reference to the electrical power being drawn from the wall so we're going to
exclude all those variables as test parameters and focus exclusively on the
power we can get at the shaft that excludes another variable as well because
if we try to measure a locked rotor torque that's the maximum torque the
motor can put out when the shaft can no longer rotate and the motors basically
pushing as hard as it can the rpm is zero so if you put all that in the
formula you get zero horsepower again it's another variable that doesn't make
sense in terms of measuring peak horsepower here's what I've decided to do
I'm basically going to load this motor as much as possible and keep cranking up
the load until both the rpm and the torque start to come down and then I'll
know that I have passed its maximum output or the motor will flame up and
like vibrate and explode or something that's entirely possible with this kind
of motor let's find out this time I'm going to hit it with 120 volts right
from the start so I better go ahead and put a little load on there so it
doesn't go crazy three amps that sounds good okay
I actually blew the fuse in my variable transformer earlier so I'm gonna have to
hit it with 120 volts direct since I don't have any more fuses on hand and
hopefully the load will be low enough that we can actually make it through this
final destructive test all right here we go last chance because the motors
probably not going to survive another test like this
okay I think she's done I can definitely smell the smoke I'll put the peak
number that I found after scrubbing through the footage on the screen for
you so let's just draw some conclusions here we're measuring somewhere around
1.75 peak horsepower and let's just give them two and a half just for the sake of
maybe I didn't do it right so up to two and a half horsepower it doesn't seem to
be anywhere near the number that they're reporting on the box and remember
this is prominently stamped on the box it's in the manual it's melted into the
plastic on the front of your shop vac and it's the most meaningless number on the
product why not brag on suction power some of the other things that are
actually meaningful in terms of a shop vac I also want to point out that shop
vac in particular is a brand name in that this is universal across these wet
dry vacs I saw craftsman and I saw DeWalt shop vacs or wet dry vacuums with
these same kind of numbers on the box so we're not just picking on this one
company the test that I did today has no direct bearing on the actual performance
of this shop vac it may do a great job of sucking up water and sucking up dirt
and I also think that a universal motor in this application is a smart choice I
mean it's not very efficient but hey it packs a lot of power in a very tiny
package and they're dirt cheap I don't want to pay $500 from my shop vac I
think it's a good choice so what do we do with our new file knowledge then first
you need to share this with everybody you know who either has a shop vac or is
thinking about buying a shop vac we've all been duped into thinking that we
were getting a better shop vac because it had a higher horsepower number on it
when in reality the performance may be exactly the same as a much smaller shop
vac with better efficiency as we saw earlier the next thing we need to do is
actually look at some good reviews and articles on shop vac performance because
that's what we care about the functional performance I've stumbled across a lot of
good articles along the way researching on this so I'm going to put several in
the description feel free to pass those along as well and finally this doesn't
mean that you should throw out your shop vac because you thought it had more
horsepower than it actually has if it's doing the job fine then it's doing the
job that's all we really care about but four and a half horsepower I don't know
where they got that number from anyway thanks for watching after reviewing the
footage I decided to go back and double check a couple things anticipating a
few questions one of the things I wanted to check was whether I was measuring the
horsepower at its actual operating speed with the impeller installed so before
taking apart the second shop vac I actually measured the RPM of the
impeller itself and it ended up being about 20,000 rpm and that perfectly
coincided with the test that I ran earlier
