What's the future of Earth? Not humanity broadly, but Earth specifically.
Conversations about interplanetary expansion are dime a dozen in Silicon Valley, mostly
thanks to the work Elon Musk is doing at SpaceX. Everyone pretty much assumes that humanity
will expand from Earth to Mars before moving on to the outer planets and moons. This process
of solar expansion has been described in many science fiction stories, my favorite of which
has to be the expanse. But what about Earth specifically, regardless of whether or not
certain groups of humans move on to other planets or solar systems? It seems reasonable
to assume that Earth will continue to grow as an ecosystem for life, barring of course
an extinction level event. I'm John Cougan and here's what Earth could look like in
the future. In the middle of 2020, some researchers at the Strelka Institute created a framework
for analyzing the future of Earth. Instead of looking at various technological developments
and trying to analyze how they might compound, they instead focused entirely on energy consumption.
Energy consumption is an extremely useful metric for understanding civilizational progress.
In 1964, Nikolai Kardashev created a quantitative scale to describe three different types of
civilizations. A Type 1 civilization would be able to access all of the energy available
on its planet. For reference, humanity is currently around 0.6 and should reach Type
1 in the next couple of hundred years. Type 2 would be a civilization capable of harnessing
all of the energy of its home star. While doing this would be incredibly complex, Freeman
Dyson hypothesized it would be possible with a Dyson Sphere.
It's a very old theory number one, I'm not surprised that you haven't heard of it. In
the 20th century, a physicist called Freeman Dyson postulated the theory that an enormous
hollow sphere could be constructed around a star. This would have the advantage of harnessing
all the radiant energy of that star and any population living on the interior surface
would have virtually inexhaustible sources of power. Do you think you think that people
living in there? Possibly a great number of people, Commander. The interior surface
area of a sphere this size is the equivalent of more than 250 million class M planets.
A Type 3 civilization basically controls all of the energy in their entire galaxy. An alien
race this advanced would probably appear godlike to us. Both Type 2 and Type 3 civilizations
require massive expansion beyond the confines of Earth and could be thousands or even millions
of years away. But getting to Type 1 is actually pretty feasible for humanity if current trends
continue. Humanity is currently producing 18 terawatts of electricity, placing us around
0.6 on the Kardashev scale. While 0.6 may appear close to 1, the scale is logarithmic,
so moving up one increment after the point means 10 times the energy. To get to Kardashev
level 1, our energy production will need to be 10,000 times higher than current levels.
If we look backward at humanity's energy production, finding a time where humans controlled 10,000
times less energy than they do now requires going back more than 12,000 years to when
we were hunter-gatherers. But our growth in energy production is exponential, roughly
2% per year, so we're not 12,000 years away from reaching Kardashev 1 or K1 levels. If
we extrapolate that 2% annual growth rate into the future, you can see that we should
reach K1 levels of energy production within the next 500 years. But the exact date that
we reach K1 depends a lot on the average growth rate, called gamma, that we assume for the
future. Over the last 150 years, the growth rate has been 2.6%, but that has slowed to
just 2% over the past 40 years. Regardless, if positive growth rates continue, meaning
gamma is positive, K1 is inevitable. So how will ever-increasing energy consumption affect
our planet? In order to answer this question, we need to consider the first law of thermodynamics.
Energy can be transformed from one form to another, but it can neither be created nor
destroyed. This means that the energy we use on Earth is inevitably released as waste heat
before it's radiated into space. This would create another form of climate change, completely
separate from the greenhouse effect, and much harder to counteract. Physicists estimate
that a temperature increase of 12 degrees centigrade would create a doomsday scenario,
and at K1 levels of energy consumption, the waste heat alone would raise Earth's temperature
past this doomsday level and require massive structural changes in the way our world operates
in order to survive. Even if we rely on solar energy exclusively, Earth will still reach
a direct heating doomsday before reaching K1 levels of energy consumption. Unfortunately,
the laws of thermodynamics are impossible to bypass directly, so we will have to adapt.
There are tons of ways that Earth could adapt along the way to K1, but it's useful to consider
two primary dimensions along which these adaptations could occur. The first dimension would be
where we choose to use the majority of our energy, on Earth or in space. Pushing energy
usage into space via satellites would allow the Earth to maintain livable temperatures,
while keeping energy consumption within the atmosphere would require significant changes
to life on Earth. The second dimension we should consider would be the way in which
we produce energy, as this affects the direct heating timeline. If we choose to focus on
solar energy and cover the planet in photovoltaic cells, Earth becomes black. On the other end
of this spectrum is a blue Earth, where the majority of energy is produced via fusion
and leaves some of Earth's surface available for other uses. Based on these variables,
we can imagine four extreme scenarios, each at the edges of these trade-offs. The first
is black marble, which represents the scenario most affected by direct heating. In this future,
humanity has been extremely inefficient in energy production and unable to expand beyond
our atmosphere due to space junk. Consequently, the Earth is now covered in solar panels,
and the entire society lives inside of a dome. The Earth is completely climate controlled,
the majority of humans spend their time in virtual reality, much like the future depicted
in Ready Player One. This outcome is possible if we don't optimize our technologies before
it's too late. At a certain point, once the effects of direct heating are inevitable,
the only solution is to use even more energy to control the climate artificially. The second
scenario is the opposite of the black marble, and we'll call it arcology. This is a future
where most energy is used off Earth, thanks to the development of megastructures that
extend into space. This leaves the remainder of the planet's surface for agriculture and
the cultivation of biodiversity. This is an extremely efficient society, with just two
billion human inhabitants, all focused on fighting against excess entropy. In order to avoid destroying
Earth's atmosphere from direct heating, industry is located on the moon, where a solar base beams
energy back to Earth, and new energy intensive construction can be completed off Earth. The
third scenario, called half Earth, considers what the world would be like if humans no
longer existed at all. On half Earth, an artificial general intelligence runs the planet, which
is entirely robotic. This AGI is entirely focused on expansion at all costs, and no
longer needs to worry about direct heating or Earth's atmosphere at all. The goal is
to mine materials until the construction of the first Dyson Sphere can be completed, before
moving on to other solar systems and continuing to expand from there. This is the most aggressive
scenario by far, with most energy generated by fusion. All resources are mere inputs,
helping to expand and conquer the universe. The last scenario considers what would happen
if humans were able to evolve into photosymbians and overcome the limitations of traditional
human forms. Photosymbians are genetically modified humans that are capable of autotrophy
through photosynthesis. This would obviate the need for traditional farming, and allow
humanity to use energy on Earth much more efficiently. In this world, energy is abundant,
and atmospheric engineering has redistributed sunlight more evenly across the planet's
surface, allowing for higher biomass production efficiency. Temperatures are level across the
Earth's surface, and 1 trillion centiants are flourishing in the tropical and subtropical
zones. These four scenarios represent just two different parameters, the type of energy
production and the location of its consumption. As you can see, these variables allow us
to predict radically different futures, and there are obviously many other possible futures.
So what's the takeaway here? Well, this type of parameter-driven projection methodology
is useful because it shows us that the future is indeterminate and humanity still has an
incredible amount of agency regarding how we progress as a species. It's quite common
in Silicon Valley to hear particular thought leaders share singular visions of the future,
often in service of the particular project they are working on at the moment. But I think
it's more useful to imagine multiple scenarios and the decisions that might lead to each
one. As for which future I think is most likely, and which future I would most like
to see personally, I'll be covering that in a future video, so please consider subscribing.
