"Imagination, Culture, and Play"
Open sidebar
"Imagination, Culture, and Play"
Could you fix formatting and spelling errors?

ALPHA Phi quarterly , volume 28, 1916

Many students who are bored by group plays take delight in personifications and plays among ideas. These may have the length of a Chinese tragedy or may be single ceremonial.

I remember looking up to my windows which opened upon a porch one
ning. to see a group in gay-colored smocks, like huge moths, silently
alighting upon sill and railing and when I as silently arose and beckoned them within.

they rehearsed for me a part of the progranof a birthday feast, for they were all Persians and Omar Khayyam
was in their midst.

The same group delighted in what they called "futurist portraits."

Some described a landscape and the others tried to to guess who at it was

One mght say. I see a cliff by the sea; several Dine rise fair and straight the blue is bright and calm ; the sun shines through the green branches and a
salt tang is in the air. "

and mediately several would guess
"Margaret M." When they 
compulsory chapel. they
became "old monks going
stop sedate and down-cast eye."

These forms of recreation illustrate Matthew Arnold's thought when he speaks of the ability to use the imagination fruitfully as a sign of culture.

The Mount Holyoke girls inquire as to an experience. "Was it funny, peculiar
or funny, ha! ha!:"" Professor Dewey says,

"Much if not all the love of truth for truth's sake in scientific inquiry represents the attitude of play carried over into enjoyment of inquiry for its own sake."
Alpha Phi Quarterly, Volume 28, 1916
Many students who are bored with group plays take delight in personifications and plays among ideas. These may have the length of a Chinese tragedy, or they may be a single ceremony.
I remember looking up to my window, which opened upon a porch one morning, to see a group in gay-colored smocks, like huge moths, silently alighting upon the sill and railing. When I silently arose and beckoned them within, they rehearsed for me a part of the program of a birthday feast, for they were all Persians, and Omar Khayyam was in their midst.
The same group delighted in what they called "futurist portraits." Some described a landscape, and the others tried to guess who was at it. One might say, "I see a cliff by the sea; several pines rise fair and straight. The blue is bright and calm; the sun shines through the green branches, and a salt tang is in the air." And immediately several would guess, "Margaret M." When they had compulsory chapel, they became "old monks going with a sedate and downcast eye."
These forms of recreation illustrate Matthew Arnold's thought when he speaks of the ability to use the imagination fruitfully as a sign of culture.
The Mount Holyoke girls inquire about the experience. "Was it funny, peculiar, or funny, ha! ha!:" Professor Dewey says, "Much, if not all, the love of truth for truth's sake in scientific inquiry represents the attitude of play carried over into enjoyment of inquiry for its own sake."
ChatGPT Mar 14 Version
. Free Research Preview. Our goal is to make AI systems more natural and safe to interact with. Your feedback will help us improve.
New chat