I am happy I'm allowed to speak for myself. I found a previous speaker here. And I'm
going to talk about a strange case of global warming. I am not really terribly
interested in global warming. Like most physicists, I really don't think much
about it. But in 2008, I was on a panel here about global warming. And I had to
learn something about it. And I spent a day or so, or half a day, maybe, on
Google, and I was horrified by what I learned. And I'm going to try to explain
to you why that was the case. So I also, being on that panel, became very famous.
Because if you search on my name, and on global warming together, you get roughly
40,000 hits. That's much more than I get if I search on my name and super
connectivity, you know. So you get sort of into the system. And according to me
then, what I said at that time, and I still agree with, the global warming has
become a new religion. Because you can't discuss it. And that's not right. So it
starts, as science comes in money forms. It's what I call real science, which I
hope I do. Then what it is, we have pathological science, that people who
fool themselves. And that happened quite often in science. You do something, you
have a theory, you do something, and my God, the experiment shows it. You're very
happy on your publish, and you fool yourself. You can be very careful when
you publish. Then we have what we call fraudal in science, which is fortunately
very rare. Some people cheat in science on purpose. And I had advice to you, if
you want to cheat in science on purpose, cheat on something which is not
important. Then you won't be found out. You won't be very famous either, but
that's an etiquette. And finally, I have junk science. Junk science often is a
medical field. Well, somebody had five people eating onion soup, and five
people eating tomato soup, and the five people eating onion soup don't get as
much cancer as the five people eating tomato soup. And you can publish that,
but it's not very good. And finally, we have pseudoscience. And pseudoscience is
a very strange thing. Because pseudoscience, you begin with a hypothesis. And
then you, which is very appealing to you. And then you only look for things which
confirm the hypothesis. You don't look for other things. And so the question,
then, what I'm going to ask is global warming, a pseudoscience. And you can
be the judge. So here it starts with these two people. I've shown pictures of
before. If you ask who's a famous scientist in the United States, they say
Al Gore. And so somebody says to me, you are no business dealing with the global
sign, global warming, because you're not a climatologist, but neither is Al
Gore, you know. So that's it. And Pochari, who is a railroad engineer. These two
people got the Nobel Prize in peace because of this figure here. And I am
ashamed of the Norwegian government who did that. This is almost as bad a
peace prize. And when Obama got the peace prize, they got elected. So the
peace prize is a difficult thing to do right, I think. Now, what is this curve
here? They were famous because they made this curve famous. And this is the
average temperature of the earth starting from 1860 to roughly 2000. And the
temperature change has gone off of a point minus 0.4 degrees to plus four
degrees, 0.8 degrees. It will be discussing in global warming, 0.8
degrees. If you ask people in general, what it is, they think it's four or
five degrees. They don't know it's a little. It's not even fever. Now, the
curve, the curve temp is average over space and time for the whole earth for
the whole year. Now, I'm dealing with temperature. Normally, in my normal life,
I grow cells in tissue culture. And we have to keep the temperature at 37
degrees. And that's very difficult. But the earth has kept the temperature in
150 years in 0.8 degrees. But I don't believe anybody can measure that. It's
impossible to measure that. And because in 1880, the termometers were placed,
various places. In 1900, they were moved. In 1950, they were moved. In 2000, they
were moved. How can you figure the average temperature on the earth? I don't
think that's possible. If I gave 10 people the job of measuring the average
temperature in this room, you will get 10 different answers. So that's a very
difficult thing to do. So what does it mean, then, this curve here? And in my
opinion, it's probably nothing. Because, I mean, why does it matter if the
temperature is going up 0.8 degrees? The average temperature, if indeed you could
measure it. So from 1880 to 2013, the temperatures increased. And from 288
degree Kelvin to 288.8 degree Kelvin is 0.3 percent. It's very little. And if
it's true, it means to me, the temperature would be an amazingly stable.
Now, there's a maze that the temperature can be so stable. And from 1975 to
roughly then 2000, you get this curve here. And the CO2 and the temperature
increased in common. And that's what the problem is, but the CO2 causes the
temperature change. CO2 has very little due to the temperature change.
Boulder Raper is a much, much, much stronger green gas than the CO2. If you
look out of the window, you see the sky, you see the clouds, and you don't see
the CO2. And then you come to the hockey stick graph, which the previous
speaker showed in a little different matter. And I have to say that I have to
rely on H.C. Anderson and the Emperor's new clothes. But the little boy was
innocent. He didn't see that the Emperor had clothes on. And I, in the little boy
here, I don't see that the CO2 is the cause of all this problem. For example,
then I showed you before, the temperature had gone up from 288 to 288.8
degrees, 0.3%. In this 150 years, the Earth population had gone up from 1.5
billion to 7 billion. Nobody talks about that. And maybe, for example, that the
all the paved roads and cut-down forests has to cause a global warming, not the
CO2. But nobody talks about that. And actually, some person do. This is Stephen
Shue, which is an Nobel Prize winner from 1977. And he suggests to paint all
roof white, because that might help. So, at least he's a... I know him very well.
He's a smart guy, but he's been bought by the global warming people. And he's
now helping Obama, trying to make green energy in the United States. So, how come
that we heard about the Copenhagen meeting. How come that can be? Well, it
can be because of societies like the American Physical Society. I, as you
heard, I resigned from the American Physical Society because the statement
that energy is incontrovertible. American Physical Society discussed a mass of the
proton. The mass of the proton is not incontrovertible, according to the American
Physical Society. But the global warming is. See, that's a religion. That's a
religious statement. Like the Catholic Church says the earth is not round, and
the Physical Society says that the global warming occurs. I mean, that's a
terrible thing. So, I resigned from the Physical Society. I hope I can get one or
two of you to resign as well. Now, the other thing is, you'll see here, the
other is this statement taken directly from the American Physical Society. It
says the global warming is occurring. If non-mitigation action are taken,
significant disruption in the earth physical and ecological systems, social
systems, security and human health are likely to occur. So, let's see, look at
history. In the last 150 years, the earth has got warming, according to the
people. But the human health has got better. The system is better. Everything is
better. The earth had much better than that was 150 years ago. So, why is it
suddenly changing? Why is it suddenly getting worse? It's a mystery to me. So,
then they had a meeting in Kharkun, and what did we get there? It's typical of a
paper. Oxfam reports show that 21,000 people suffered better during the
first nine months of 2010. Twice as many as the whole 2009. These are the tidbits
you see in the paper, trying to convince people that global warming is a
terrible thing. And I think that's a strange thing. Now, we have a recent
meeting in Brazil, and if you read in the paper, nothing much has been coming
out from that. I could hardly find it, but I prepared this slide. And what they
try to do is to concentrate on sustainable development. They can all agree
with that. But one thing you should be very careful, you should not confuse
pollution with CO2. CO2 is not the pollution. We all agree that pollution is
a bad thing and so on, but that's nothing to do with CO2. So, what is the
greenhouse effect? Have you ever heard about it already? What it is, is that
without the atmosphere, the Earth would be roughly 35 degrees colder. If the
fact is that CO2 has increased from 280 to 350 part per million in a hundred
years, temperatures increase 0.8 degrees C. Is there a cause and effect? Well, you
can try to test that. Since 1998, it was the warmest year measured, CO2 has
increased up to 396 part per million. So, we can then calculate what the
effect of the temperature would be. The very simplest calculation is 0.8
times 4 divided by 100 is 0.1 degree warmer. But it's colder today. It's colder
now than it was in 1998. That's 15 years or so. How can that be? If CO2 is
increasing regularly, it should be warmer. But it's not. So, here you see the
curve. This is the CO2 increasing. This is the temperatures in 1998. And you see
here in 90, I think it's 1908. Suddenly, it dropped maybe 0.5 degrees or so. Almost
got rid of all the global warming entirely in one year. So, you recognize the
difference of measurement is very difficult. And so, you can't really
measure it. That's what bothers me, that both the people who are leaving
global warming and the people who are deniers accept the curve. That curve
should never be accepted. So, here is where the temperature is measured.
This is according to NASA, good or not, for space research. So, here in the
United States, all these dots are places where temperature is measured. It's
between 30 and 60 degrees. You know, the United States is almost completely
agree. But look, below 60 degrees, 50 degrees south, there are eight
thermometers. That includes the South Pole. There are only eight thermometers
there. How can they talk about average temperature of the Earth? I don't
understand it. And furthermore, if I ask this rhetorical question, what is the
optimal temperature for the Earth? It's clearly not the temperature we have.
That would be a miracle. But nobody knows what the optimal temperature is
for the Earth. It may be two degrees warmer, maybe two degrees colder, I just
don't know. But it clearly is not the temperature we have today. So, nature,
of course, it's gotten into the fact, and they have a journal called Climate
Change. My friend said, don't make fun of nature, then they won't publish your
papers. I said that nature doesn't publish my papers anyway, so it doesn't
matter. So, nature then, this issue, I found out there were several issues, but
these issues were free, so I looked up, and they grow corn in Africa. And they
found out, it's a big article in this paper, that for one, they lose 1% for
every day at over 30 degrees C. That's a very difficult thing to find out. Maybe
true, maybe not. But if you think about the corn farmers in Iowa, that they're
probably maybe a hundred times as efficient at the people in Africa, because
of the climate and all the things we have in the United States, and they grow
corn. Unfortunately, what we do with corn, we turn most of it into ethanol. And
they mix, in New York State, they mix 10% ethanol into the gasoline. And so it's
affecting me directly. Every time I buy gasoline, I have to buy 10% ethanol
mixed in the gasoline, much less inefficient and very costly for the
country. Should never have done that. And they don't mention that all in here,
how important CO2 is for plant life. And so if I have more CO2, the plant grows
better all over the earth. If you have a greenhouse and put carbon dioxide in it,
the plant grows faster. Plant CO2, of course, is food for plants. And believe it
or not, the great trees in Bob Sochen are starving. They don't look like that, but
they really are, because when photosynthesis was developed, the carbon
dioxide was much higher in the air than it is today. So the plant have a system
which is geared for a much higher concentration of carbon dioxide. So here
is another thing. So you see all these kind of things. See, I pick and choose
when I give this talk, like my previous speakers picked and chose to. So I pick
and chose, and I really like this one. This is the body shrinks because of
global warming. And all these kinds of things, like, I've seen that the
strawberries have gotten smaller these days. For example, the Red Bill Gulls,
California Square Lynx, Woodrats, large number of things get smaller because of
global warming, because of the 0.8 degrees average. Now, unfortunately, this does
not apply to people. My observation is that people get bigger as far as to
people global warming, of course. So here we come then to see, remember,
everything is caused by global warming. And then people, it doesn't get any
warmer. So we can't really talk about that. We have to talk about something
else. We like to talk about climate change. Okay. So if I look up then, it takes
30 years to define the climate according to the people who should know. So when
did the climate change? Yesterday? Five days ago? Five years ago? I don't know.
But that's what people talk about climate change. And you may have noticed that
when you talk about climate change, it's always to the worst. Nobody says, oh,
I'm so glad the climate is changing. I'm getting better. But nobody says that.
When you say climate change, you mean it getting worse. And here's a thing which
is difficult to see maybe from here. So let's focus on this graph here. This is
from the Midwest United States. And this is the rainfall over 100 years. And you
see in the Midwest United States, there was a very dry period, which is called
the Dust Bowl. It became very famous because of John Steinbeck wrote The
Grape the Rock. But you see, this happened long before now. And here's another
hundred years from place in Africa, huge amount of rain. See, these climate
things that happened as always have happened. Even if you're religious,
you know, about the newest flood in the Bible, you know, that's really a giant
flood. So the climate has always changed. And then we come to people who talk
specific. And what I really like is this thing here that says melting Greenland.
They don't send the ice melt on Greenland. It sounds much worse if you say Greenland
is really melting, you know, you know, and they show these pictures of flood. So
they look at this just to pick something. And actually, if all the glaciers in the
world melt, the ocean will rise one meter. If all the ice on Greenland melt, the
ocean will rise seven meters. If all the ice on the South Pole melts, the ocean
will rise 93 meters. But the fact is that there are more ice in the South Pole now
than there ever has been, because it's colder. You know, there's a previous speaker
talked about the Southern, the Northern Hemisphere, which is getting a little
warmer. But the Southern Hemisphere is getting colder. So that's the way life is.
Now, here is a paper by a partner. I know about this guy as Ulta Johansson. He's in Norwegian.
They have measured the ice on inland on Greenland, scientifically, by using satellites.
And since there's a Norwegian guy, I'm from Norway, it has to be true, you know.
And they have found out the last 11 years or so, the ice on the Greenland has risen five
centimeters a year on the inland of Greenland. Well, you are seeing pictures from the coast,
but the inland is increasing. So there are more ice on Greenland now than it was like 15 years
ago. That's a wonderful fact. If you don't believe that, you can look at Google and here I picked
up the several harbors in Greenland. This is the five coldest years I measured, the five warmest
years. Up now, these are the coldest years and these are the warmest years. The warmest years
were basically in the 30s. But we didn't worry about the Greenland melting at that time. And that's
true for all the temperatures in Greenland. And the coldest years include 92 and 93, you know,
92. And so the coldest year happened more recent than the warmest years. But so they don't have
to worry about Greenland. So since it's difficult then for the people to talk about climate change,
you know, as in the previous speaker, talk about extreme weather. Now, that's something, you know.
But you say every time you have extreme weather, you have a hundred year flood. That means it
happened a hundred years ago as well. See, the weather is no more extreme now and it never would
have been. When we had a big catastrophe in the United States, when New Orleans was almost, they
wiped out of the map, we had eight hurricanes that year. Huge, the papers say this is the future.
This is global warming. This is what we have it to expect. The next year, there was no
hurricane in the United States. Nobody wrote in the papers say there are no hurricanes. This
must do the global warming. This we can expect, you know. Only when disasters happen, you get into
the act and say this is bad. So you feel then you have to sort of, you know, extreme weather that
you have when the ocean rises, you have to run away from it. But that, of course, is not the fact.
And so the question you ask, is the ocean level increasing? And if you look at this curve here,
this is a thousand years on this scale that 8,000 years ago. This is meters here.
So the ocean has risen 15 meters in 8,000 years. If you look at the recent years,
this curve here, and this is the recent years. The ocean, this is no centimeters and this is
a hundred years. So the ocean has risen 20 centimeters in a hundred years. It wrote 20 centimeters in
a previous hundred years. And so the last two, three hundred years is written roughly 20 centimeters,
a hundred years. But please note, there are no unusual rise of sea levels. It's not unusual.
And to be sure you understand that, I'll repeat it. There is no unusual size in the sea level.
So you've got to, you've got to, see, these are the facts people don't want to admit to you.
They say the sea level is rising. Yes, it is less than 20 centimeters a century. That's what it does.
So here, then, is going back to Al Gore. This polar bear is very famous because he's running
out of ice. And the poor, the cuddly polar bears are dying. So, but this is the real culprit,
the guy with the gun and the polar bears. And I'm, as I said, I'm from Norway, and Spitzbergen
is the correct protector of Norway, has polar bears on it. And in 1972, there were roughly hundreds,
two thousand bears there. And now in 2005, four thousand bears there. The reason for that, of
course, you weren't allowed to hunt them anymore. They were protected. And what everybody in Norway
knows, but you probably don't know, is they're more seals now than they've been for a long time.
But seal is what polar bear eat. Because people have stopped buying seal-skinned coats. And the
Canadian and the Norwegian are used to club little seal babies to make these beautiful coats. Don't
do that anymore. So it's a huge amount of seal, which is what polar bears eat. So when I resigned
from the physical society, I got this wonderful problem by a guy named Samson. And I really like
that. You consider a large room 20 feet square, 10 feet high. Actually, let's take this room.
This is a very large room. And the question he asked is, if I seal this room off, how many
matches do I have to write light every day to keep up with the increase in the carbon dioxide
in the air due to all the cars spewing out gasoline and stuff? There are roughly maybe 800 million
cars in the world. So how many matches do I have to light in this room to keep up with the carbon
dioxide increase in the atmosphere every day? And this is a good problem for physicists. I was
surprised when I saw the problem. But the facts are that for this room here, if you light, say,
one match, you're probably equivalent to three years of car spewing carbon dioxide into the air.
So one match in this room is equivalent to all the carbon dioxide cars in the world put up in the
room. If you take this room here, it happened to be 20 years. But this room is much bigger. That's
amazing thing. See, the atmosphere is much, much bigger than you think it is. And it's a relatively
easy calculation. And I hope you try to do that tonight, and you will learn something about that
anyway. But you are sitting here listening to me, and you are polluting this room with carbon
dioxide as well. So much are you doing that? Well, if you need roughly 2,000 calories a day,
so let's take sugar as the food. And if you do that, you have to eat 3 moles of sugar a day,
which is 2,000 calories. And the sugar will weigh 450 grams. But the carbon dioxide you breathe out
weigh 800 grams, more than the sugar, of course, because you get the oxygen from the air. So every
day you breathe out roughly 800 grams of carbon dioxide, which is equivalent to 400 kilos a year
speaking of 40 tons in a lifetime. That's what you breathe out. And of course, it's only about
roughly 4% of the total emission, because you drive cars, and you heat your house,
and you drive in airplanes and stuff. So it's only 4%. So it doesn't help to save the world
if you go on a diet. You don't have to do that. It doesn't do much.
So the Chinese policy from 19, this is what Chinese did, which I admire very much, because
they did something about something. What they did, they had one child per family,
and the result is that 375 million Chinese had not been born.
Think about that. More in the population in the United States. If you are still worried about
global warming, why don't you try to get the government to limit the child to one child per
woman? Then you have really done something. The reason people don't do that, of course,
is unpopular. The Chinese did it, and it was a very brave and the correct decision, I think.
The other thing is that the green want this solution. When I see Ben Mills in California,
I shudder because I see my tax money go out the window. And of course, this is the right decision,
atomic or nuclear plants. And I know about the earthquake and the tsunami in Japan,
never did it cross Germany to ban nuclear power. That was a wrong decision of Germany,
and I know they will reverse it. I can make any kind of bets on that. And I know here now,
in the tsunami in Japan, actually there was a dumb thing from the Japanese to begin with,
to build a nuclear power in an earthquake, prone earthquake area. But it was one of the biggest
earthquakes ever have been seen on this earth. And what happened is that 100,000 people, roughly
speaking, died in the catastrophe. And as far as I know, not a single person died from radiation.
But we are so worried about radiation. That's wrong. Nuclear power is the most safe power
if you pay kilowatts hour produced. So here and then there are many ways to spend money.
And I feel, do you feel good using solar cells? I mean, do you feel good using solar cells? Wasting
your money, the manufacturing capability of the country and everything else using solar cells.
So here, then, is a real problem from New York City in 1900. You may think I'm joking with
somewhere written a book about this. The real problem in New York City was how can we get
enough horses? It's not a joke. It was a real problem. And it was dead horses laying in the
streets of New York at that time. And the other problem, of course, how can we get rid of the
horse manure? And so now we laugh at that problem. But I say 50 years from now, people look at us
and say, how could these people be so stupid not using nuclear power? How could they possibly be?
So the question I asked, are we afraid of chance or change? And this is an American character
who is not afraid. We want, we worry. And here is a picture of the earth and some millions of years.
And the earth is changing. Things are changing for heaven's sake. We can't keep till the same.
This is the American foreign policy. They try to keep things the same because we have it well
in America. So their policy is to keep things unchanged. But even the foreign policy in the
United States can't manage to do that. And we certainly can't manage to keep the earth just
indifferent. So we have, I think we have to learn to live and change. That's one thing. And here's
a picture of myself, my wife and me, we got married roughly 60 years ago. This is how we looked.
This is how we look today. You see? We've changed. And notice, unfortunately we have changed.
And notice also that the new picture is a colored picture. It was no color when I got married.
So as far as I'm concerned, we are left the world in the better shape than we arrive. And this
will continue. And so here is some Antarctic ice core, which I have been shown. We see roughly
every 100,000 years we get an ice age. That'll happen now. You see that? That'll happen in ice age.
People lived. This is 800,000, 400,000 years ago. People lived on the earth through these changes.
And, but they come and they look like we are ready for another ice age. Not for, and then people say,
well, please burn some coal. Keep warming up the earth. And the other interesting thing about this
is that the blue line is the temperature and the temperature increases before the carbon dioxide.
And a lot of peddling and writing and things that try to get that changed around. But the facts
are that these are the experiments. So finally, then we get to the end. And this is from the
economist, down to spare grounds for hope on global warming. And if I asked a rhetorical question,
is climate science a pseudoscience? And if I'm going to answer the question, the answer is absolutely.
So thank you very much.
