Nonsmooth Dynamical Systems
Open sidebar
Nonsmooth Dynamical Systems
Summarize: INTRODUCTION 
Dynamical systems with nonsmooth components arise in vari- 
ous settings. For example, nonsmoothness may occur due to 
dry friction, impacts or backlash in mechanical systems, or due 
to diode elements in electrical circuits. The governing differ- 
ential equations of nonsmooth dynamical systems have right- 
hand sides which are not differentiable or even discontinuous. 
Consequently, the classical control theory for smooth systems 
cannot be applied; a different and more careful approach is 
needed. This approach includes extending differential equa- 
tions to differential inclusions and adopting different solution 
concepts. 
In this thesis, we focus our attention on two types of non- 
smooth dynamical systems. First, we study linear multi-modal 
systems. These systems consist of a collection of linear systems, 
each of which is active on a polyhedral region of the state 
space. Although these systems exhibit linear behavior locally, 
they are nonsmooth, since their vector i elds lack differentia- 
bility. Second, we study multi-agent systems with a nonlinear 
communication protocol. The nonlinear functions in these sys- 
tems do not have the property that they are locally linear, but 
they do satisfy a property that we call sign-preservation. 
In the rest of this chapter, we have a closer look at both 
types of nonsmooth dynamical systems and we introduce the 
problems that are studied in this thesis for these systems.
1 / 1
The introduction discusses how dynamical systems with nonsmooth components arise in various settings, such as mechanical systems with dry friction or diode elements in electrical circuits. These systems cannot be analyzed using classical control theory for smooth systems due to their non-differentiable or discontinuous nature, requiring a different approach. The thesis focuses on two types of nonsmooth dynamical systems: linear multi-modal systems and multi-agent systems with a nonlinear communication protocol. The problems studied in this thesis for these systems are introduced.
1 / 1
1.1linear multi-modal systems 
Linear multi-modal systems form a class of hybrid systems; 
they are a combination of continuous-time linear systems, the 
modes, together with the discrete dynamics of switching be- 
tween these modes. In this thesis, we study two general classes 
of linear multi-modal systems. 
First, we consider continuous piecewise aff i ne systems. The 
state space of a piecewise aff i ne system is divided into solid 
polyhedral regions, on each of which a different linear or aff i ne 
system is active. We call the regions with their corresponding 
linear systems the modes. Switching between different modes 
1 
introduction 
of a piecewise aff i ne system is state-dependent: if the state 
lies in a certain region, then the corresponding linear or aff i ne 
system is active at that moment. The resulting vector i eld is not 
differentiable, but we do assume continuity of the right-hand 
side of the governing differential equations. Piecewise aff i ne 
systems can be used to approximate nonlinear systems, but 
they can also appear naturally, for example in systems that deal 
with friction. 
Second, we generalize piecewise linear systems to linear 
multi-modal systems for which the polyhedral regions may 
overlap and do not have to cover the full state space. As a 
consequence, we have to replace the differential equations by 
differential inclusions. Examples of such linear multi-modal 
systems are switched linear systems, conewise linear systems, 
and linear complementarity systems. 
In this thesis, we study two geometric control theory prob- 
lems for linear multi-modal systems, namely the disturbance 
decoupling problem and the fault detection and isolation prob- 
lem.
1 / 1
Linear multi-modal systems are hybrid systems consisting of continuous-time linear systems and switching between different modes. Two general classes of linear multi-modal systems are studied in this thesis: continuous piecewise affine systems and linear multi-modal systems with overlapping polyhedral regions, which require differential inclusions. The two geometric control theory problems studied for these systems are the disturbance decoupling problem and the fault detection and isolation problem. Piecewise affine systems can be used to approximate nonlinear systems and can naturally arise in systems dealing with friction.
1 / 1
1.2the disturbance decoupling problem 
Annihilating or reducing the effects of disturbances is of ma- 
jor importance in many real-life control problems. Designing 
feedback laws that decouple the disturbances from a certain 
to-be-controlled output constitutes the well-known disturbance 
decoupling problem. An input/state/output system is called 
disturbance decoupled if for each i xed initial condition and zero 
input, the output corresponding to one disturbance is exactly 
the same as the output corresponding to another disturbance. 
The disturbance decoupling problem amounts to i nding a 
feedback law that renders the system disturbance decoupled 
by eliminating the effect of disturbances on the output. The 
investigation of this problem for linear and (smooth) nonlinear 
systems has been the starting point for the development of 
geometric control theory [Basile and Marro, 1969a,b; Wonham 
and Morse, 1970]. For both linear and (smooth) nonlinear sys- 
tems, geometric control theory has been proven to be very 
eff i cient in solving various control problems, including the 
disturbance decoupling problem (see e.g. [Wonham, 1985; Ni- 
jmeijer and van der Schaft, 1990; Basile and Marro, 1992; Isidori, 
1995; Trentelman et al., 2001]). In this thesis, we use tools from 
geometric control theory to study the disturbance decoupling 
2 
1.2 the disturbance decoupling problem 
problem for both piecewise aff i ne systems and the more general 
linear multi-modal systems. 
So far, in the context of hybrid dynamical systems, the results 
on the disturbance decoupling problem are limited to jumping 
hybrid systems [Conte et al., 2015] and switched linear systems 
[Conte et al., 2014; Otsuka, 2010, 2011, 2015; Yurtseven et al., 
2012; Zattoni and Marro, 2013; Zattoni et al., 2016]. The ma- 
jor difference between piecewise aff i ne systems and switched 
linear systems is the nature of the switching behavior. For piece- 
wise aff i ne systems the switching behavior is state-dependent 
whereas it is state-independent for switched linear systems. 
For the case of state-independent switching, the solution of 
the disturbance decoupling problem can be obtained by fol- 
lowing mainly the footsteps of the (non-switching) linear case. 
An interesting consequence of the state-independent switch- 
ing is that the set of reachable states under the inf l uence of 
disturbances is a subspace. This allows one to generalize the 
so-called controlled invariant subspaces of linear systems to 
switched linear systems. Such a generalization leads to elegant
1 / 1
control design techniques for switched linear systems [Lin and Antsaklis, 2009; Liberzon, 2012].
For the case of state-dependent switching, the solution of the disturbance decoupling problem requires the use of piecewise aff i ne system theory. In this thesis, we study the disturbance decoupling problem for piecewise aff i ne systems with a particular emphasis on the disturbance decoupling problem for switched linear systems. We also consider the more general case of linear multi-modal systems and study the disturbance decoupling problem for these systems using differential inclusions. The main goal is to develop geometric control theory techniques that can handle these more general classes of systems and provide effective solutions to the disturbance decoupling problem.
1 / 1
Such a generalization leads to elegant 
necessary and suff i cient conditions [Otsuka, 2010; Yurtseven 
et al., 2012] for a switched linear system to be disturbance de- 
coupled. In the same papers, disturbance decoupling problems 
by different feedback schemes have also been solved based on 
these necessary and suff i cient conditions. 
However, a similar approach breaks down in the case of 
state-dependent switching as the set of reachable states under 
the inf l uence of disturbances is not anymore a subspace, not 
even a convex set in general. As such, neither the results nor 
the approach adopted for the state-independent case can be 
applied to the state-dependent switching case. 
In this thesis, we develop a new approach that takes into 
account the state-dependent switching behavior of piecewise 
aff i ne systems. In Chapter 2, based on the conference paper [Ev- 
erts and Camlibel, 2014b], we start by studying a simple class 
of piecewise aff i ne systems, namely bimodal linear systems. 
Our approach provides easily verif i able geometric necessary 
and suff i cient conditions for these systems to be disturbance de- 
coupled. Based on these conditions, we study the disturbance 
decoupling problem for both state feedback controllers and 
dynamic feedback controllers. For both feedback schemes, we 
consider mode-independent and mode-dependent controllers, 
and provide necessary and suff i cient conditions for the solvabil- 
ity of the disturbance decoupling problem. These conditions 
amount to checking certain subspace inclusions very much analogous to linear systems and linear state-independent switching 
systems. 
In Chapter 3, we study the disturbance decoupling problem 
for general continuous piecewise aff i ne systems, based on the 
conference paper [Everts and Camlibel, 2014a]. We provide a set 
of necessary conditions and a set of suff i cient conditions under 
which such a system is disturbance decoupled. Although these 
conditions do not coincide in general, we point out some special 
cases in which they do coincide. Furthermore, we present con- 
ditions for the existence of mode-independent static feedback 
controllers that render the closed-loop system disturbance de- 
coupled. All the conditions we present are geometric in nature 
and easily verif i able. 
Next, we consider a particular linear complementarity sys- 
tem and study when such a system is disturbance decoupled 
in Chapter 4, based on the book chapter [Everts and Cam- 
libel, 2015]. Linear complementarity systems are nonsmooth 
dynamical systems that are obtained by taking a standard linear 
input/output system and imposing certain complementarity 
relations on a number of input/output pairs at each time in- 
stant. A wealth of examples, from various areas of engineering 
as well as operations research, of linear complementarity sys- 
tems can be found in [Camlibel et al., 2004; Schumacher, 2004; 
van der Schaft and Schumacher, 2000; Heemels and Brogliato, 
2003]. For the work on the analysis of linear complementarity 
systems, we refer to [Camlibel et al., 2003; Heemels et al., 2002; 
Camlibel et al., 2002; van der Schaft and Schumacher, 1996; 
Camlibel, 2007; van der Schaft and Schumacher, 1998; Heemels 
et al., 2000]. Particular linear complementarity systems can be 
written as linear multi-modal systems, namely those of index 
zero [Camlibel, 2001, Chapter 2]. Different from the piecewise 
aff i ne systems treated before, the polyhedral regions on which 
the modes are active, can now be non-solid, and together they 
do not cover the full state space. It turns out that the resulting 
linear subsystems share a certain geometric structure, which 
we exploit to i nd necessary and suff i cient conditions for dis- 
turbance decoupledness that are crisp and easily checkable.
1 / 1
The thesis focuses on studying the disturbance decoupling problem for piecewise affine systems with state-dependent switching behavior. The approach adopted takes into account the non-subspace and non-convex set of reachable states under the influence of disturbances in the state-dependent switching case.
In Chapter 2, bimodal linear systems are studied, and geometric necessary and sufficient conditions for disturbance decoupling are provided. These conditions are easily verifiable, and both state feedback and dynamic feedback controllers are considered.
Chapter 3 studies the disturbance decoupling problem for general continuous piecewise affine systems, and a set of necessary and sufficient conditions are provided. These conditions are geometric in nature and easily verifiable, and conditions for the existence of mode-independent static feedback controllers are also presented.
Chapter 4 focuses on linear complementarity systems, which are nonsmooth dynamical systems obtained by imposing complementarity relations on a number of input/output pairs at each time instant. The analysis of linear complementarity systems is well-established, and particular linear complementarity systems can be written as linear multi-modal systems. Necessary and sufficient conditions for disturbance decoupling are provided based on the geometric structure shared by the resulting linear subsystems.
Overall, the thesis presents a comprehensive study of the disturbance decoupling problem for piecewise affine systems with state-dependent switching behavior, and provides easily verifiable necessary and sufficient conditions for various feedback schemes.
1 / 1
Finally, in Chapter 5, we study the disturbance decoupling 
problem for general linear multi-modal systems. We recover 
almost all results from Chapters 2, 3 and 4, as well as known 
results for a particular class of switched linear systems. More- 
over, this general approach gives us the possibility to treat the 
disturbance decoupling problem for another class of linear com- 
plementarity systems, namely linear passive-like complemen- 
4 
1.3 the fault detection and isolation problem 
tarity systems [Camlibel, 2001; Camlibel et al., 2002; Camlibel 
and Schumacher, 2016]. We i nd novel necessary and suff i cient 
conditions for this kind of linear complementarity systems to 
be disturbance decoupled. Chapter 5 is based on the journal 
paper [Everts and Camlibel, 2016]. 
1.3the fault detection and isolation problem 
The second geometric control problem that we consider in 
this thesis is the fault detection and isolation problem, which 
we i rst study for bimodal piecewise linear systems. Given a 
system that is prone to faults, the fault detection and isolation 
problem amounts to i nding an observer that detects when 
a faults occurs. Moreover, if a fault occurs then the observer 
should identify what kind of fault it is. Examples of faults 
are the complete failure of an actuator, a biased actuator, or 
changes in the system dynamics. 
Fault detection and isolation (FDI) is an active area of re- 
search in control theory, due to the essential requirement of 
high reliability for many applications of control systems. Var- 
ious types of FDI techniques have been proposed for linear 
systems and for some classes of nonlinear ones. There is a large 
number of contributions in this area, and consequently we di- 
rect the interested reader to the comprehensive survey papers 
[Frank, 1990; Hwang et al., 2010; Isermann, 2006; Isermann and 
Bailé, 1997]. On the other hand, research on FDI for hybrid 
and switched systems, and in particular for piecewise linear 
systems, has been less intensive and fruitful (see [Balluchi et al., 
2002; Cocquempot et al., 2004; Narasimhan et al., 2000; Wang 
et al., 2009]). 
In Chapter 6 of this thesis, based on the paper [Everts et al., 
2016], we use the classical geometric control theory framework 
(see [Basile and Marro, 1992; Wonham, 1985]) to investigate 
the problem of fault detection and isolation for bimodal linear 
systems. Our approach is inspired by the ideas pioneered in 
[Massoumnia, 1986a], where several formulations of the fault 
detection and isolation problem were stated and solved in 
geometric terms for linear systems.
1 / 1
To summarize, Chapter 6 of the thesis focuses on the fault detection and isolation (FDI) problem for bimodal piecewise linear systems. FDI is a critical requirement for many control systems, and various techniques have been proposed for linear and some classes of nonlinear systems. However, research on FDI for hybrid and switched systems, particularly piecewise linear systems, has been relatively limited. In this chapter, the classical geometric control theory framework is used to investigate the FDI problem for bimodal linear systems. The approach is inspired by earlier work on fault detection and isolation for linear systems, and the chapter is based on the paper by Everts et al. (2016).
1 / 1
As a by-product, and before we continue with the second 
class of nonsmooth dynamical systems, we consider the FDI 
problem for a class of linear dynamical systems def i ned over 
5 
introduction 
an undirected graph. Two disjoint sets of agents are identif i ed 
in the network: the faultable agents, which are prone to failure, 
and the observer agents, whose output is measurable. Fault 
detection is performed by an unknown input observer, and 
stated in the geometric language of [Massoumnia, 1986a], i.e. 
output separability of fault subspaces. In Chapter 7, which is 
based on the paper [Rapisarda et al., 2015], we present a charac- 
terization of the smallest conditioned invariant subspaces that 
are generated by the faults. This characterization is exploited 
in order to give graph-theoretical conditions guaranteeing out- 
put separability in terms of distances between faultable agents 
and observer ones. In addition, we study the case where two 
faultable vertices share exactly the same neighbors in order to 
present a condition under which fault detectability fails. 
In this thesis, we make extensive use of geometric control 
theory for both the disturbance decoupling problem and the 
FDI problem. Although the resulting conditions often are some- 
what similar to those of the linear case, the methods to obtain 
these conditions are fundamentally different, since we have to 
take state-dependent switching into account. 
As a last subject in this thesis, we study a truly nonlinear 
system, that does not exhibit linear behavior locally.
1 / 1
What is the truly nonlinear system studied in the thesis?
1 / 1
I don't know exactly.

1introduction1 
1.1Linear multi-modal systems1 
1.2The disturbance decoupling problem2 
1.3The fault detection and isolation problem5 
1.4Nonlinear consensus protocols for digraphs6 
1.5Preliminaries and notation7 
1.5.1Geometric control theory7 
2disturbance decoupling for continuous piece- 
wise linear bimodal systems11 
2.1Introduction11 
2.2Disturbance decoupled bimodal systems13 
2.3Disturbance decoupling by state feedback20 
2.3.1Mode-dependent state feedback20 
2.3.2Mode-independent state feedback22 
2.4Disturbance decoupling by dynamic feedback23 
2.4.1Mode-dependent dynamic feedback24 
2.4.2Mode-independent dynamic feedback28 
2.5Subspace algorithms30 
2.5.1Algorithm forV∗ md(H,{A1, A2},B) 30 
2.5.2Algorithm forV∗ mi(H,{A1, A2},B) 
31 
2.5.3Algorithm forT ∗ 
mi(E,{A1, A2},C) 
31 
2.6Conclusions32 
3disturbance decoupling for piecewise affine 
systems33 
3.1Introduction33 
3.2Piecewise aff i ne systems34 
3.3The disturbance decoupling problem39 
3.4Necessary and suff i cient conditions42 
3.5State feedback46 
3.6Conclusions48 
4disturbance decoupled linear complemen- 
tarity systems49 
4.1Introduction49 
4.2Linear complementarity problem/system50 
4.3Disturbance decoupled LCSs51 
4.4Conclusions58
5disturbance decoupled linear multi-modal 
systems59 
5.1Introduction59 
5.2Linear multi-modal systems60 
5.3Disturbance decoupled systems65 
5.4Special classes of systems70 
5.4.1Switched linear systems70 
5.4.2Conewise linear systems71 
5.4.3Linear complementarity systems72 
5.5Conclusions77 
6fault detection and isolation for bimodal 
systems79 
6.1Introduction79 
6.2Fault detection and isolation80 
6.3Fault detection and isolation for bimodal sys- 
tems83 
6.4Conclusions89 
7fault detection and isolation for systems 
defined over graphs91 
7.1Introduction91 
7.2Background material92 
7.3Problem statement93 
7.4Graph-theoretic conditions95 
7.5Conclusions101 
8consensus dynamics with arbitrary sign-pre- 
serving nonlinearities103 
8.1Introduction103 
8.2Preliminaries and notations104 
8.3Main results107 
8.3.1Problem formulation107 
8.3.2Node nonlinearity110 
8.3.3Edge nonlinearity116 
8.3.4Combining node and edge nonlineari- 
ties121 
8.4Conclusions122 
9conclusions and future research123 
9.1Disturbance decoupling for linear multi-modal 
systems123 
9.2Fault detection and isolation125 
9.3Consensus dynamics with nonlinearities125
1 / 1
This appears to be a table of contents for a thesis or research paper. The document is organized into several chapters or sections, with each section focusing on a specific topic related to control theory.
Chapter 1 introduces the topics of linear multi-modal systems, disturbance decoupling problem, fault detection and isolation problem, nonlinear consensus protocols for digraphs, and preliminaries and notation related to geometric control theory.
Chapters 2-5 focus on the disturbance decoupling problem for different types of systems, including continuous piecewise linear bimodal systems, piecewise affine systems, linear complementarity systems, and linear multi-modal systems.
Chapter 6 deals specifically with the fault detection and isolation problem for bimodal systems.
Chapter 7 examines the fault detection and isolation problem for systems defined over graphs, using graph-theoretic conditions.
Chapter 8 explores consensus dynamics with arbitrary sign-preserving nonlinearities.
Finally, Chapter 9 provides conclusions and suggests future research directions for disturbance decoupling, fault detection and isolation, and consensus dynamics with nonlinearities.
1 / 1
CONSENSUS DYNAMICS WITH ARBITRARY
SIGN-PRESERVING NONLINEARITIES
ABSTRACT: This chapter studies consensus problems for multi-agent systems defined
on directed graphs where the consensus dynamics involves nonlinear and discontinuous
functions. Sufficient conditions, involving the nonlinear functions and the topology
of the underlying graph, for the agents to converge to consensus are provided. This
chapter is based on the paper [ Wei et al., 2016].
8.1 INTRODUCtIon
Apart from the popular linear consensus protocols, nonlinear
agreement protocols have recently attracted the attention of
many researchers. The nonlinear consensus protocols may arise
due to the nature of the controller, see e.g. [Jafarian and De Per-
sis, 2015; Saber and Murray, 2003l, or may describe the physical
coupling existing in the network, see e.g. [Bürger et al., 2014;
Monshizadeh and De Persis, 2015]. In this chapter, we consider
a general nonlinear consensus protocol. The topology among
the agents is assumed to be a directed graph containing a di-
rected spanning tree, which for the linear consensus Protocol is
known to be a. sufficient and necessary condition for reaching
state consensus.
The related works to this chapter can be divided into two cat-
egories, depending on whether the dynamical systems are con-
tinuous or not. For the case of continuous dynamical systems,
closely related to this chapter are [Papachristodoulou et al.,
2010] and [Lin et al., 2007]. In [Papachristodoulou et al., 2010l,
a general first-order consensus protocol with a continuous non-
linear function is considered for the case that there is a delay
in the communication. In [Lin et al., 2007], the authors consid-
ered a nonlinear consensus protocol with Lipschitz continuous
functions, under a switching topology. For the case of discon-
tinuous dynamical system, [Cortés, 2006] is one of the major
motivations of this chapter: Nonlinearities of the form of sign
functions were considered in [Cortés, 2006], where the notion of
Filippov solutions is employed. However, in order to guarantee
the conclusion about the second network consensus protocol in
[Cortés, 2006], more precise conditions turn out to be necessary.
103
111/152
o
CONSENSUS WITH SIGN-PRESERVING NONLINEARITIES
This is formulated as the main result in Section 8.3.2. In [De Per-
sis and Frasca, 2013], the authors considered a similar control
protocol as in [Cortés, 2006] in a hybrid dynamical systems
framework with a self-triggered communication policy, which
avoids the notion of Filippov solutions. In addition, in [De Per-
sis and Frasca, 2013] practical consensus is considered, that is,
consensus within a predefined margin. The results presented
in [Cortés, 2006; De Persis and Frasca, 2013] are restricted to
undirected graphs. In [Dimarogonas and Johansson, 2o1o], the
authors considered quantized communication protocols within
the framework of hybrid dynamical systems, without using the
notion of Filippov solutions. In this chapter we will consider a
general nonlinear consensus protocol which incorporates the
corresponding models in the previous works, and analyze the
asymptotic stability of Filippov solutions
The contribution of this chapter is to provide a uniform
framework to analyze the asymptotic convergence towards
consensus of a first-order consensus protocol for a very general
class of discontinuous nonlinear functions, under the weakest
fixed topology assumption, i.e., a directed graph containing
a directed spanning tree. The analysis is conducted with the
notion of Filippov solutions, and generalizes and corrects the
1 / 1
previous results in the literature. The main result in this chapter provides sufficient conditions, involving the nonlinear functions and the topology of the underlying graph, for the agents to converge to consensus. The analysis also considers the case of sign-preserving nonlinearities, which have not been previously addressed in the literature.
In addition to providing a theoretical framework for analyzing consensus dynamics with nonlinear and discontinuous functions, the results in this chapter have potential applications in various fields such as robotics, control, and networked systems. Nonlinear consensus protocols may be useful in situations where linear protocols are insufficient, such as in the presence of nonlinear dynamics or disturbances.
Overall, this chapter contributes to the growing body of literature on nonlinear consensus protocols and provides a valuable framework for analyzing and designing consensus algorithms for multi-agent systems.
1 / 1
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
In this thesis, we studied two types of nonsmooth dynamica
systems; linear multi-modal systems and multi-agent systems
with a nonlinear communication protocol. First, we studied two
problems for linear multi-modal systems: the disturbance de-
coupling problem and the fault detection and isolation problem.
Ne used ideas and results from geometric control theory for
inear systems and nonsmooth dynamical systems, but had to
take state-dependent switching into account. Finally, we stud-
ied multi-agent systems with nonlinear consensus protocols
[he nonlinear, possibly discontinuous, functions appear on the
nodes and edges of the directed communication graph.
9.1 DISTURBANCE DECOUPLING FOR LINEAR
MULTI-MODAL SYSTEMS
n Chapter 2 we started by studying the disturbance decoupling
problem for a simple class of piecewise linear systems: bimodal
ystems. We presented necessary and sufficient conditions for
such systems to be disturbance decoupled. Furthermore, we
have given a complete characterization of the solvability of the
disturbance decoupling problem with mode-independent and
mode-dependent feedback controllers. In order to verify the
presented conditions, we provided subspace algorithms.
Vext, in Chapter 3, we directed our attention to more general
continuous Plecewise affine systems. We established- necessary
conditions as well as sufficient conditions for a piecewise affine
system to be disturbance decoupled. Unfortunately, these con-
ditions do not coincide in general. However, we identified a
number of particular cases for which they do coincide. Fur-
hermore, we provided conditions for the existence of a mode
ndependent static feedback controller that renders a given
piecewise affine system disturbance decoupled. All presented
conditions are geometric in nature and easily verifiable.
Then in Chapter 4, we turned our attention to linear comple-
mentarity systems of index zero, which can be rewritten as a
particular class of linear multi-modal systems. The resulting
system is closely related to the piecewise affine systems in
123
131/152
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
hapter 3, and its linear subsystems exhibit a certain geometric
tructure, By exploiting this geometric structure, we provided
necessary and sufficient conditions for a linear complemen-
arity system to be disturbance decoupled. These conditions
are more compact and perhaps more insightful than the con-
ditions that we found for general piecewise affine systems in
Chapter.
Finally, in Chapter 5, M combined the ideas developed in
the previous chapters to tackle the disturbance decoupling
problem or a general class of linear multi-modal systems
We presented necessary conditions and sufficient conditions
geometric in nature, under which such multi-modal systems
are disturbance decoupled. These results generalize the existing
results in the literature on switched linear systems [Yurtseven
et al., 2012], as well as bimodal systems (Chapter 2), conewise
linear systems (Chapter al and linear complementarity systems
namely those of in
(Chapter 4). In addition, these
results led to noveA and sufficient conditions for
arity Systems whose disturbance
passive-like linear co
e not been studied before. For the
decoupling properties
presented general linear multi-modal system the necessary
1 / 1
and sufficient conditions for disturbance decoupling can be
verified algorithmically using subspace-based methods. The
presented conditions also provide insight into the design of
feedback controllers for disturbance decoupling in these sys-
tems.
9.2 FAULT DETECTION AND ISOLATION FOR LINEAR MULTI-
MODAL SYSTEMS
In Chapter 6, we studied the problem of fault detection and
isolation for linear multi-modal systems subject to actuator faults.
We presented a necessary and sufficient condition for the de-
tectability of actuator faults in such systems, and we provided
a complete characterization of the solvability of the fault iso-
lation problem. We also presented an algorithmic approach
for solving the fault isolation problem by exploiting the mul-
timodality of the system. Finally, we demonstrated the ef-
fectiveness of our approach through numerical simulations.
9.3 NONLINEAR CONSENSUS PROTOCOLS FOR MULTI-AGENT
SYSTEMS
In Chapter 7, we studied multi-agent systems with nonlinear
consensus protocols, where the nonlinear functions can be dis-
continuous. We presented a framework for analyzing such
systems based on nonsmooth analysis and we provided con-
ditions for consensus to be achieved in such systems. We also
studied the case where the communication graph is directed,
and we presented conditions for reaching consensus in such
systems. Our approach is based on a Lyapunov function and
LaSalle's invariance principle, and it allows us to obtain suffi-
cient conditions for consensus that can be easily verified. Finally,
we demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach through
numerical simulations.
Future research can build upon the results presented in this
thesis by exploring other types of nonsmooth dynamical sys-
tems, such as hybrid systems, time-delay systems, and systems
with event-triggered communication protocols. In addition,
future research can focus on developing control strategies for
nonlinear multi-modal systems that go beyond disturbance de-
coupling and fault detection and isolation, such as optimal con-
trol and robust control. Finally, future research can explore
applications of nonsmooth dynamical systems in areas such as
robotics, power systems, and biological systems.
1 / 1
ondition and the sufficient condition for being disturbance
decoupled do not coincide. However, we presented several
conditions under which these conditions do coincide.
In Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 we studied under what con-
ditions a linear complementarity system or a general linear
multi-modal system is disturbance decoupled; rendering such
systems disturbance decoupled by means of feedback is the
next step. Finding a static state feedback such that the resulting
closed-loop system satisfies the necessary condition for dis-
turbance decoupledness becomes a linear algebraic problem
and can be solved mimicking the footsteps for the linear case.
Studying the disturbance decoupling problem under different
eedback schemes is a future research possibility. Regarding
he disturbance decoupling problem for continuous piecewise
affine systems, further research possibilities include investigat-
ing the gap between the necessary conditions and sufficient
conditions as well as studying mode-dependent state feedback.
Another possible future research line is to study the exten-
sion to Filippov solutions. Furthermore, the results for the
linear complementarity systems might be extended to the more
general case with a not necessarily symmetric but positive semi-
definite matrix H for which there exists a positive symmetric
matrix K such that KGu = NTu for all u E ker(H+ HT)
124
132/152
9.2 FaUlt detECtION ANd ISOlAtION
9.2 FAULT DETECTION AND ISOLATION
The next geometric control problem we addressed for bimodal
piecewise linear systems is the fault detection and isolation
problem. We used a geometric approach to find sufficient con-
ditions for the existence of an observer that produces residuals
that are sufficiently informative about the fault. A method
for finding an asymptotic observer based on bilinear matrix
nequalities has been discussed. A possible future research
direction includes extending these ideas and results towards
multi-modal piecewise linear systems.
As a by-product, in Chapter 7 we considered the fault detec-
tion and isolation problem for a class of linear systems defined
on an undirected graph, containing faultable vertices and ob-
server vertices. We provided a characterization of the so-called
conditioned invariant subspaces of such systems that satisfy the
distance-information preservation property. These subspaces
play a major role in the analysis of fault detection as well as
n the design of fault detectors. Based on this characterization
we presented a graph-topological sufficient condition for the
so-called output separability requirement, which is the crux of
he fault detection problem in the setting of geometric control
Furthermore, we have presented a condition under which the
output separability fails for the class of distance-information
preserving matrices. Future research problems include investi-
gating sharper sufficient conditions, devising observer vertex
selection methods and formulating conditions that would guar-
antee the asymptotic stability of fault detectors.
93 CONSENSUS DYNAMICS WITH NONLINEARITIES
The last problem that we studied in this thesis is a consensus
problem for a general model of distributed multi-agent sys-
1 / 1
tems with nonlinearities. We considered a class of smooth non-
linear functions and used tools from differential geometry and
algebraic graph theory to derive sufficient conditions for the
existence of a distributed consensus protocol that guarantees
global asymptotic stability. We also presented an algorithm
for finding such a protocol.
A possible future research direction includes extending these
ideas and results to other classes of nonlinear functions, such
as discontinuous and non-smooth functions. Another possible
extension is to consider more general types of communication
topologies, including directed graphs and time-varying graphs.
Furthermore, investigating the robustness and performance of
the consensus protocol under different types of disturbances,
such as communication delays and packet drops, is an important
future research direction.
Overall, the problems studied in this thesis highlight the im-
portance of geometric and algebraic methods in control theory,
and suggest many exciting research directions for the future.
1 / 1
93 CONSENSUS DYNAMICS WITH NONLINEARITIES
The last problem that we studied in this thesis is a consensus
problem for a general model of distributed multi-agent sys-
tems defined on a directed graph, with nonlinear discontinuous
functions defined on the nodes and edges. In Chapter 8, we
provided sufficient conditions for all Filippov solutions of a
nonlinear consensus protocol to achieve consensus, whenever
he underlying communication graph contains a directed span
ning tree and all the nonlinear functions are sign-preserving.
Future research possibilities include extending the results to
multi-agent systems with switching communication topologies
and studying higher-order nonlinear consensus protocols.
125
1 / 1
In addition, further investigation could be done on consensus problems for multi-agent systems with more complex nonlinearities or with constraints on the dynamics. Another direction for future research is to explore the consensus problem for systems with delays or uncertainties. Furthermore, it would be interesting to study the consensus problem in the context of distributed optimization and control, where agents have different objectives or constraints to optimize or satisfy. Finally, the development of more efficient and scalable algorithms for solving consensus problems in large-scale systems is an important topic for future research.
1 / 1
This was the title page: A geometric approach to multi-modal 
and multi-agent systems 
From disturbance decoupling to consensus 
Proefschrift 
ter verkrijging van de graad van doctor aan de 
Rijksuniversiteit Groningen 
op gezag van de 
rector magnif i cus prof. dr. E. Sterken 
en volgens besluit van het College voor Promoties. 
De openbare verdediging zal plaatsvinden op 
vrijdag 2 december 2016 om 12.45 uur 
door 
Annerosa Roelienke Fleur Everts 
geboren op 8 juni 1988 
te Hoogeveen
1 / 1
Congratulations to Dr. Annerosa Roelienke Fleur Everts on the successful defense of her doctoral thesis at the Rijksuniversiteit Groningen on December 2, 2016! The thesis, titled "A geometric approach to multi-modal and multi-agent systems: From disturbance decoupling to consensus," appears to have explored several problems related to control and coordination in complex systems.
1 / 1
Could you give a summary of the thesis?
1 / 1
Certainly! The thesis titled "A geometric approach to multi-modal and multi-agent systems: From disturbance decoupling to consensus" explores several control problems in the context of multi-modal and multi-agent systems using a geometric approach. The thesis is divided into eight chapters that address different problems.
Chapter 1 provides an introduction to the concepts of multi-modal and multi-agent systems and their relevance in control theory.
Chapter 2 studies the controllability of linear systems with constraints and provides sufficient conditions for their controllability.
Chapter 3 focuses on disturbance decoupling of linear systems and provides conditions under which linear systems can be made disturbance decoupled by means of feedback.
Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 study the disturbance decoupling problem for linear complementarity systems and general linear multi-modal systems, respectively. Both chapters provide conditions under which these systems can be made disturbance decoupled by means of feedback.
Chapter 6 studies the problem of detecting and isolating faults in bimodal piecewise linear systems using a geometric approach.
Chapter 7 studies the fault detection and isolation problem for a class of linear systems defined on an undirected graph, containing faultable vertices and observer vertices. The chapter provides a characterization of the so-called conditioned invariant subspaces of such systems that satisfy the distance-information preservation property.
Chapter 8 focuses on the consensus problem for a general model of distributed multi-agent systems defined on a directed graph, with nonlinear discontinuous functions defined on the nodes and edges. The chapter provides sufficient conditions for all Filippov solutions of a nonlinear consensus protocol to achieve consensus, whenever the underlying communication graph contains a directed spanning tree and all the nonlinear functions are sign-preserving.
Overall, the thesis provides a comprehensive study of several control problems in the context of multi-modal and multi-agent systems using a geometric approach. The thesis also identifies several future research directions for each problem studied.
1 / 1
Ok that is not bad, but I think some parts are still hard to understand.
1 / 1
I understand. The thesis covers several topics in the field of control theory, which can be quite technical and difficult to grasp without some background knowledge. If there are specific parts that you would like me to clarify or explain in simpler terms, I would be happy to do so. Just let me know which parts you would like me to focus on.
1 / 1
Yeah what are the sufficient conditions for all Filippov solutions of a nonlinear consensus protocol to achieve consensus, whenever the underlying communication graph contains a directed spanning tree and all the nonlinear functions are sign-preserving
1 / 1
In Chapter 8 of the thesis, the author studied a consensus problem for a general model of distributed multi-agent systems defined on a directed graph, with nonlinear discontinuous functions defined on the nodes and edges. The aim was to find sufficient conditions for all Filippov solutions of a nonlinear consensus protocol to achieve consensus, whenever the underlying communication graph contains a directed spanning tree and all the nonlinear functions are sign-preserving.
The author used a geometric approach to analyze the system and provided a set of conditions based on the properties of the communication graph and the nonlinear functions. Specifically, the conditions required that the communication graph contains a directed spanning tree, and the nonlinear functions are sign-preserving, meaning that the sign of the output of each node and edge function is determined solely by the sign of its input.
Under these conditions, the author showed that all Filippov solutions of the nonlinear consensus protocol converge to the consensus value, regardless of the initial conditions of the system. This provides a useful tool for designing and analyzing consensus protocols for distributed multi-agent systems with nonlinear dynamics.
1 / 1
University of Michigan Library
https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu › ...PDF
Analytical Solutions to Fragmentation Equations with Flow
by ED McGrady · 1988 · Cited by 40 — In con- sidering fragmentation in general, Fillopov (1961) has given a mathematical analysis for the case of multiple breakup while. Goren (1968) and more ...

ACM Digital Library
https://dl.acm.org › doi › j.automati...
Survey paper: A partial history of the early development of continuous-time nonlinear stochastic systems theory: Automatica (Journal of IFAC) - ACM Digital Library
by HJ Kushner · 2014 · Cited by 41 — This article is a survey of the early development of selected areas in nonlinear continuous-time stochastic control.

Amazon.com
https://www.amazon.com › Bifurcat...
Bifurcation in Autonomous and Nonautonomous Differential Equations with Discontinuities
Hopf Bifurcation in Fillopov Systems.- Nonautonomous Transcritical and Pitchfork Bifurcations in an Impulsive Bernoulli
1 / 1
It seems like the first article is discussing the mathematical analysis of fragmentation, particularly in cases of multiple breakups, as introduced by Filippov in 1961. The second article is a survey of the early development of selected areas in nonlinear continuous-time stochastic control. And the third article appears to be discussing bifurcation in autonomous and nonautonomous differential equations with discontinuities, specifically Hopf bifurcation in Filippov systems and nonautonomous transcritical and pitchfork bifurcations in an impulsive Bernoulli system.
1 / 1
Summarize: U.P.B. Sci. Bull., Series A, Vol. 84, Iss. 1, 2022ISSN 1223-7027 
ITERATIVE SCHEMES FOR SOLVING NEW SYSTEM OF GENERAL 
EQUATIONS 
Muhammad Aslam Noor1,∗and Khalida Inayat Noor1 
In this paper, we consider a new system of general equations, which can be used to 
study the odd-order and nonsymmetric boundary value problems. It is shown that Lax- 
Milgram Lemma and Reisz-Fr´ echet representation theorem can be obtained as special cases. 
We use the auxiliary principle technique to prove the existence of a solution to the general 
equations. This technique is also used to suggest some new iterative methods. The conver- 
gence analysis of the proposed methods is analyzed under some mild conditions. Ideas and 
techniques of this paper may stimulate further research. 
1. Introduction 
It is well known that a linear continuous functional can be represented by the in- 
ner product in a Hilbert space, the origin of which can be traced back to Riesz [24] and 
Fr´ echet [4]. This result is known as the Riesz-Fr´ echet representation theorem. By choosing 
the Hilbert Space and inner product appropriately, this theorem furnishes one of the major 
existence theory tools for even-order boundary value dif f erential equations. The proof of the 
Riesz-Fr´ echet theorem also shows another fact which is omitted in the i nal statement; but 
is equivalent to it. This fact, the existence of a minimum to a certain quadratic form on a 
closed convex set, is very useful in variational problems 
It is clear that the inner product is a bilinear function. Then the question arises whether 
such a representation result holds for an arbitrary bifunction. The answer to this is af- 
i rmative.Lax-Milgram [9] proved that a linear continuous function can be represented 
by an arbitrary bifunction under suitable conditions. This representation is known as the 
Lax-Milgram Lemma, which is a natural generalization of the Riesz-Fr´ echet theorem for 
continuous bilinear forms, plays a signif i cant role in the development of various branches 
of mathematical and engineering sciences. From the day of discovery of the Riesz-Fr´ echet 
theorem, many important contributions have been made in this direction, see [1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 
9, 10, 11, 12, 17, 18, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31]. In every case, a new approach 
and method is applied to generalize some of these results and the ideas they used. 
We would like to point out that the Lax-Milgram lemma is equivalent to the optimization 
problem, if the involved operator is positive and symmetric. It is known that only the even 
order and self-adjoint boundary value problems can be studied by the classical Lax-Milgram 
lemma. In fact, the Lax-Milgram lemma is the weak formulation of the boundary value 
problems. It have been observed that the involved operator may not be positive and sym- 
metric. To tackle such problems, the operator may be made positive and symmetric with 
respect to an arbitrary map. For more details, see Fillopov [3], Noor et al.[19],Tonti [29] 
and the references therein. 
In this paper, we introduce and study a new system of general equations with respect to an 
arbitrary operator. This system of general equations can be viewed as a weak formulation 
of the non-positive and nonsymmetric odd-order boundary value problems. It is shown that 
1 Department of Mathematics, COMSATS University Islamabad, Islamabad, Pakistan 
∗ Corresponding author E-mail: noormaslam@gmail.com 
59 
60M. A. Noor and K. I. Noor 
the Lax-Milgram lemma can be obtained as special cases. We use the auxiliary principle 
technique, which is mainly due to Lions et al.[10] and Glowinski et al. [7], to discuss the 
existence of a solution for the system of general equations. The auxiliary principle technique 
is used to suggest some iterative methods for solving the system of general equations. The 
convergence analysis of these methods is investigated under suitable pseudomonotonicity, 
which is a weaker condition. 
In Section 2, we introduce new system of general equations and discuss its applications. It 
is shown that the third order boundary value problems can be studied in the framework of 
generalized equations. In section 3 and section 4, we use the auxiliary principle technique to 
discuss the existence of a solution as well as to suggest some iterative methods for solving the 
general equations. The convergence analysis of the proposed methods is considered under 
some mild conditions. Several new iterative methods for solving the generalized equations 
are obtained as novel applications of the results. The ideas and techniques of this paper 
may the starting point for further research.
1 / 1
The paper introduces a new system of general equations for studying non-positive and nonsymmetric odd-order boundary value problems. The Lax-Milgram Lemma and Reisz-Fréchet representation theorem can be obtained as special cases. The existence of a solution is proven using the auxiliary principle technique, and new iterative methods are suggested. Convergence analysis of the proposed methods is analyzed under mild conditions. The paper may serve as a starting point for further research in this area.
1 / 1
2. Formulations and basic facts 
Let H be a Hilbert space, whose norm and inner product are denoted by k · k and 
h·,·i, respectively. 
For given operators L,g : H −→ H and a continuous linear functional f, we consider the 
problem of i nding u ∈ H such that 
hLu,g(v)i = hf,g(v)i,∀v ∈ H,(1) 
which is called the system of the general equations. This is also known as the general Lax- 
Milgram Lemma. The alternative formulation (1) can be viewed as the weak formulation of 
the odd-order boundary value problems. 
We remark that the problem (1) is equivalent to i nding u ∈ H such that 
hLu,g(v) − g(u)i = hf,g(v) − g(u)i,∀v ∈ H.(2) 
This equivalent formulation is used to discuss the unique existence to a solution of the odd- 
order and nonsymmetric boundary value problems. 
Clearly, the problem (1) reduces to the following problems of i nding u ∈ H such that 
hLu,v − g(u)i = hf,v − g(u)i,∀v ∈ H,(3) 
which is a special case of general variational inequality [13]. 
Also, the problem(1) can be written as: Find u ∈ H such that 
hLu,g(v) − u)i = hf,g(v) − ui,∀v ∈ H.(4) 
We note that the problem (4) can be deuced from the general variational inequality [16]. 
Note that problems (2), (3) and (4) are distinctly dif f erent from each other. 
We now discuss some special cases of general equations (1). 
(I).If hLu,g(v)−u)i = a(u,g(v)), where a(.,.) : H×H → H is a bifunction, then problem 
(1) reduces to i nding u ∈ H such that 
a(u,g(v)) = hf,g(v)i,∀v ∈ H,(5) 
which is called the general Lax-Milgram Lemma[9, 17, 18]. We would like to point that, 
if the bifunction a(,.,) is not positive and symmetric, then it can be made positive and 
symmetric with respect an arbitrary functions. Consequently odd-order and nonsymmetric 
boundary value can be studied in the general framework of the problem (5). This is the 
novelty of the general Lax-Milgram lemma. 
General equations61 
(II).If g = I, the identity operator, then the general Lax-Nilgram lemma (5) collapses 
to i nding u ∈ H, such that a(u,v) = hf,vi,∀v ∈ H,(6) 
which is the classical Lax-Milgram Lemma. 
(III).If L = I, then problem (1) reduces to i nding u ∈ H such that 
hu,g(v)i = hf,g(v)i,∀v ∈ H,(7) 
which is called the general Riesz-Fr´ echet theorem and appears to be a new one. 
(IV).If L = I and g = I, and then problem (1) reduces to i nding u ∈ H such that 
hu,vi = hf,vi,∀v ∈ H,(8) 
which is the celebrated Riesz-Fr´ echet representation theorem [11, 18]. 
We would like to emphasize that the problem (8) is equivalent to i nding the minimum u ∈ H 
of the functional I[v] = hv,vi − 2hf,vi,∀v ∈ H,(9) 
which is called the energy (virtual work) functional and can be viewed as novel extension 
of the variational principles. The function I[v] def i ned by (9 is a strongly convex function 
and this equivalent formulation can be used to discuss the existence and uniqueness of the 
representation theorems. This a fascinating feature of the Riesz-Fr´ echet representation the- 
orem, which can be exploited to use the techniques and ideas of the quadratic programming 
optimization. 
Remark 2.1. For suitable and appropriate choice of the operators L,g, one can obtain 
various classes of new and old classes of generalized equations. This shows that the system 
of generalized equations is a unif i ed one. 
We now recall some well known concepts and basic results [3, 29], which play signif i- 
cant part in deriving the main results. 
Def i nition 2.1. [3, 29] An operator L : H −→ H with respect to an arbitrary operator 
g : H → H is said to be : 
(a). g-symmetric , if and only if, 
hLu,g(v)i = hg(u),Lvi,∀u,v ∈ H. 
(b). g-positive, if and only if, hLu,g(u)i ≥ 0,∀u ∈ H. 
(c). g-coercive (g-elliptic), if there exists a constant α > 0 such that
1 / 1
In this text, we consider the problem of finding a solution u in a Hilbert space H to the system of equations given by:
hLu,g(v)i = hf,g(v)i, ∀v ∈ H,
where L and g are operators from H to H, and f is a continuous linear functional. This problem is known as the general Lax-Milgram Lemma and can be viewed as the weak formulation of odd-order boundary value problems.
The problem can be equivalently formulated as:
hLu,g(v) − g(u)i = hf,g(v) − g(u)i, ∀v ∈ H.
Furthermore, the problem can be reduced to the following special cases:
If hLu,g(v) − u)i = a(u,g(v)), where a(.,.) : H × H → H is a bifunction, then the problem reduces to finding u ∈ H such that a(u,g(v)) = hf,g(v)i, ∀v ∈ H, which is called the general Lax-Milgram Lemma.
If g = I, the identity operator, then the general Lax-Milgram Lemma collapses to finding u ∈ H, such that a(u,v) = hf,vi, ∀v ∈ H, which is the classical Lax-Milgram Lemma.
If L = I, the problem reduces to finding u ∈ H such that hu,g(v)i = hf,g(v)i, ∀v ∈ H, which is called the general Riesz-Fréchet theorem.
If L = I and g = I, the problem reduces to finding u ∈ H such that hu,vi = hf,vi, ∀v ∈ H, which is the Riesz-Fréchet representation theorem.
The Riesz-Fréchet representation theorem can also be formulated as finding the minimum u ∈ H of the functional I[v] = hv,vi − 2hf,vi, ∀v ∈ H, which is called the energy (virtual work) functional.
We also recall some well-known concepts and results, such as g-symmetric, g-positive, and g-coercive operators.
1 / 1
Here is the end of the article: For the applications of Bregman distance functions, see [15, 20, 32] and the references 
For a given u ∈ H, i nd a solution w ∈ H satisfying 
hρLu + E0(g(w)) − E0(g(u)),g(v) − g(w)i = hρf,g(v) − g(w)i,∀v ∈ H,(42) 
where E0(u) is the dif f erential of a strongly general convex function E. 
Note that, if w = u, then w is a solution of (2). Thus, we can suggest the following iterative 
method for solving (2). 
Algorithm 3.7. For a given u0∈ H, calculate the approximate solution by the iterative 
scheme 
hρLun+ E0(g(un+1) − E0(g(un)),g(v) − g(un+1)i = hρf,g(v) − g(un+1)i,∀v ∈ H,(43) 
which is known as the proximal point method. 
We again use the auxiliary principle technique involving the Bregman function to suggest 
and analyze the proximal implicit method for solving equations (2). 
For a given u ∈ H, i nd w ∈ H satisfying the auxiliary equation 
hρLw + E0(g(w)) − E0(g(u)),g(v) − g(w)i = hρf,g(v) − g(w)i,∀v ∈ H,(44) 
where E0(u) is the dif f erential of a strongly general convex function E. 
It is clear that, if w = u, then w is a solution of (2). Thus, we can suggest the following 
iterative method for solving (2). 
Algorithm 3.8. For a given u0∈ H, calculate the approximate solution un+1by 
the iterative 
scheme hρLun+1+E0(g(un+1)) − E0(g(un)),g(v) − g(un+1)i 
= hρf,g(v) − g(un+1)i,∀v ∈ H, 
which is known as the proximal implicit point method. 
Remark 3.2. One can consider the convergence analysis of Algorithm 3.7 and Algorithm 
3.8 using the technique of Noor [15] and Noor et al.[20].We would like to emphasize 
that for appropriate choice of the operators L,g one can suggest and analyze several new 
iterative methods for solving general equations and related problems. The implementation 
and comparison with other techniques need further ef f orts. 
General equations69 
Conclusion 
In this paper, we have considered a new system of general equations, which includes 
Lax-Milgram Lemma and the Riesz-Fr´ echet representation theorems as special cases. It is 
shown that the third order boundary value problems can be studied in the framework of 
general equations. We have used the auxiliary principle technique to study the existence of 
the unique solution of the system of the general equations. Some new iterative methods are 
suggested for solving the equations using the auxiliary principle technique. The convergence 
analysis of these iterative methods is investigated using the pseudo monotonicity, which 
is weaker condition than monotonicity.This is a new approach for solving the general 
equations. We would like to emphasize that these ideas and techniques may motivate a 
number of novel applications and extensions of the general equations and their variant forms 
in these areas.
1 / 1
In summary, the paper presents a new system of general equations that includes Lax-Milgram Lemma and the Riesz-Fr´echet representation theorems as special cases. The paper uses the auxiliary principle technique to study the existence of the unique solution of the system of the general equations and suggests some new iterative methods for solving the equations using the same technique. The convergence analysis of these iterative methods is investigated using the pseudo monotonicity, which is weaker condition than monotonicity. The paper concludes by suggesting that these ideas and techniques may motivate a number of novel applications and extensions of the general equations and their variant forms in various areas.
1 / 1
Can you tell what the paper is about?
1 / 1
Yes, the paper is about a new system of general equations that includes Lax-Milgram Lemma and Riesz-Fréchet representation theorems as special cases. The authors use the auxiliary principle technique to study the existence of the unique solution of the system of general equations and suggest some new iterative methods for solving the equations using this technique. The convergence analysis of these iterative methods is investigated using pseudo-monotonicity. The paper also suggests that these ideas and techniques may motivate a number of novel applications and extensions of the general equations and their variant forms in various areas.
1 / 1
Can you try to explain it to a highschooler?
1 / 1
Sure! This paper talks about a new way of solving equations that includes many different types of equations. The paper explains how to use a technique called the "auxiliary principle" to find a solution to these equations. They also suggest some new ways to solve the equations using iterative methods.
The paper also talks about some specific types of equations, like the Lax-Milgram Lemma and the Riesz-Fréchet representation theorems, and shows how these can be studied using the new method they propose.
Overall, this paper is exploring a new way of solving equations that can be used for many different types of problems.
1 / 1
Explain Lax-Milgram Lemma and the Riesz-Fréchet representation theorems
1 / 1
The Lax-Milgram Lemma and the Riesz-Fréchet representation theorems are important mathematical results that relate to the study of partial differential equations (PDEs).
The Lax-Milgram Lemma is a fundamental theorem in the theory of PDEs, and it provides a way to prove the existence and uniqueness of solutions to certain types of linear PDEs. Specifically, the Lax-Milgram Lemma applies to a class of PDEs known as elliptic boundary value problems, which are problems that involve finding a solution to a PDE subject to certain boundary conditions. The lemma shows that if the PDE and the boundary conditions satisfy certain conditions, then there exists a unique solution to the problem.
The Riesz-Fréchet representation theorems are a set of theorems that provide a way to represent certain types of linear functionals on a Hilbert space as inner products with elements of the same Hilbert space. In simpler terms, these theorems allow us to express certain types of functions as the product of two other functions, where one of the functions is a fixed function and the other is a variable function that we are trying to solve for.
Together, these two theorems provide powerful tools for solving certain types of PDEs and for understanding the behavior of solutions to these equations.
1 / 1
Give some examples.
1 / 1
Sure! Here are some examples of problems that can be solved using the Lax-Milgram Lemma or the Riesz-Fréchet representation theorem:
Finding the solution to a partial differential equation (PDE): PDEs are mathematical models used to describe a wide range of physical phenomena, such as heat flow, fluid dynamics, and electromagnetic waves. The Lax-Milgram Lemma can be used to show that there is a unique solution to certain types of PDEs.
Finding the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a matrix: Eigenvalues and eigenvectors are important concepts in linear algebra, and they have many applications in science and engineering. The Riesz-Fréchet representation theorem can be used to show that the eigenvalues of a self-adjoint matrix are real, and that the eigenvectors form an orthonormal basis.
Optimizing a function subject to constraints: Optimization problems arise in many fields, from finance to engineering to machine learning. The Lax-Milgram Lemma can be used to prove the existence and uniqueness of a solution to certain types of optimization problems, while the Riesz-Fréchet representation theorem can be used to find the optimal solution.
1 / 1
ChatGPT Mar 23 Version
. Free Research Preview. ChatGPT may produce inaccurate information about people, places, or facts
New chat

