All right guys, here we are, downtown Los Angeles, downtown Skid Row, 6th Street, here
with Mark Leida.
Many of you know Mark from his YouTube channel, Soft White Underbelly.
Mark gets into people's stories, those living on the fringes, drug addicts, prostitutes,
gang members.
And C-Notes, C-Notes who knows the streets really well down here.
We're gonna walk around, we're gonna get an understanding from Mark and C-Notes about
the homeless and Corey.
Corey's over there on the bike.
These guys know Skid Row as well as anybody.
Everybody makes a big deal about how we need to fix homelessness, and in LA it looks really
awful, right?
You have homeless people living all over the city, even in some really expensive, really
nice neighborhoods.
But I don't believe the problem is homelessness at all, because if you heal back the layers,
you've got drug addiction behind the homelessness.
All these people are drug addicts.
You have a hard time finding some that aren't.
So then you say, oh, the problem is drugs, like Nancy Reagan said.
The problem is in drugs.
You heal back another layer, and then it's mental illness behind that.
And then you can say, oh, the problem is mental illness, but what causes that?
So you heal back another layer, and you've got the childhood trauma, the broken families,
all that kind of stuff that people went through.
If we get shot at, we'll just run.
You're well known in these parts.
What's the story with this street?
Correctly.
It was way worse than this.
Much worse, yeah.
Nobody to a certain extent, they're all lonely, lonely inside, lonely mentally.
This is the Skid Row police station, and here's drug addicts right here.
It was easy for me.
Had great role models, had great opportunities.
These people had none of that.
A lot of people are addicted to the streets.
I'm addicted to the wildness.
I've had guns pulled out of my face.
I've been conned and robbed every which way you can imagine.
Oh, you want me to get a job and shower and get dressed and pay taxes and all that shit?
What the fuck is that?
Hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars trying to fix these people that are broken.
And I don't even know if that'll work.
It's controversial, but I think about this a lot.
You have to change the way you think, so you can make better decisions.
