Philosophy in real world
Open sidebar
Philosophy in real world
Summarise and simplify: My question for Chomsky's consequences of capitalism class (edited out the first paragraph)

One way in which philosophy education is set up, seems to be to exclude facts about the world. I asked my teacher last semester who I was studying The Philosophy of Right with, why aren't we including concrete analysis of real world events and struggles into our class? Surely historical analysis like Hegel is doing can't be disconnected from the world. He said that you would have to go to a different department, philosophy only does that incidentally, not as the main subject, to paraphrase.

The purpose of Hegel's philosophy is apparently, merely to describe things about his time. What were the "truths" about Hegel which were so important for us as philosophers to learn? Truths about Hegel's time were uncritical pro police arguments, how corporations supposedly protect from "contingencies" like you getting sick, how your very freedom itself comes from the state, and how inequalities in wealth could occur, but no mention was made of whether they are actually occurring, or the violence of the state. It was in a lot of ways, simply status quo propaganda, to just teach Hegel from Hegel's 1800s perspective and disconnected from the world. We were taught in a way which says we cannot look towards the future with imagination of how a new system would look, but can only look at what is already actual. It left me feeling like the point of Hegel's ethos was to avoid discussing problems with the system, which he barely ever discusses. When I asked about when revolution would ever be appropriate, the response was that it will happen because the system just becomes unbearable, and it is the job of the philosopher to understand the world, not to change it. Mentions of Marx characterized him as doing science, and not interested in saying what we ought to do.

I was appalled by the philosophy of Hegel, and tried to interject as much facts about the world, the inequality, the lack of true democracy in the workplace, imperialism, and money out of politics, which were all too absent from what was being taught. The professor, a kind and caring person who I have taken many classes with on other thinkers, in spite of how opposed I am to the way he teaches Hegel's philosophy of right, said that if he did teach critical theory, then it would make conservatives riled up, and stoke the "spectre of communism" which he says Marx talks about in his manifesto. I struggle to see how philosophy is relevant without critique, and a desire to know how to build a better world.

I say all this about my views against Hegel so I can introduce the question of how to approach truth and ultimately action from a philosophical perspective. I do question, as a philosopher, there being some sort of fundamental truth which is objective, and independent from us, as correspondence theory suggests, or the idea that words correspond directly to objects would imply. I also question that there can be truth outside of perspectives, which is why when I talk about what is true, it seems as though I am saying what is true from my perspective.

As a philosopher, one of the main issues which concerns me is more meta-textual questions, such as how we know what is true is true. Relativism as spoken about by PHD in philosophy Kane Baker who has a lecture on relativism, is the idea that there is no outside of one's own perspective. One can of course listen to other perspectives, but one's own perspective is their own. There is no meta-language as Lacan would say, or view from nowhere outside of the language which structures our world unconsciously, no objective, neutral language through which to describe things. Truth for Lacan is structured like a fiction as he says in seminar 7. The relativism that Baker proposes is different from the kind that Chomsky remarks on in Foucault, that Foucault is a universalist, namely that he holds a universal value of relativism being true. This is clearly a mark against Foucault for Chomsky because it is inconsistent to say there's no universalist perspective, and then apply relativism universally, or at least that is how the problem Chomsky has with Foucault appears to me. But if relativism could also be defined as a sort of perspectivism, the idea that each perspective is ultimately relative to each individual, not an epistemologically privileged stance outside of themselves, then it would seem that a relativist could hold a universal perspective, and that's not a problem because if someone holds a different perspective, that perspective is theirs and not mine. This type of relativism, which leads to the conclusion that each perspective is just individual opinion, and no one has an objective view of truth, is universalist, but why is that a problem? It would seem that with this sort of relativism, the stance is more of there being no view from nowhere, than the problem being that relativism is contradictory if it's universal.

I lead into the question of relativism, which is my own view, after talking about my objections to Hegel because just proposing relativism, without also having a strong desire for things to change, seems contrary to my own subjective desire to go beyond capitalism. What are we supposed to do, those of us to do who want to change the world, in spite of there being no ultimate purpose, or meta-narrative of historical progress moving towards an ultimate goal like Hegel, and perhaps take a relativist or pragmatist perspective on truth? How does one best counter Hegel and not simply describe the world, but act to change it? What is actually necessary, in people's opinions, to effect change, in terms of how one looks at the world, if not believing that hegemonic systems of truth like morality, or a definition of progress which is true universally for all people are feasible goals? Would philosophical questions of truth actually be important for effecting change? Would it be necessary to abandon philosophy and simply not ask the questions about what truth is, and accept the shared goal, worldview. morality, and ideology of a specific group who wants to aspire to your goal?

It would seem if there's no truth about morality or what one should do, then the way to effect change would come down to rhetoric, and convincing people that they share your desire. Perhaps one could look to Max Stirner's The Ego and Its Own, for its concept of the union of egoists (far different from Randian egoism). Ones who don't hold some shared value of morality, or sacred values, but share a mutual desire. It would seem to me that one needs to, contra Hegel, envision what a better world would look like, if they want to propose that change to people. Perhaps democracy in the workplace, re-distributing wealth, a 4 day work week, getting rid of bosses, eliminating wage slavery. Does one simply advocate for what they want and hope others agree, or does the question of a true worldview, or a true moral agenda need to occur in order to make progress towards the ends we set? Is what is true necessary for action, or is what is true for me sufficient?
The writer is questioning the way philosophy is taught in their education, specifically the philosophy of Hegel, and how it is disconnected from the real world. They express disappointment that the class didn't include analysis of real world events and struggles, and felt that the purpose of Hegel's philosophy was to avoid discussing problems with the system. They also express concern about the idea of objective truth and how it relates to action and building a better world. They mention the ideas of relativism and the different perspectives on it by scholars such as Kane Baker and Noam Chomsky.
The author is Calvin Blackwood. Could I get the themes and questions?
2 / 2
The main theme of the passage is the disconnection between philosophy education and the real world, specifically in regards to the philosophy of Hegel and its lack of analysis of real world events and struggles. The author also raises questions about the relevance of philosophy without critique and a desire to know how to build a better world. Additionally, the author raises questions about the nature of truth, specifically whether there is an objective truth that is independent from one's own perspective and how this relates to action and building a better world. The author also references the ideas of relativism and the different perspectives on it by scholars such as Kane Baker and Noam Chomsky.
What is Baker's philosophy?
I'm sorry, I don't have enough information about the specific person you are referring to with the name Kane Baker as a PhD in philosophy. However, Kane Baker, is a common name, and there are many people with that name who could be a philosopher or a professional in different fields. If you could provide more context or details about the Kane Baker you are referring to, I will be happy to help you.
ChatGPT Mar 14 Version
. Free Research Preview. Our goal is to make AI systems more natural and safe to interact with. Your feedback will help us improve.
New chat

