Book Reviews 
85
tive skills. In his chapter, Wynne argues that the kinds of thinking applied in tool
behavior are not unique, but rather are the same kinds of thinking applied by apes
and humans in all kinds of problem-solving situations. Reynolds stresses the
intimate relation between human social structures, especially the "task group"
employing complementary roles, and various uniquely human tools, especially
those characterized by modular construction ("polyliths"). Ingold criticizes the
dichotomy that is typically made between the technical and social domains by
researchers, arguing that it is a false dichotomy that comes from the not-useful
distinction made by Westerners between nature and society.
Each of the five sections is introduced by either Parker or Ingold, there are general
introductions by Gibson (on continuity and discontinuity in human evolution) and
by Hewes (on the history of thinking about the relation between tools and lan-
guage), and there is a very general epilogue by Ingold. These are all very interesting
and helpful chapters, although they do not solve the basic problem of all edited
volumes: the problem of cohesion and coherence among contributions. Casting
aside the unattainable goal of cohesion, I found this a useful volume, with many
valuable contributions. In some cases authors reviewed well-known positions from
previous publications, but in many others genuinely new arguments are made and
evidence presented. And it is very useful to have these many excellent researchers—
from their many different disciplines—focused on problems relating to the evolu-
tion of two of the most important cognitive capacities of human beings: tools and
language. A focus on the social dimensions of the problem, a focus evident in many
contributions, is also a welcome change from previous treatments.
The Lopsided Ape: Evolution of the Generative Mind. Michael C. Corballis. New
York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.366 pp.
WILLIAM BEEMAN
Brown University
There has been a need for several years for a comprehensive, yet readable survey
of research on language and the brain that would take into account findings of the
past two decades. Corballis's book admirably fulfills that function and adds a few
surprises to boot. Corballis is a psychologist, but his book will be appreciated by
anthropologists for its holism in treating the brain not as an isolated organ seen
through narrow laboratory experiments, but as an aspect of the total human soma
with a history and a functional integration with complex human behavior.
The central themeof this book isa comparative investigation of the dual functions
of the human split brain. The first half of the book (7 ofl2 chapters) is devoted to
a general discussion of human biological evolution focusing on the evolution of the
brain and a general discussion of the brain's function in human language capabili-
ties, including a review of chimpanzee and other language-teaching experiments.
A welcome part of this discussion is a full chapter on the cultural and cognitive
implications of human handedness—a topic not often addressed in anthropological
literature.
The view of linguistics Corballis presents assumes that transformational-genera-
tive functions in language are actual neurological operations of the brain. Indeed,
Beeman, William O. 1994b Review of Corballis, Michael, The Lopsided Ape: 
Evolution of the Generative Mind. Journal of Linguistic 
Anthropology 4(1): 85-86.

86 
Journal of Linguistic Anthropology
this view is crucial to his own argument about the uniqueness of left-brain func-
tions. This bias may raise a few eyebrows, but it does not detract from the overall
useful discussion of the Lennebergian cognitive operations that must underlie
language functions.
This first half of the book will be familiar territory for most linguistic anthropolo-
gists; nevertheless, it is good to see it all contained within two covers. Indeed the
first eight chapters of this book could be used by themselves as a very appropriate
unit on the biology and evolution of language in any linguistic anthropology course.
The last four chapters contain material that will be less familiar to anthropology.
These chapters are also more controversial and therefore more interesting. Praxic
skills—a fascinating class of mental functions with which anthropologists may not
be acquainted as a cohesive body—is treated in a separate, highly valuable chapter.
Praxic skills are those that involve the coordination of left-right hemispheric func-
tions. The ability to write from left to right (or vice versa) is one of these. The ability
to speak in smooth phrases without stuttering is another. Praxic skills are controlled
by left-brain activity, but draw on right-brain functions. Corballis claims that "it
may be this concentration of praxic control within a single hemisphere that has
given rise to our extraordinary ability to execute complex praxic skills—to make
speeches, build complex machines, and program computers" (p. 214).
However, Corballis claims that praxic skills are not enough to define human
uniqueness in cognitive functioning. The truly unique property of human cogniti-
tion is a "generative assembling device" or GAD (p. 219). This device is related to
the linguistic generative function and involves the human ability to construct whole
representations—visual, conceptual, and verbal, from small vocabularies of primi-
tive units. Corballis identifies this too as a left-brain function. The GAD allows
humans to make sense of cubist paintings, construct Chinese characters, and
recognize objects based on the underlying basic shapes that constitute them. These
basic shapes were termed "geons" by Biederman ("Recognition by Components: A
Theory of Human Image Understanding," Psychological Review 94(1987):115-147),
from whom Corballis draws much of his thinking on this issue.
The corresponding right-brain ability is the capacity to deal with holistic, inte-
grative phenomena. This includes the ability to recognize whole shapes—either
visual, such as faces, or aural, such as music. The feeling and recognition of emotions
seems also to be a right-brain phenomenon. The analytic left-brain GAD seems to
be the principal factor in spoken language, while the right hemisphere is "pre-ver-
bal" except "perhaps in prosodic or emotional aspects of speech. However, both
sign language and written language have spatial components and there is corre-
spondingly more of a right-hemispheric component" (p. 274).
Much of Corballis's reasoning comes from the study of pathologies. The reader
will learn a lot about unusual disfunctions of the brain, such as "amusia," the
impairment of musical abilities (p. 266); "anosognosia," the una wareness of disease
(p. 263); "hemineglect," the tendency to ignore one side of space (p. 260); and
"prosopagnosia," the inability to recognize familiar faces (p. 228). The work is
nearly devoid of cross-cultural insights or, indeed, any commentary on cultural
conditioning of these abilities, other than general comments about human gestation
and neonatal care.
Nevertheless, this is an eminently readable work. It will serve as an excellent
review of standard knowledge in this held for professionals, and it contains enough
intellectual controversy to make it stimulating reading. It should additionally be of
real interest to motivated students.

