Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Native RNA nanopore sequencing reveals
antibiotic-induced loss of rRNA
modiﬁcations in the A- and P-sites
Anna Delgado-Tejedor
1,2, Rebeca Medina1, Oguzhan Begik
1, Luca Cozzuto1,
Judith López
3,4, Sandra Blanco
3,4, Julia Ponomarenko1 &
Eva Maria Novoa
1,2,5
The biological relevance and dynamics of mRNA modiﬁcations have been
extensively studied; however, whether rRNA modiﬁcations are dynamically
regulated, and under which conditions, remains unclear. Here, we system-
atically characterize bacterial rRNA modiﬁcations upon exposure to diverse
antibiotics using native RNA nanopore sequencing. To identify signiﬁcant
rRNA modiﬁcation changes, we develop NanoConsensus, a novel pipeline that
is robust across RNA modiﬁcation types, stoichiometries and coverage, with
very low false positive rates, outperforming all individual algorithms tested.
We then apply NanoConsensus to characterize the rRNA modiﬁcation land-
scape upon antibiotic exposure, ﬁnding that rRNA modiﬁcation proﬁles are
altered in the vicinity of A and P-sites of the ribosome, in an antibiotic-speciﬁc
manner, possibly contributing to antibiotic resistance. Our work demonstrates
that rRNA modiﬁcation proﬁles can be rapidly altered in response to envir-
onmental exposures, and provides a robust workﬂow to study rRNA mod-
iﬁcation dynamics in any species, in a scalable and reproducible manner.
Increasing antibiotic resistance among pathogenic bacteria threatens
healthcare and the efﬁcacy of the majority of currently known
antibiotics1. Most clinically used antibiotics inhibit bacterial growth by
targeting protein synthesis2–4, often through direct binding to the
bacterial ribosome, interfering with mRNA translation or blocking the
formation of peptide bonds at the peptidyl transferase center. For
example, aminoglycoside antibiotics such as kanamycin, streptomycin
and neomycin, are potent and broad-spectrum antibacterials that were
introduced in the clinic more than ﬁve decades ago, which interact
with the 16S rRNA at the A site of the ribosome5. Unfortunately, their
clinical efﬁcacy is seriously threatened by multiple resistance
mechanisms6. Currently, the most widely disseminated aminoglyco-
side resistance determinants are drug modiﬁcation enzymes7, but 16S
rRNA methyltransferases that modify the drug-binding site have
recently emerged as a signiﬁcant threat that can confer class-wide
resistance to these drugs8,9. Thus, detailed studies of these emerging
resistance mechanisms are urgently needed.
Bacterial rRNAs contain a large number of methylations that are
placed by genomically encoded methyltransferases10. While these
typically improve ribosome function under most conditions, when
challenged with antibiotics the loss of speciﬁc modiﬁcations can
confer low to moderate levels of antibiotic resistance11–16 (Supple-
mentary Data S1). For example, bacterial strains lacking rsmA
(rsmA_KO), responsible for dimethylation of adenine at position 1519
of the 16S rRNA (16S:m6,6A1519), show resistance to kasugamycin17,18,
whereas
bacterial
strains
lacking
the
rsmG
methyltransferase
(rsmG_KO), responsible for placing 7-methylguanosine in the 16S rRNA
(16S:m7G527), show increased resistance to streptomycin19. To better
Received: 28 March 2023
Accepted: 5 November 2024
Check for updates
1Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain. 2Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
3Molecular Mechanisms Program, Centro de Investigación del Cáncer and Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas (CSIC)-University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. 4Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca (IBSAL), Hospital Uni-
versitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. 5ICREA, Pg. Lluís Companys 23, Barcelona, Spain.
e-mail: eva.novoa@crg.eu
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
comprehend the role that rRNA methylation dynamics plays in anti-
biotic resistance, and to decipher whether additional rRNA modiﬁca-
tions might be contributing to increased antibiotic resistance, accurate
methods to monitor and quantify rRNA modiﬁcations are sorely
needed20–22.
Transcriptome-wide detection of RNA modiﬁcations has been
typically achieved by coupling either antibody immunoprecipitation
or
chemical
probing
with
next
generation
sequencing
(NGS)
technologies23–35. However, limited availability of selective antibodies
and/or chemicals only allows for detection of ~5% of currently known
RNA modiﬁcations21,36,37. Moreover, even when these reagents are
available, these methodologies have high false positive rates38, are
often not quantitative39 and are inconsistent when using different
antibodies40, and can only detect one RNA modiﬁcation type at a time.
A promising alternative to NGS-based methods is the direct RNA
nanopore sequencing (DRS) platform developed by Oxford Nanopore
Technologies (ONT), which can detect diverse types of modiﬁed
nucleotides in individual native RNA molecules41–43. In this platform,
RNA molecules are translocated through the nanopores that are
embedded
in
synthetic
membranes
coupled
to
an
ammeter,
causing changes in the ionic current, which are in turn used to
identify the underlying nucleotide sequence using machine learning
algorithms44–46, a process referred to as ‘base-calling’. RNA modiﬁca-
tions can then be identiﬁed using two main approaches: (i) in the form
of systematic base-calling ‘errors’47–51, or (ii) in the form of alterations in
the current signal (i.e., altered current intensities, dwell times and/or
trace)43,52–57. In recent years, a plethora of algorithms to detect RNA
modiﬁcations in DRS datasets have been developed47,53,56–59; however,
the overlap between predicted RNA modiﬁed sites by different algo-
rithms is poor49,57, limiting our ability to extract meaningful biological
conclusions from these datasets. Moreover, it is currently unclear how
the performance of each algorithm varies depending on the RNA
modiﬁcation type, modiﬁcation stoichiometry and sequencing depth,
thus limiting the applicability of DRS for the detection of dynamically
regulated RNA modiﬁcations in biological contexts45.
Here, we systematically benchmark diverse RNA modiﬁcation
detection softwares in DRS datasets, across diverse RNA modiﬁcation
types, stoichiometries and sequencing depths. We then propose
a novel approach, NanoConsensus which uses as input the predictions
of
diverse
RNA
modiﬁcation
prediction
softwares
(EpiNano47,
Nanopolish60, Tombo56 and Nanocompore57), re-scores them and
weights them internally, and ﬁnally extracts a robust list of repro-
ducible RNA modiﬁcation sites that are differentially modiﬁed
between two conditions (e.g., wild type versus knockout; antibiotic-
treated versus untreated). Our results demonstrate that Nano-
Consensus is a robust strategy to detect multiple rRNA modiﬁcation
types simultaneously, outperforming all individual RNA modiﬁcation
softwares tested in this work, detecting RNA modiﬁcation changes
across diverse RNA modiﬁcation types, with improved sensitivity and
speciﬁcity across a wide range of modiﬁcation stoichiometries and
sequencing depths.
We then apply NanoConsensus to study rRNA modiﬁcation
dynamics on E. coli cultures from diverse genetic backgrounds
(including strains lacking speciﬁc rRNA modiﬁcation enzymes), which
were subjected to either streptomycin (str) or (ii) kasugamycin (ksg)
exposure, which bind to the A- and P-site of the ribosome, respectively
(Fig. 1A). We ﬁnd that upon antibiotic treatment, rRNA modiﬁcation
levels of a subset of sites are signiﬁcantly decreased, in an antibiotic-
dependent manner, and that this loss of rRNA modiﬁcations depends
on the speciﬁc antibiotic employed. Notably, dysregulated rRNA
modiﬁed sites are spatially located in the vicinity of the A site and the
P-site of the ribosome. We show that this loss is not caused by the
appearance of mutations in rRNA molecules, nor expression of alter-
native rRNA operons. Rather, we demonstrate that the loss of rRNA
modiﬁcations is caused by the de novo appearance of a subpopulation
of under-modiﬁed rRNA molecules that were not present in untreated
E. coli cultures.
Overall, our work reveals that rRNA modiﬁcations can be dyna-
mically regulated upon antibiotic exposure, with altered rRNA mod-
iﬁcation
patterns
that
are
antibiotic-speciﬁc.
Moreover,
we
demonstrate that NanoConsensus is a robust toolkit to study rRNA
modiﬁcation dynamics across varying stoichiometries and RNA mod-
iﬁcation types, with low false positive rates. To facilitate the use and
applicability of NanoConsensus by future users, we integrate this
pipeline into the MasterOfPores NextFlow workﬂow61, making the
detection of differential RNA modiﬁcations DRS datasets simple,
traceable and reproducible.
Results
Direct RNA nanopore sequencing can identify bacterial rRNA
modiﬁcations implicated in antibiotic resistance mechanisms
Previous works have shown that bacteria have evolved an effective and
elegant way of preventing drug binding to the ribosome by either
adding or removing speciﬁc rRNA modiﬁcations at appropriate
sites62,63. Yet, a systematic analysis of how antibiotic exposures affect
the stoichiometry and dynamics of rRNA modiﬁcations is currently
missing. The direct RNA nanopore sequencing (DRS) platform is well-
suited to capture the dynamic changes in rRNA modiﬁed sites caused
by environmental cues, such as antibiotics43,64. However, whether this
is the case, and whether nanopore sequencing is sensitive enough to
capture potential rRNA modiﬁcation changes caused by the presence
of antibiotics, remains unknown.
To address this question, we ﬁrst examined whether E. coli mutant
strains lacking speciﬁc rRNA methyltransferases would show increased
antibiotic resistance phenotypes, as reported in the literature. To this
end, we cultured E. coli strains lacking rsmG (responsible for placing
16S:m7G527) or rsmA (responsible for placing 16S:m6,6A1518,A1519)
(Supplementary Data S1), and exposed them antibiotics at increasing
concentrations (streptomycin or kasugamycin, for which their resis-
tance had been reported, see Fig. 1A), and monitored their growth
during 16 h. Results conﬁrmed that rsmG and rsmA knockout strains
showed increased resistance to streptomycin and kasugamycin,
respectively (Fig. 1B, C), compared to wild type strains, in agreement
with previous literature17,19.
Previous works using nanopore sequencing to identify RNA
modiﬁcations have mainly focused their efforts on the detection of N6-
methyladenosine (m6A)47,51,53,55,57,58,65 and pseudouridine (Ψ)43,66–68, and
to a lesser extent inosine (I)69 and 2′O-methylation (Nm)43,70. However,
whether DRS can detect other less frequent RNA modiﬁcation types,
such as those that have been previously implicated in antibiotic
resistance mechanisms remains unclear. To this end, we sequenced
total RNA from E. coli rsmG, rsmA and rsmF knockout strains
(responsible for 16S:m7G527, 16S:m6,6A1518,A1519 and 16S:m5C1407,
respectively), as well as from the parental E. coli wild type strain, using
DRS (Fig. 1D, see also Fig. S1). EpiNano-Error47 was used to identify
differentially modiﬁed rRNA sites by comparing the base-calling
‘errors’ of each knockout strain to those observed in the parental
wild type strain, revealing that all 3 modiﬁcations examined (m7G,
m6,6A and m5C), could be identiﬁed in the form of base-calling
‘errors’48,49 (Fig. 1D, E, see also Figure S1A). Indeed, we found that base-
calling ‘errors’ decreased in the rsmG, rsmA and rsmF knockout strains
(Fig. 1D, see also Fig. S1B), supporting that DRS can be used to identify
rRNA modiﬁcation types that are involved in antibiotic resistance
mechanisms.
Poor reproducibility across RNA modiﬁcation detection algo-
rithms limits our ability to identify antibiotic-induced rRNA
modiﬁcation dynamics
Considering that m7G and m6,6A-deﬁcient strains (rsmG and rsmA
knockouts) displayed increased resistance to streptomycin and
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
2
kasugamycin, respectively (Fig. 1B,C), we then wondered whether the
wild type E. coli strain would dynamically modulate its rRNA mod-
iﬁcation levels of 16S:m7G527 and 16S:m6,6A1518,1519 upon antibiotic
exposure. To address this question, we treated wild type E. coli cultures
with either streptomycin (str) or kasugamycin (ksg) for either 1 h or
16 h, and sequenced treated and untreated samples using DRS (Sup-
plementary Data S2). Differences in rRNA modiﬁcation proﬁles were
determined using EpiNano-Error, as well as with 3 additional softwares
(Nanocompore57, Tombo56 and Nanopolish71) that employ pairwise
comparison approaches to identify differential RNA modiﬁcations
between two samples, and therefore, are not limited to detecting a
single RNA modiﬁcation type. We should note that Nanopolish does
not identify RNA modiﬁcations per se; however, it can be used to
‘resquiggle’ the reads to then predict differences in current intensity at
each position45. To ensure that unequal coverage along the transcript
would not cause biases in the detection of differentially modiﬁed sites
along the transcript and across algorithms, only full-length reads were
kept for downstream analyses (see Methods and Supplementary Data
S2). For every algorithm, we used its own scoring system to identify
differentially modiﬁed sites (see Methods), which we refer to as ‘raw
scores’.
Our results showed that each algorithm predicted many dynamic
sites between the two conditions (antibiotic-treated versus untreated).
However, the sites were poorly reproducible across biological
replicates. Notably, we observed a poor overlap when comparing
the predictions made by each algorithm (Fig. S2). In the case of
Tombo, most of rRNA sites were in fact predicted as differentially
modiﬁed, in agreement with previous works reporting that Tombo
performance was poor due to very large proportions of false
positives53,57.
Fig. 1 | Nanopore direct RNA sequencing can be used to study bacterial rRNA
modiﬁcations involved in antibiotic resistance mechanisms. A 3D structure of
the ribosome (gray) depicting the tRNA in the P-site (orange) and A-site (green).
The residues surrounding the kasugamycin binding site are shown in blue, and are
located near the anticodon region of the tRNA that is located at the P-site, whereas
residues surrounding the streptomycin binding site are shown in pink, and are
located near the anticodon region of the A-site tRNA. Surrounding residues were
deﬁned as those that have at least one of its atoms at less than 10 Å from the
antibiotic. In the zoomed regions, modiﬁed nucleotides involved in antibiotic
resistance are represented as brown surfaces, whereas the antibiotics are shown in
black. PDB structure corresponds to 7K00. B Growth curves of E. coli WT (left) and
E.coli rsmG KO (right) upon increasing concentrations of streptomycin. Data shown
represents the average OD600 values of 2 independent biological replicates. Each
biological replicate was calculated as the median of 3 technical replicates. Data was
collected every 9 minutes, during a time course of 16 h. Source data are provided as
a Source Data ﬁle. C Growth curves of E. coli WT (left) and E.coli rsmA KO (right)
upon increasing kasugamycin concentrations. Data shown represents the average
OD600 values of 2 independent biological replicates, and each biological replicate
was calculated as the median of 3 technical replicates. Data was collected every
9 minutes, during a time course of 16 h. Source data are provided as a Source Data
ﬁle. D IGV snapshots of E.coli WT and knockout strains illustrating loss of base-
calling errors upon enzyme knockout (rsmG and rsmA). Positions with mismatch
frequencies greater than 0.1 are colored, whereas positions with mismatch fre-
quencies lower than 0.1 are shown in gray. E Scatterplots of the summed base-
calling error frequencies (sum of insertion, deletion and mismatch frequencies) at
each nucleotide position in the knockout strain, relative to WT. The rRNA modiﬁed
sites that are lost upon knockout of the gene are shown in red (position 0); the
neighboring positions (±4 nt) to the rRNA modiﬁcation site (position 0) are shown
in blue. Remaining positions are shown in gray.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
3
Systematic benchmarking reveals that performance of
nanopore-based RNA modiﬁcation detection algorithms
depends on modiﬁcation type, sequencing coverage and
stoichiometry
To investigate the reasons behind the poor reproducibility of RNA
modiﬁcation detection across softwares, we systematically analyzed
how different features (sequencing coverage, RNA modiﬁcation type
and modiﬁcation stoichiometry) might impact the performance of
each algorithm. To this end, we analyzed DRS datasets from E. coli and
S. cerevisiae wild type and mutant strains lacking distinct RNA mod-
iﬁcation types at known rRNA positions (see Supplementary Data S3).
Firstly, we examined whether different RNA modiﬁcation types
(Am, m5C, m7G, m6,6A, Um, Ψ) would be detected by each different
software. We should note that RNA modiﬁcations appear in the form of
altered base-calling ‘errors’ and/or current intensities in positions that
are neighboring the modiﬁed site (i.e., positions −2,−1, +1 and/or +2
relative to the modiﬁed site)43,47,57. For this reason, we quantiﬁed the
scores in the 5 nucleotides surrounding the differential modiﬁed site
(5-mer), and then examined how each modiﬁcation type was detected
by each software, ﬁnding that the position within the 5-mer identiﬁed
as ‘altered’ varied both with the RNA modiﬁcation type and algorithm
of choice (Fig. 2A). For example, EpiNano typically identiﬁed altera-
tions in the base-calling signatures at the position 0 of the 5-mer,
whereas current intensity-based methods, such as Tombo, Nanopolish
or Nanocompore, frequently identiﬁed the alterations at the neigh-
boring positions. Moreover, alterations in the signal were often seen at
different positions of the 5-mer, even when comparing the same RNA
modiﬁcation type across different algorithms. For example, 2′-O-
methyladenosine (Am) could be detected by all 4 softwares, but the
altered signal was detected at distinct positions of the 5-mer
depending on the algorithm. Altogether, these results suggest that in
order to compare the predictions from individual softwares, raw
Fig. 2 | Algorithm performance varies depending on RNA modiﬁcation type,
modiﬁcation stoichiometry and sequencing coverage. A Dotplots of raw dif-
ferential RNA modiﬁcation scores along the modiﬁed 5-mer obtained by each
software when detecting different RNA modiﬁcation types. In the x-axis, 0 denotes
the modiﬁed position. Position within the 5-mer of the ‘altered feature’ varies
depending on the RNA modiﬁcation type, but also depending on the software used
to identify the modiﬁcation changes. Data from three technical replicates from four
different coverage levels is included. Box, ﬁrst to last quartiles; whiskers, 1.5×
interquartile range; center line, median. Source data are provided as a Source Data
ﬁle. B Raw RNA modiﬁcation scores along the E. coli 16S rRNA transcript for each
individual software tested, obtained when comparing E. coli wild type and rsmF
knockout strains. Analyses have been performed using either 100 (upper panel) or
500 randomly selected reads (lower panel). The modiﬁed site that is reported to be
lost in the rsmF knockout strain (16S:m5C1407) is indicated with an asterisk (*). See
also Figs. S3–S6. C Barplots of median differential modiﬁcation raw scores obtained
by each software in the modiﬁed 5-mer for each modiﬁcation type present in the
benchmarking. Raw scores are obtained by comparing the wild type and knockout
strains, for each given site. Two randomly chosen rRNA modiﬁed sites that are not
expected to change across any of the datasets have been included in the analyses as
controls (16S:730 and 25S:2549). Error bars indicate median ± s.d. of three repli-
cates. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle. D Barplots of median raw
scores in each modiﬁed 5-mer analyzed. Samples were analyzed using 1000 reads
per sample, and with a diverse range of stoichiometry levels (see Methods). Error
bars indicate median ± s.d. of three replicates. Source data are provided as a Source
Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
4
scores from all positions of the 5-mer should be taken into con-
sideration for downstream analyses, rather than comparing the
nucleotide positions predicted by each software, as each software
associated the modiﬁcation signal to distinct nucleotide position(s).
Next, we examined how sequencing coverage affected the per-
formance of each software. To this end, each DRS dataset (Supple-
mentary Data S3) was downsampled into three independent subsets of
50, 100, 500 and 1500 reads (see Methods). Each wild type subset was
then compared to a knockout subset of reads, and differential peaks
were identiﬁed by each algorithm (Fig. 2B, see also Fig. S3–S6). Our
results revealed that the identiﬁcation of differentially modiﬁed sites
was strongly dependent on sequencing coverage. Notably, the minimal
coverage required to detect a differentially modiﬁed site varied both
depending on the algorithm as well as on the modiﬁcation type. For
example, loss of m6,6A could be detected by Tombo when having a
minimum coverage of 500 reads whereas Epinano was able to detect it
with a coverage of 50 reads (Fig. 2C). Overall, our results demonstrate
that coverage signiﬁcantly affects the performance of all algorithms,
that not all softwares efﬁciently detect all RNA modiﬁcation types
given a speciﬁc sequencing coverage, and that using 50 reads per
position (which is the recommended threshold by several of the soft-
wares) is often insufﬁcient to detect RNA modiﬁcations, even when the
site modiﬁed at high stoichiometry.
Finally, we assessed the impact of RNA modiﬁcation levels (i.e.,
stoichiometry) in the performance of each algorithm. To this end, we
artiﬁcially generated samples with decreasing modiﬁcation stoichio-
metries (100, 75, 50, 40, 30, 20 and 10%) by mixing reads from wild
type and knockout samples at different proportions, with the
assumption that wild type samples are 100% modiﬁed at the site of
interest, and knockout samples are 0% modiﬁed (see Methods). Sub-
samplings were performed in triplicate for each RNA modiﬁcation type
and stoichiometry level. We should note that all artiﬁcial mixes
representing distinct RNA modiﬁcation stoichiometries contained the
same number of reads (n = 1000), to ensure that coverage would not
be a confounder in the analysis. Our results revealed that stoichio-
metry had a major effect in the detection of RNA modiﬁcations
(Fig. 2D), in agreement with previous works57,59. Notably, we observed
that the effect of stoichiometry was strongly dependent on the RNA
modiﬁcation type. For example, Am was detected by most of softwares
across all stoichiometries tested; by contrast, the majority of algo-
rithms struggled to detect m5C, even at high stoichiometries (Fig. 2D).
NanoConsensus outperforms individual softwares at predicting
RNA modiﬁcations
Our results showed that RNA modiﬁcation type, stoichiometry levels
and coverage impact the detection of differentially modiﬁed sites in
DRS datasets (Fig. 2). Notably, our results also revealed that all soft-
wares examined predicted a signiﬁcant number of false positives
(Fig. S2). Indeed, each software identiﬁed several ‘differentially mod-
iﬁed’ sites when comparing wild type and knockout strains, even
though only one RNA modiﬁed site is absent in the knockout strain,
relative to the wild type (Fig. 2B, see also Figs. S3–S6).
We reasoned that the detection and replicability could be
improved if predictions took into account 5-mer data instead of single
nucleotide one. In addition, we reasoned that Z-score normalization
would decrease the proportion of false positives identiﬁed by each
software (see Methods). Indeed, we observed that Z-score rescaling
signiﬁcantly decreased the number of false positives, and decreased
the minimum number of reads that were required to identify a site as
differentially modiﬁed (Figs. S7–S11).
We then examined whether results using Z-score rescaled scores
would improve the detection of differentially modiﬁed sites in E. coli
cultures upon streptomycin (str) or kasugamycin (ksg) exposure
(Figs. S12–S13). We found that all 4 softwares showed good overlap of
predicted differential sites across biological replicates, within each
software (38–69% replicability, depending on the software) (Fig. S14A).
However, we still observed a poor overlap of predicted differentially
modiﬁed sites across softwares (15–25%) (Fig. S14B) suggesting that a
robust pipeline to detect differentially modiﬁed RNA sites from DRS
datasets is greatly needed.
We reasoned that the detection could be further improved if the
predictions from different algorithms would be combined in a con-
sensual manner, as this should decrease the number of false positives
while retaining the true differentially modiﬁed sites. To this end, we
developed NanoConsensus (Fig. 3A), an algorithm that reports putative
modiﬁed regions at per-transcript level, which takes as input the
results generated by different RNA modiﬁcation detection algorithms
(EpiNano, Nanopolish, Tombo and Nanocompore), and generates as
output a list of differentially modiﬁed sites that are robustly predicted
across softwares and replicates. Brieﬂy, NanoConsensus converts the
outputs of each software into Z-scores, identiﬁes putative modiﬁed
sites by each software, and assigns a ﬁnal NanoConsensus score to each
position of the transcript. Because the alteration of the signal caused
by a modiﬁcation does not necessarily overlap across softwares
(Fig. 2A, see also S7A), NanoConsensus expands each putative modiﬁed
site predicted by each software into a 5-mer window, and predicts the
overlap of 5-mer regions predicted by each software. Finally, all
regions supported by at least two softwares and with a NanoConsensus
score higher than a threshold (which is dependent on the background
‘noise’,
see
Methods)
are
reported
as
‘differentially
modiﬁed’
sites (Fig. 3A).
Using this approach, we observed that NanoConsensus was able to
robustly identify all modiﬁcation types examined (Fig. 3B), in all
independent biological replicates (n = 3) (Fig. S15). We then assessed
Nanoconsensus’ performance in the detection of RNA modiﬁcations
across diverse stoichiometry levels, coverage and modiﬁcation types
(Fig. 3C,D), using as input the same datasets used to assess the per-
formance of each individual software (Fig. 2, see also Fig. S7 and
Methods). To compare the performance of NanoConsensus to that of
each individual software, Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC)
curves were built for each algorithm, modiﬁcation type, coverage and
stoichiometry, and the comparative performance was assessed by
comparing the Area Under the Curve (AUC) values for each ROC curve.
Our results showed that NanoConsensus was more robust in predicting
RNA modiﬁcations across diverse modiﬁcation types, stoichiometries
and coverage (Figs. S16 and S17). Indeed, NanoConsensus globally
outperformed all individual softwares in terms of AUC values (AUC =
0.959) when using as input all the subsets (RNA modiﬁcation types,
stoichiometries,
and
coverage)
included
in
the
benchmarking
(Fig. S18).
Although NanoConsensus can robustly detect all RNA modiﬁca-
tion types examined in this work (Fig. 3B, see also S15), we should note
that m5C modiﬁcations were among the worst performing of all
modiﬁcations examined, as these could not be accurately identiﬁed at
low stoichiometry levels (Fig. 3D, F). Despite these limitations, we
found that NanoConsensus could robustly detect m5C modiﬁcations in
datasets with ≥30% modiﬁcation stoichiometry (Fig. S19). To further
conﬁrm the ability of NanoConsensus to detect m5C modiﬁcations, we
examined its performance in independent mouse rRNA DRS datasets,
by comparing wild type and NSUN5 KO mice, which are expected to
lack 28S:m5C3438. The lack of modiﬁcation in NSUN5 KO mice was
conﬁrmed by both RT-qPCR and bisulﬁte sequencing (Fig. S20, see also
Methods). Our results conﬁrm that NanoConsensus could accurately
identify m5C in mouse rRNA molecules (Fig. S21), further supporting
our observation that NanoConsensus is able to robustly identify m5C
modiﬁcations in diverse sequence contexts, as long as the modiﬁca-
tion stoichiometry of the modiﬁed site is ≥30%.
Finally, we examined the number of false positives reported by
each individual software, compared to NanoConsensus. To this end,
we computed the positive predictive values (PPV) across diverse
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
5
stoichiometries and RNA modiﬁcation types, for each algorithm.
The PPV reﬂects the proportion of true positives (TP) among the set
of predicted ‘positive’ (P) differentially modiﬁed sites. Our results
showed that the PPV was affected both by modiﬁcation stoichio-
metry and coverage, and that it was also dependent on the RNA
modiﬁcation type (Fig. 3E, see also Figs. S22–S23). Notably, the PPV
of
each
software
was
signiﬁcantly
improved
after
Z-score
normalization, due to the decrease in false positives (Fig. S24).
Globally, we found that Nanopolish showed the worst performance
in terms of PPV, followed by EpiNano and Nanocompore. On the
other hand, NanoConsensus showed the best performance in terms
of PPV across all stoichiometries and modiﬁcation types, implying
that it reports fewer false positives, compared to individual soft-
wares tested (Fig. 3F).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
6
Aminoglycoside exposure leads to changes in the modiﬁcation
pattern of the 16S in the bacterial ribosome
We then used NanoConsensus to re-examine the question of how
antibiotic exposures, such as kasugamycin or streptomycin, may
impact the rRNA modiﬁcation patterns of the bacterial ribosome. To
this end, E. coli cultures were grown in LB until log phase, and were
then exposed to streptomycin (str), kasugamycin (ksg) or left
untreated (Fig. 4A). Cultures were collected 1 h or 16 h post-treat-
ment, and the experiment was performed in independent biological
replicates, on different days. DRS libraries from total RNA were built
as previously described43 (see Methods), and the data was analyzed
in a pairwise manner using NanoConsensus. This analysis revealed
multiple regions (5 in 16 s rRNA, 1 in 23 s rRNA) that were ‘differen-
tially modiﬁed’ in both replicates (Fig. 4B, labeled in red). Notably,
all the identiﬁed regions located in the 16S rRNA overlapped with
known rRNA-modiﬁed sites (Supplementary Data S5). In terms of
directionality of the RNA modiﬁcation change, all sites identiﬁed as
differentially modiﬁed decreased in their modiﬁcation stoichio-
metry upon antibiotic exposure (Fig. S25). We should note that
increased duration of antibiotic treatment (1 h or 16 h) (Fig. 4B); did
not signiﬁcantly change the set of differentially modiﬁed sites
identiﬁed in the case of kasugamycin, whereas in the case of strep-
tomycin, some differentially rRNA modiﬁed sites were lost with
extended exposures.
Finally, we examined the 3D location of ‘differentially modiﬁed’
regions upon antibiotic treatment within the ribosome structure, and
found that these regions were very close in the 3D space despite being
far in the linear rRNA molecule (Fig. 4B). More speciﬁcally, these
regions were all located within the A- and P-sites of the ribosome
(Fig. 4C see also Supplementary Data S5), thus matching the binding
site areas of streptomycin and kasugamycin, respectively (Fig. 4C).
Thus, our results suggest that the alteration of a subset of rRNA
modiﬁcation might constitute an adaptive response of bacterial cells
to diminish the binding afﬁnity of kasugamycin and streptomycin in
the P-site and A-site, respectively. Altogether, our results demonstrate
that rRNA modiﬁcation levels can be dynamically regulated upon
environmental exposures, and that rRNA modiﬁcation dysregulation
might constitute a common molecular mechanism employed by bac-
terial species to increase their tolerance towards antibiotics binding
the ribosome.
Mutations or differential rRNA usage do not explain the
observed differences in DRS proﬁles
We and others have shown that differential RNA modiﬁcations in DRS
datasets cause alterations in the current intensities and/or base-calling
‘error’ patterns45,72. However, changes in the nucleotide sequence (e.g.,
SNPs, alternative rRNA usage) can also lead to such alterations, and
thus could constitute a confounder in the analysis, misguiding the
detection of differential rRNA modiﬁcations.
To exclude such possibility, we examined whether the use of
alternative E. coli rRNA genes could explain our results. E. coli has seven
rRNA operons encoded in its genome, with small sequence differences
among them73,74. Notably, previous works have shown that stress can
lead to change in its operon usage75,76. To examine whether differential
rRNA operon usage could explain our observations, we performed a
multiple sequence alignment of the 7 annotated E. coli 16S rRNA
sequences, ﬁnding that all 7 rRNA sequences were identical across
operons within regions identiﬁed as ‘differentially modiﬁed’, (Fig. 5A)
demonstrating that differential rRNA operon usage could not explain
the observed changes in the DRS data.
Another possible confounder in the rRNA modiﬁcation analysis
could be the presence of mutations that might arise at the genomic
level upon bacterial divisions, which might be selected for if they
confer a selective advantage upon antibiotic exposure77. To examine
whether
rRNA
mutations
could
explain
our
observations,
we
sequenced antibiotic-treated and untreated samples using Nano3P-
seq78, a cDNA-based nanopore sequencing method that efﬁciently
captures both the coding and non-coding transcriptome, regardless of
their tail composition (see Methods and Supplementary Data S4).
Analysis of rRNA molecules sequencing using Nano3P-seq revealed no
mutations at the rRNA regions identiﬁed as “differentially modiﬁed” by
Nanoconsensus (Fig. 5B). Altogether, our analyses support that the
changes seen in the DRS data are caused by alterations in the rRNA
modiﬁcation patterns, and not by changes occuring at the rRNA
nucleotide sequence or caused by alternative use of rRNA operons.
De novo rRNA transcription occurs upon streptomycin
exposure
Our results show that alterations in bacterial rRNA modiﬁcation pat-
terns can already be seen 1 h after antibiotic exposure (Fig. 5A, B),
demonstrating that rRNA modiﬁcations can be rapidly regulated upon
environmental exposures. This, in turn, opens new questions regard-
ing how these differentially modiﬁed rRNA molecules are produced.
To decipher the mechanism(s) used by bacterial cells to alter their
rRNA modiﬁcation proﬁles, we ﬁrst examined whether speciﬁc path-
ways might be altered upon antibiotic exposure. To this end, we
sequenced ribodepleted RNA samples from untreated, ksg-treated and
str-treated cultures (1 h post-antibiotic exposure) using Nano3P-seq, in
biological duplicates. We performed differential expression analysis
(Fig. 5C and Supplementary Data S6, see also Methods) and GO term
enrichment analysis on the set of genes that had at least 4-fold changes
in their expression levels (Fig. 5D), which revealed that both upon
kasugamycin and streptomycin treatment, transmembrane transport-
associated genes are downregulated, possibly to reduce the antibiotic
uptake. In addition, we also found that de-novo ribosome synthesis
genes were signiﬁcantly upregulated upon streptomycin treatment,
suggesting that the origin of lowly modiﬁed 16S rRNA molecules might
arise from newly synthesized 16S rRNA molecules. However, we cannot
Fig. 3 | NanoConsensus outperforms individual softwares in the prediction of
RNA modiﬁcations. A Schematic overview of the NanoConsensus pipeline. B Per-
position NanoConsensus scores along the 16 s and 18 s rRNA transcripts, for the
battery of RNA modiﬁcation types benchmarked in this work (m66A, Y, m5C, Am,
Um and m7G), where the WT strain has been compared to a different knockout
strain that lacks a speciﬁc rRNA modiﬁcation (see Supplementary Data S1 for list of
knockout strains used for each modiﬁcation type). The known modiﬁed site that is
lost is highlighted with an asterisk (*). Only one replicate is shown for each mod-
iﬁcation type, results obtained for additional replicates are shown in Fig. S15.
C Barplot of NanoConsensus scores of the 5-mer regions centered in each modiﬁed
site analyzed. Samples included in the analysis consist of 100% modiﬁed samples
(WT), with varying read coverage levels, and are the same that were used to gen-
erate Fig. 2C. Error bars indicate median ± s.d. of three replicates. Source data are
provided as a Source Data ﬁle. D Barplot of median NanoConsensus scores of the
5-mer regions centered in each modiﬁed site analyzed. Samples were analyzed with
a range of stoichiometry levels (and ﬁxed coverage of 1000 reads), which are the
same samples that were used to generate Fig. 2D. Error bars indicate median ± s.d.
of three replicates. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle. E Radar plots of
positive predictive values (PPV) for each software, RNA modiﬁcation type and
stoichiometry using either raw scores (upper track) or Z-scores (lower track). PPVs
for raw scores were computed using the following threshold: for EpiNano, all sites
reported as modiﬁed; for Nanopolish, sites whose Δmedian current intensity
/median(Δmedian current intensity)>=5; for Tombo, sites whose p-value is lower
than 0.01 after Benjamini–Hochberg correction; for Nanocompore, sites whose p-
value is lower than 0.01 and with a GMM log odds ratio>0.5. PPVs for Z-scores were
computed with a Z-Score threshold > 5. Source data are provided as a Source Data
ﬁle. F Radar plots of positive predictive values (PPV) for NanoConsensus. PPV were
computed using a Z-Score threshold > 5 and NanoConsensus score threshold >
5*(median across transcript). Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
7
exclude other possibilities, such as the existence of eraser enzymes,
that can be responsible for the appearance of lowly modiﬁed 16S rRNA
molecules.
To test this hypothesis, we examined the cumulative distribution
of per-read ‘errors’ (which can be used as a proxy for the relative
number of RNA modiﬁcations per molecule) from str-treated, ksg-
treated and untreated full-length DRS reads (see Methods). Our ana-
lysis revealed that a population of lowly modiﬁed reads (i.e., summed
errors <4) was present in both str- and ksg-treated samples, but was
largely absent in untreated samples, suggesting that lowly-modiﬁed
rRNA reads appear in response to antibiotic treatments (Fig. 5E).
Similar results were obtained using PCA analysis of per-read rRNA
modiﬁcation proﬁles, which also showed that most of the lowly-
modiﬁed rRNA reads were mainly appearing upon antibiotic exposure
(Fig. S26).
Excluding rsmA and rsmG, the lack of individual methyl-
transferases does not lead to an increased resistance to strep-
tomycin nor kasugamycin
Previous works have reported that the lack of rsmA (responsible of
placing m6,6A in 16S:1518-1519), and rsmG (responsible of m7G in
16S:527)
leads
to
increased
resistance
to
kasugamycin
and
Fig. 4 | Direct RNA sequencing results of E. coli samples exposed to strepto-
mycin and kasugamycin. A Experimental design of the exposure of non-resistant
E. coli to both streptomycin and kasugamycin. (Created in BioRender. Novoa, E.
(2024) BioRender.com/b62y778). B NanoConsensus scores along the 16S rRNA
(upper panel) and 23S rRNA (lower panel) of E. coli samples collected after 1 h or
16 h exposure to streptomycin (left panel) or kasugamycin (right panel). In gray,
non-signiﬁcant positions; in blue, regions identiﬁed by NanoConsensus in only one
replicate; in red, regions identiﬁed in both replicates. Known modiﬁed sites found
in replicable differentially modiﬁed regions identiﬁed by Nanoconsensus are also
shown. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle. C 3D structure of the bac-
terial ribosome (PDB: 7K00), highlighting the differentially modiﬁed rRNA residues
upon streptomycin (upper panel) or kasugamycin (lower panel) exposure identi-
ﬁed in this work. Differential rRNA modiﬁed residues are shown in red; in black, the
antibiotic; in light green and orange, the tRNA molecule located in the A and P-sites,
respectively.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
8
streptomycin, respectively. In our work, we ﬁnd that modiﬁcation
levels of both 16S:m6,6A1518-1519 and 16S:m7G527 are signiﬁcantly
decreased upon antibiotic exposure, suggesting an adaptive response
of bacteria in their rRNA modiﬁcation proﬁles to increase their resis-
tance to antibiotics. Notably, we also found that additional rRNA
modiﬁed sites, apart from these two, were signiﬁcantly decreased in
their modiﬁcation levels upon antibiotic exposure (Fig. 4B). Therefore,
we wondered whether the lack of methyltransferases responsible for
placing rRNA modiﬁcations that we ﬁnd dysregulated upon antibiotic
treatment, in addition to rsmA and rsmG, might lead to increased
antibiotic resistance.
To this end, we cultured seven E. coli knock-out strains (listed in
Supplementary Data S1), including rsmA and rsmG, that we identiﬁed
as responsible for placing rRNA modiﬁcations that are differentially
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
9
methylated
upon
streptomycin
and/or
kasugamycin
exposure
(Fig. 4B). Each strain was cultured under a broad range of antibiotic
(kasugamycin or streptomycin) concentrations, and their growth was
monitored for 16 h (Figs. 6A and S27). To assess whether the lack of a
given methyltransferase enzyme led to increased antibiotic resistance,
we compared the growth of each knockout to that of the wild type
strain by subtracting the AUC values of the growth curves of each
strain and antibiotic concentration relative to the same conditions in
the wild type strain. Our results showed that the lack of rsmA and rsmG
led to increased antibiotic resistance (Fig. 6B), as expected. However,
the lack of other methyltransferases examined did not lead to
increased antibiotic resistance, despite being responsible for placing
rRNA modiﬁcations at sites that we ﬁnd differentially modiﬁed upon
antibiotic exposure. The possible synergistic effect of removing sev-
eral of these enzymes simultaneously remains unknown.
Discussion
A plethora of computational methods for detecting RNA modiﬁcations
in nanopore direct RNA sequencing (DRS) datasets have been devel-
oped in recent years43,48–50,52–58. These methods typically predict RNA
modiﬁcations either through the analysis of the raw signal features
(e.g., current intensity and/or dwell time)43,52–58 or in the form of dif-
ferential base-calling ‘errors’47–51. Previous works have compared the
performance of some softwares in detecting m6A modiﬁcations in DRS
datasets, ﬁnding a relatively poor overlap between the predictions
across softwares53,57,58,79,80. However, their comparative performance in
detecting other RNA modiﬁcation types (e.g., Ψ, Nm, ac4C) has so far
not been assessed. Thus, it is unclear which software(s) should be used
to study rRNA modiﬁcation dynamics.
To tackle this question, here we benchmarked four softwares that
can in principle detect diverse RNA modiﬁcation types in DRS datasets,
and assessed their ability in detecting diverse RNA modiﬁcation types
(i.e., Ψ, Am, Um, m6,6A, m7G and m5C) across diverse stoichiometries
and sequencing coverage ranges. Our results showed that softwares
relying on signal intensity features were better than those using
basecalling errors at detecting some RNA modiﬁcation types (e.g.,
m5C), but the opposite was seen for other RNA modiﬁcation types (e.g.,
m6,6A) (Fig. 2C). Notably, we also found that in cases where RNA
modiﬁcations showed a ‘spread of signal’ along several nucleotides,
algorithms often identiﬁed different positions as the ‘differentially
modiﬁed site’, partly explaining the poor overlap of RNA modiﬁcation
predictions across softwares (Fig. S2). In addition, our analyses showed
that both coverage and stoichiometry levels had a strong impact in the
performance of the algorithms (Fig. 2), lowering both their sensitivity
and speciﬁcity (Figs. S3–S6 and S16). To overcome these limitations,
we designed and implemented NanoConsensus, a workﬂow that iden-
tiﬁes differentially modiﬁed RNA sites between two samples using as
input the predictions from 4 different softwares, allowing for sliding-
window overlaps to identify common predictions across softwares. We
found that NanoConsensus outperformed all 4 individual softwares,
and
was
robust
across
a
range
of
RNA
modiﬁcation
types,
stoichiometry and coverage levels (Fig. 3E-F). To facilitate the use of
this tool, we have made Nanoconsensus available as Nextﬂow module81,
and have integrated it within the MasterOfPores61 Nextﬂow workﬂow,
to ensure reproducibility, scalability and traceability of the analyses
performed. We should note that similar ‘consensus’ approaches have
also been successfully employed to improve the detection of DNA
modiﬁcations in nanopore sequencing data82.
Once the performance of Nanoconsensus was benchmarked and
optimized, we applied it to investigate whether bacterial rRNA mod-
iﬁcation proﬁles were altered upon antibiotic exposure, and determine
whether variation in rRNA modiﬁcation levels might constitute a nat-
ural mechanism that bacteria use to increase their resistance upon
antibiotic exposure. To this end, we sequenced total RNA from
streptomycin-treated, kasugamycin-treated and untreated E. coli cul-
tures using nanopore DRS, and compared the rRNA modiﬁcation
proﬁles of treated and untreated cultures. We found that antibiotic
exposure signiﬁcantly altered the 16S rRNA modiﬁcation proﬁles of the
bacterial ribosome (Fig. 4B). Notably, differentially modiﬁed rRNA
sites were largely located within the vicinity of the A and P-sites (Fig. 4C
and Supplementary Data S5), which correspond to the binding regions
of the streptomycin and kasugamycin, respectively. We should note
that one site was identiﬁed in 23S rRNA, which did not overlap with any
annotated rRNA modiﬁed site, and was located 91 Å and 105.4 Å away
from streptomycin and kasugamycin binding sites, respectively, and
thus, was considered as a false positive for the remaining downstream
analyses.
The fact that rRNA modiﬁcations are altered precisely in the
vicinity of the antibiotic binding site suggests that this phenomenon is
a specialized response from bacteria to the speciﬁc antibiotic in
question, possibly as a means to decrease the binding afﬁnity of the
antibiotic to the bacterial ribosome. In the case of streptomycin, it has
been previously reported that the antibiotic interacts with positions
16S:530 in the loop19,83, and more speciﬁcally with 16S:m7G527.
Therefore, the lack of this modiﬁcation, possibly also enhanced by the
loss of other neighboring modiﬁcations, likely causes a decrease in the
binding afﬁnity of the antibiotic. In the case of kasugamycin, it is
known that both m6,6A residues (16S:m6,6A1518 and 16S:m6,6A1519) are
not in direct contact with the antibiotic, which might explain why the
absence of these modiﬁcations confers only low-level resistance84.
Previous works using DRS have reported differential RNA mod-
iﬁcation patterns upon heat and oxidative stress in snRNAs, snoRNAs
and mRNAs, but not in rRNAs43,64. Contrary to previous observations,
our results point to rRNA modiﬁcations being dynamically regulated
upon environmental conditions, at least in the case of antibiotic
exposure(s). An alternative explanation for the loss of the 16S rRNA
modiﬁcations observed upon antibiotic exposure would be that anti-
biotics themselves interfere with the RNA modiﬁcation machineryand/
or alter the recognition of the sites during rRNA maturation.
Indeed, the selective loss of certain bacterial rRNA modiﬁcations
upon antibiotic exposures, in an antibiotic-speciﬁc manner, opens new
questions regarding what might be the mechanism(s) that bacteria use
Fig. 5 | Streptomycin exposure leads to increased de novo synthesis of rRNA
molecules, some of which lack a subset of rRNA modiﬁcations. A Multiple
sequence alignment (MSA) of the seven rRNA operons sequences in all regions
identiﬁed by NanoConsensus upon antibiotic exposure. B IGV tracks of nanopore
cDNA reads aligning to the ribosome sequence in all regions identiﬁed by Nano-
Consensus upon antibiotic exposure. Positions with mismatch frequencies greater
than 0.1 are colored, whereas positions with mismatch frequencies lower than 0.1
are shown in gray. C Differential expression analysis results between treated and
untreated samples. In gray, non-signiﬁcant genes; in green, genes with
abs(log2FC) > 2 and; in red, genes with abs(log2FC) > 2 and p adjusted value >=0.05.
P-values were calculated using the two-sided Walsh test and corrected with
Benjamini–Hochberg approach. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
D GO term enrichment analysis using molecular process terms using as input all
genes with abs(log2FC) > 2, which corresponded to n = 195 (upregulated) and
n = 214 (downregulated) genes upon streptomycin treatment, and n = 197 (upre-
gulated) and n = 203 (downregulated) genes upon kasugamycin treatment. In
orange, terms related to downregulated genes upon antibiotic exposure and; in
green, related to upregulated genes. P-values were obtained with the Fisher’s Exact
Test, followed by calculating the False Discovery Rate (FDR). Only terms with a
FDR < 0.05 were included in the ﬁnal results. Source data are provided as a Source
Data ﬁle. E Cumulative distribution of summed basecalling errors at per read level
from both untreated (n = 10,953 reads), str-treated (n = 3689 reads) and ksg-treated
(n = 14,376 reads) samples. In the upper-left corner, p-values between distributions
calculated with the two-sided KS test are shown.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
10
Fig. 6 | Depletion of rsmA and rsmG, but not other methyltransferases, leads to
increased resistance to kasugamycin and streptomycin. A Median growth
curves from four biological replicates of different E. coli strains (wild type, rsmA
knockout, rsmG knockout and rsmE knockout) across a range of antibiotic (strep-
tomycin, upper panels; kasugamycin, lower panels) concentrations. Data for each
biological replicate was computed as the median of three technical replicates.
Growth curve data was ﬁtted to a logistic curve. See also Figure S27 for growth
curves in additional E. coli strains tested (rsmB, rsmD, rsmH and rsmJ knockout
strains). B Barplots depicting Median Area Under the Curve (AUC) difference in
growth curves between wild type and knockout strains (KO-WT), for every KOstrain
and across all antibiotic concentrations tested. In bold, the strains that are reported
to have an increased resistance to each speciﬁc antibiotic. Error bars indicate
standard deviation of four biological replicates. Source data are provided as a
Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
11
to achieve the outcome of differential rRNA modiﬁcation. To answer
this question, we performed single molecule analysis of rRNA mod-
iﬁcation patterns (Figs. 5E and S26) as well as differential expression
analysis of treated and untreated cultures using Nano3P-seq (Fig. 5C
and Supplementary Data S4). These efforts revealed that antibiotic-
exposed bacteria have increased de novo expression of under-
modiﬁed rRNA molecules, which ultimately leads to signiﬁcantly
altered rRNA modiﬁcation proﬁles. It remains unclear, however, how
antibiotics lead to altered rRNA maturation processes and to the
production of under-modiﬁed rRNA molecules.
Future work is needed to conﬁrm whether the observed changes
in rRNA modiﬁcation patterns are caused by de novo generation of
under-modiﬁed rRNA molecules that appear upon antibiotic exposure,
or other possible models, such as that the presence of antibiotics
causes defects in ribosome assembly, which leads to the generation of
an under-modiﬁed rRNA population. In this regard, it has been pre-
viously shown that kasugamycin exposure leads to the formation of
61S
ribosomes85,
although
these
ribosomes
showed
unaltered
16S:m66 A1518 and 16S:m66A1519 modiﬁcation levels in previous stu-
dies, which differs from our ﬁndings.
In addition to the mechanism that leads to the appearance of
under-modiﬁed rRNA populations, an exciting open question that is
prompted by this work is whether differentially modiﬁed rRNA sub-
populations that are naturally generated will be incorporated into
translating ribosomes and used for protein synthesis, for example by
performing sucrose gradient fractionation coupled to nanopore total
RNA sequencing (to capture rRNA modiﬁcations) and mRNA sequen-
cing (to capture selective translation of subsets of transcripts). Estab-
lishing whether these unmodiﬁed ribosomes are part of the translating
pool of ribosomes, and whether they might be involved in preferential
translation of selected subsets of mRNAs as a means to achieve anti-
biotic resistance, are still open questions that need to be addressed in
the future.
Various resistance mechanisms, including enzymatic detox-
iﬁcation, target alteration (rRNAs and ribosomal proteins) and
reduced accumulation (impermeability and efﬂux) have been shown
to
be
involved
in
bacterial
resistance
to
protein
synthesis
inhibitors86. Notably, rRNA alteration has recently gained increased
interest
due
to
several
recent
studies
showing
that
some
chloramphenicol-ﬂorfenicol resistant (Cfr) bacteria carried a gene
encoding for a mutant version of an rRNA methyltransferase87,88.
Here we systematically examined whether the loss of individual
methyltransferases, responsible for placing rRNA modiﬁcations that
we identiﬁed as differentially modiﬁed upon antibiotic exposure
(Supplementary Data S5), might alter the resistance of bacteria
towards the antibiotic in question. We found that only the loss of
rsmG and rsmA, but not other methyltransferase enzymes examined,
led to a resistance phenotype (Fig. 6A, B, see also Fig. S27). It is
possible that the lack of these additional enzymes is not per se
enough to lead to increased resistance, but may have a synergistic
effect when lost simultaneously with rsmG and/or rsmA. In this
regard, recent studies have reported that some Mycobacterium
tuberculosis antibiotic-resistant strains carry multiple mutations in
several methyltransferase genes89 that are ortholog to the genes
identiﬁed by Nanoconsensus, suggesting that the lack of these
additional methyltransferases might constitute a selective advan-
tage towards antibiotic resistance.
While our work establishes a robust framework to identify dif-
ferential rRNA modiﬁcation patterns across conditions using DRS
(Fig. 2), we should note that Nanoconsensus has some limitations, as
well as room for future improvement. Firstly, it does not provide
information regarding the directionality (i.e., increase or decrease) of
the rRNA modiﬁcation changes between two conditions, although this
limitation can be partly alleviated by using the Epinano results that are
generated as part of the Nanoconsensus pipeline (see Fig. S25).
Secondly, NanoConsensus results are qualitative or at best semi-
quantitative, and therefore, to obtain quantitative information on the
differentially modiﬁed identiﬁed, other softwares such as nanoRMS43
should be used downstream in the analysis. Thirdly, Nanoconsensus
lacks single nucleotide resolution; consequently, if several RNA mod-
iﬁcations are located within the differentially modiﬁed regions iden-
tiﬁed, it is not possible to determine which speciﬁc rRNA modiﬁcation
is changing. Fourthly, NanoConsensus requires a minimum modiﬁca-
tion stoichiometry of 10–30% (depending on the RNA modiﬁcation) to
detect a differentially modiﬁed site, limiting its applicability to RNA
molecules with high modiﬁcation stoichiometries, such as rRNAs or
tRNAs. Despite these limitations, we demonstrate that Nanoconsensus
can be used to reveal antibiotic-dependent rRNA modiﬁcation chan-
ges, contributing to the understanding of how bacteria tune their
ribosomes as a response to environmental conditions. Notably, this
knowledge may be applied in the future to improve the design of
antibiotic chemical structures such that they have improved binding
efﬁciencies towards both the fully-modiﬁed and under-modiﬁed
ribosomal A and P-site regions.
Methods
Bacterial strains and culturing
E. coli strains used in this study (rsmA:JW0050, rsmG:JW3718 and
rsmF:JW5301, see Supplementary Data S1 for additional details) were
obtained from the Keio Knockout Collection90, including the reference
wild type strain (BW25113). Knockout strains have a kanamycin cas-
sette replacing the depleted gene. Strains were plated in LB-agar plates
(E. coli BW25113) or in LB-agar plates supplemented with 25 μg/mL
kanamycin (in the case of E. coli knockout strains).
Growth curves of antibiotic-resistant E. coli strains
For each strain, E. coli starter cultures were grown O/N in 4 mL tubes at
37 °C and 180 rpm. Aliquots from the overnight cultures were added
into a ﬁnal volume of 200 μl in 96-well plates with an initial OD600 of
0.01. Different antibiotic concentrations (streptomycin: 8,16, 32, 64
and 128 μl/mL; kasugamycin: 62, 125, 250, 500 and 1000 μl/mL) were
tested in both non-resistant and resistant strains. E.coli rsmF KO strain
was not tested for kanamycin resistance as its KO was generated
through the insertion of a kanamycin resistance cassette90. Bacteria
was grown at 37 °C and OD600 was measured every 10 min with a
TECAN M200 Plate Reader. We should note that the rsmF knockout
strain was not included in the growth curve experiments as this mutant
is expected to show increased resistance to kanamycin, and all Keio
collection mutants contain a kanamycin resistance cassette replacing
the gene that has been removed90. All experiments were performed in
biological replicates (n = 4) for each strain and condition, and each
strain and condition was measured at least in two independent plates
and in two different days.
Bacterial exposure to antibiotics
E. coli BW25113 starter cultures were grown O/N in 4 mL of LB at 37 °C
and 180 rpm. Three 500 mL LB cultures were then inoculated with the
starter culture, to an initial OD600 ≈0.01. OD600 was monitored every
hour with a spectrophotometer until all cultures reached OD600 ≈0.4
(early log phase). Then, the ﬁrst 500 mL culture was supplemented
with streptomycin 10 mg/mL (ﬁnal concentration = 16 μl/mL) (Sigma-
Aldrich, #S6501-5G), the second 500 mL culture was supplemented
with kasugamycin 40 mg/mL (ﬁnal concentration = 250 μl/mL) (Merck,
#32354-100MG) and the third culture was supplemented with the
equivalent volume of water (no antibiotic). OD600 was measured at
time points 0 h, 1 h and 16 h after antibiotic addition (or no antibiotic).
50 mL from each erlenmeyer were taken at each of the three time
points, and were immediately centrifuged in a pre-chilled benchtop
centrifuge at 16,000 g 4 °C for 10 min. Supernatant was discarded, and
pellets were stored at −80 °C until further use. This experiment was
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
12
repeated with three independent biological replicates, which were
cultured in different days.
E. coli total RNA extraction
Frozen pellets were thawed on ice, followed by the addition of 400uL
of Trizol (Life Technologies, #15596018). After ﬁve minutes incubation
at room temperature, 90uL of chloroform (Vidra Foc, #C2432) was
added and mixed thoroughly by inversion. Samples were centrifuged
for 15 min at 16,000 g at 4 °C. Supernatant was kept and an equal
volume of 70% ethanol was added in a new eppendorf tube. After-
wards, small RNAs were removed with the Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit
following manufacturer’s recommendations (Qiagen, #74104). Sam-
ples were DNAse-treated using Turbo DNAse (Life Technologies,
#AM2239) for 10 min at 37 °C followed by a ﬁnal clean-up with Qiagen
RNeasy MinElute Kit (Qiagen, #74204) using default manufacturer’s
protocol (which keeps RNAs > 200nt) to remove excess of small RNAs
that are typically present in E. coli total RNA extracts. RNA integrity was
assessed using TapeStation (Fig. S28) and quantiﬁed using Nanodrop.
Direct RNA nanopore library preparation and sequencing
DNAse-treated E.coli total RNA (600 ng per sample) was in vitro poly-
adenylated using E. coli Poly(A) polymerase (New England Biolabs,
#M0276L) using manufacturer’s recommendations with minor chan-
ges (the polyA tailing reaction was carried out for 10 minutes at 37 °C,
instead of 30). Poly(A)-tailed total RNA was then prepared for
sequencing using the direct RNA sequencing kit (SQK-RNA002), fol-
lowing
the
protocol
guidelines
(version:
DRCE_9079_v2_rev-
M_14Aug2019), with minor changes: RNA was linearized using
SuperScript IV (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, #18090010) and incubated
for 15 min at 55 °C followed by a heat inactivation step (80 °C for
10 min), or linearized using Maxima enzyme (Life Technologies,
#EP0751) and incubated for 30 minutes at 60 °C followed by a heat
inactivation step of 5 min at 85 °C (see Supplementary Data S2 and S3).
Base-calling, demultiplexing and mapping of yeast and bacterial
direct RNA sequencing runs
Raw fast5 reads from yeast and bacterial samples (Supplementary Data
S2 and S3) were analyzed using the MasterOfPores (MoP) version 2
Nextﬂow workﬂow61. Brieﬂy, the mop_preprocess module was used to
demultiplex
the
FAST5
reads
using
DeePlexiCon
with
default
parameters91. Demuxed FAST5 were then base-called using Guppy 3.1.5
(Oxford Nanopore Technologies) with the model rna_r9.4.1_70bps_hac,
and aligned using graphmap v 0.5.2 with -v 1 -K fastq parameters to the
the E. coli rRNA reference transcriptome, which comprised the 5S
rRNA, the 16S rRNA and the 23S rRNA sequences (available in Github:
NanoConsensus/ref/Escherichia_coli.rRNA.fa).
Detection of RNA modiﬁcations using diverse algorithms and
implementation into the MasterOfPores Nextﬂow workﬂow
To detect differential RNA modiﬁcations across strains, each control
condition (e.g., E. coli wild type BW25113) was compared in a pairwise
manner to each of the knockout strains (e.g., to the E. coli knockout
strains JW5301, JW0050 and JW3718, respectively) (Supplementary
Data S1). For each pairwise comparison, four RNA modiﬁcation
detection
algorithms
were
run
in
parallel:
(i)
EpiNano49,
(ii)
Nanopolish71, (iii) Tombo56 and (iv) Nanocompore57. EpiNano (version
1.1.1) was run with default parameters to extract per-site and per-kmer
base-calling errors from every sample. Nanopolish (version 0.11.1) was
used to resquiggle the basecalled fast5 using nanopolish eventalign
(--samples --print-read-names --scale-events). Then, current intensity
per position of the resquiggled reads and the coverage was extracted
with a in-house python script, available in GitHub (https://github.com/
biocorecrg/MOP2/blob/main/mop_mod/bin/mean_per_pos_v3.py)61.
Tombo (v1.5) was ﬁrst used to resquiggle the reads using tombo
resquiggle (-rna option). The function tombo detect_modiﬁcations
level_sample_compare with --store-p-value was then used to perform
RNA modiﬁcation detection. Finally, p-values at position level together
with coverage data were retrieved with tombo text_output browser_ﬁles.
Nanocompore (version 1.0.0) was run through the command nano-
compore sampcomp (--sequence_context 2 --downsample_high_coverage
10000 --pvalue_thr 1 --logit --comparison_methods GMM,KS,MW,TT)
(Fig. S29).
Improving the speed and reducing computational and time
requirements of module mop_mod from MasterOfPores Next-
ﬂow workﬂow
Nanopolish eventalign output results are stored in csv ﬁles, which we
found were very slow to parse, increasing the computational time
required to perform all the downstream analyses, thus limiting its
applicability transcriptome-wide. To increase the speed of the analysis,
two in-house scripts based on the Apache Parquet format92 were
implemented in Python3 (available in GitHub: https://github.com/
biocorecrg/MoP3/mop_mod/bin/mean_per_pos.py and https://github.
com/biocorecrg/MoP3/mop_mod/bin/Merging_processed_nanopolish_
data.py). On the other hand, Tombo output ﬁles are given in the form of
wig and bedgraph ﬁles. Therefore, to increase the efﬁciency of ﬁle
parsing, we converted Tombo output ﬁles into bigWig ﬁles and pro-
cessed them at per-transcript level using the pyBigWig package93. These
scripts have been implemented in the MasterOfPores version 2.0 Next-
Flow workﬂow81, which is available in GitHub (https://github.com/
biocorecrg/MoP2).
Prediction of RNA modiﬁcations using NanoConsensus
NanoConsensus reports putative modiﬁed regions at per-transcript
level using as input the outputs obtained from each of the 4 different
RNA modiﬁcation detection algorithms previously described (Epi-
Nano, Nanopolish, Tombo and Nanocompore).
In a ﬁrst step, NanoConsensus converts per-position reported
values by each software into normalized Z-Scores across each tran-
script. These scores are then used to select candidate RNA modiﬁed
positions for each independent software, which must be higher than
the provided user-deﬁned threshold (default value = 5) (Fig. S30).Then,
candidate positions for each individual software previously identiﬁed
are extended into 5-mers. Flexible overlapping is then performed to
identify overlapping k-mers across softwares. The regions supported
by two or more softwares are saved as putative modiﬁed sites. In a
second step, NanoConsensus re-scales Z-score values between 0 and 1
across each software’s set of values, to make the score comparable
across transcripts (otherwise Z-scores are affected by the coverage of
each transcript). Rescaled Z-scores are then converted to a Nano-
Consensus score, which is equal to the median of the rescaled Z-scores
across all softwares (NanoConsensus score = median (Z-Score Epinano,
Z-score Nanopolish, Z-Score Tombo, Z-Score Nanocompore). Thus,
every position across the transcript has an assigned NanoConsensus
score. Finally, NanoConsensus identiﬁes the differentially modiﬁed
sites as those having a Nanoconsensus score greater than 5 (default
settings) times the median per-transcript NanoConsensus score. Thus,
the threshold varies depending on the background signal of the tran-
script, i.e., if the data is “noisier” (often the case when coverage is low)
the Nanoconsensus score threshold to identify a site as “differentially
modiﬁed” within that given transcript will be higher. We should note
that this threshold can be modiﬁed by the user. All benchmarking
results included in this work used threshold=5 (default) throughout all
datasets and RNA modiﬁcation types. To capture modest variations in
stoichiometry, the user might prefer to decrease the threshold to 3.5-4.
NanoConsensus will produce the following ﬁles as outputs: (i) a ﬂat
ﬁle with all raw results obtained by all softwares, (ii) a ﬂat ﬁle with the
putative modiﬁed sites according to NanoConsensus; (iii) BED tracks
that can be loaded into IGV to visualize the results in a user-friendly
manner; and (iv) a PDF ﬁle showing both the performance of each
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
13
algorithm, represented in the form of Z-scores, and NanoConsensus
scores along the analyzed transcripts. All code has been integrated into
the mop_consensus module (RNA modiﬁcation detection module) that
is part of the MasterOfPores version 2 (MoP2) Nextﬂow workﬂow
(https://github.com/biocorecrg/MoP2)81.
Benchmarking RNA modiﬁcation predictions across datasets
with known stoichiometry and coverage
For each modiﬁcation type included in the benchmarking (Am. Um, Y,
m7G, m5C and m66A), reads from wild type E. coli were assumed to be
100% modiﬁed, and the respective knockout rRNA reads were
assumed to be 0% modiﬁed for that position (Supplementary Data S3),
respectively. For each dataset analyzed, subsampled datasets were
generated using one of the twoapproaches:(i) subsamples contained a
ﬁxed amount of reads or; (ii) samples contained a ﬁxed number of
modiﬁed reads (both scripts available at GitHub: https://github.com/
novoalab/NanoConsensus/scripts/Downsampling). All benchmarking
datasets only included full-length reads, deﬁned as reads whose initial
mapping position was 50 or lower and their ﬁnal position was equal or
larger than 1525 and 1779, for 16S and 18S transcripts respectively
(available at GitHub: https://github.com/novoalab/NanoConsensus/
scripts/Full_Length/Extract_FullLength_IDs.sh).
To compare datasets with different modiﬁcation stoichiometry
levels, we performed two complementary analyses using the two
above-mentioned subsampling approaches. In the ﬁrst subsampling
approach, each subsampled dataset comprised the same number of
reads (n = 1000). Then, to achieve different stoichiometry levels (100,
75, 50, 40, 30, 20 and 10%), a speciﬁc proportion of randomly selected
modiﬁed and unmodiﬁed full-length reads were mixed. Triplicates per
modiﬁcation type and stoichiometry were built. In the second sub-
sampling approach, the subsampled dataset were composed of tri-
plicates that have a ﬁxed number of modiﬁed reads. Then, for each
stoichiometry level, an increasing amount of unmodiﬁed reads were
added sequentially. As a result, the population of modiﬁed reads was
kept constant whereas the total number of reads varied across the
samples from the same replicate. Additionally, four full datasets with a
different number of modiﬁed reads in the 100% modiﬁed sample (50,
100, 500 and 1500 reads) were generated. All samples were compared
against 1000 full-length reads from their respective knock-out strain
using mop_mod with default parameters (see previous section).
The ability of NanoConsensus to identify other modiﬁcation types,
such as m2G and m3U, was examined by comparing wild-type data and
knock-out strains lacking these speciﬁc modiﬁcations, in a similar
fashion to other RNA modiﬁcation types included in the benchmarking
(m66A, Y, m5C, Am, Um and m7G) (Figs. S15, S31, see also Supple-
mentary Data S1). We should note that m4Cm was not included in this
analysis as it is not a modiﬁcation placed by a single enzyme, but rather
by two sequential enzymes, and the double knockout strain that would
be required was not commercially available. Thus, we did not
demonstrate whether Nanoconsensus can detect m4Cm modiﬁcations.
Generation of NSUN5 KO mice
Experimental procedures with mice were conducted following proto-
cols that were evaluated and approved by the Biosafety and Bioethics
Committee at the University of Salamanca (Protocol #269) and the
Competent Authority of Castilla y León. All mice were housed at the
Animal Research Core Facility at the University of Salamanca, in ven-
tilated ﬁlter cages under Speciﬁc Pathogen Free (SPF) conditions, with
food and water available ad libitum. Mice were kept at a constant
temperature (set up at 21 °C) and humidity with a 12-hour light/
dark cycle.
B6N(Cg)-Nsun5tm2b(EUCOMM)Wtsi/J mice were purchased from
The Jackson Laboratory (Fig. S20A). To get Nsun5−/−mice and their wild
type littermates, mice were crossed in heterozygosity. A PCR-based
strategy was developed to distinguish the wild-type and Nsun5 mutant
alleles. The primers are as follows: 5′-TGCAGCTCAGCAATAAGCA-3′, 5′-
GCAGTTCCTAGCACCGTGT-3′, 5′-ACACGGGGTTTGCAGATG-3′ and 5′-
CGGTCGCTACCATTACCAGT-3′. Nsun5 +/+ mice yielded a single band of
240 bp, while Nsun5−/−mice yielded a single band of 428 bp (Fig. S20B).
Nsun5 loss in Nsun5−/−mice was validated by RT-qPCR using TaqMan
Probe Mm00520549_m1 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). Expression of the
housekeeping gene Gapdh used to normalize was detected by TaqMan
Probe Mm99999915_g1 was used to normalize Nsun5 expression
(Fig. S20C).
RNA extraction from NSUN5 KO mice
RNA was extracted from limbs of post-natal day 2 wild type and Nsun5−/−
mice using QIAzol lysis reagent (Qiagen) according to the manu-
facturer’s instructions. After isopropanol precipitation, TURBO DNAse I
(Invitrogen) treatment was performed to remove any remaining DNA
contamination. RNA integrity was analyzed using 2100 Bioanalyzer and
RNA 6000 Nano chip (Agilent).
Detection of m5C in RNA from NSUN5 KO mice using PCR-
bisulﬁte
DNAse-treated RNA was treated with sodium bisulﬁte using Methy-
lamp RNA Bisulﬁte Conversion Kit (Epigentek) following manu-
facturer’s instructions. After the sodium bisulﬁte treatment for
5 minutes at 70 °C and 90 minutes at60 °C, treated RNA was in-column
desalted and deaminated. Converted RNA was used as template for
cDNA analysis using Maxima H-minus cDNA synthesis MasterMix
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) following manufacturer’s recommenda-
tions. cDNA was then used as template for PCR ampliﬁcation using the
following primers: 5′- AATGAAGTGTGGGTAAATGG-3′ and 5′- AAAT
AAAAACAATAAAAATCTCAT-3′. PCR product was ligated into the pCR
2.1 TOPO vector (Invitrogen), transformed into chemically-competent
DH5a E. coli and sequenced by Sanger sequencing using the following
primer: 5′- GTAAAACGACGGCCAG-3′. Sequences were aligned using
MEGA11 software and compared to mouse reference 28S rRNA
(NR_003279.1) (Fig. S20D).
Direct RNA nanopore library preparation and sequencing of
total RNA from WT and Nsun5 -/- M. musculus samples
DNAse-treated M. musculus total RNA (600 ng per sample) was in vitro
polyadenylated using E. coli Poly(A) polymerase (New England Biolabs,
#M0276L) using manufacturer’s recommendations with minor chan-
ges (polyA tailing reaction was carried out for 10 minutes at 37 °C,
instead of 30 min). Poly(A)-tailed total RNA was then prepared for
sequencing using the direct RNA sequencing kit (SQK-RNA002), fol-
lowing
the
protocol
guidelines
(version:
DRCE_9079_v2_rev-
M_14Aug2019), with minor changes: RNA was linearized using Maxima
enzyme (Life Technologies, #EP0751) and incubated for 30 minutes at
60 °C followed by a heat inactivation step of 5 min at 85 °C (see Sup-
plementary Data S3).
Detection of RNA modiﬁcations from bacterial samples exposed
to antibiotics
Bacterial DRS sequencing runs (Supplementary Data S2) were ﬁltered
to keep only full-length reads using in-house scripts (all available at
GitHub:
https://github.com/novoalab/NanoConsensus/scripts/Full_
Length), which were deﬁned as reads that covered the full transcript,
leaving up to a maximum of 50 nt uncovered in the 5′ and/or 3′ ends. In
other words, 16S rRNA reads that were kept covered at least from
position 50 to 1525, and reads that aligned to the 23S rRNA covered at
least from position 50 to 2894. Replicates per condition and time point
were included in the analysis (Fig. S32). Pairwise comparisons of
antibiotic-treated and untreated samples were analysed using the
MasterOfPores (MoP2) module mop_mod, with default parameters,
followed by NanoConsensus (also integrated in MoP2), with the fol-
lowing parameters across all transcripts: --MZS_thr 3.75 --NC_thr 4.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
14
The directionality of the changes in stoichiometry at the identiﬁed
‘differentially modiﬁed’ rRNA sites was assessed by comparing the sum
of basecalling errors of treated and untreated samples using EpiNano
(version 1.1.1). We should note that Nanoconsensus can be run com-
paring treated samples to untreated (t = 0 h) (Fig. S33A), but the signal-
to-noise ratio improves if matched untreated time points are used
(t = 1 h or t = 16 h, respectively) (Fig. S33B). Running time of these
algorithms from two of the comparisons included in this study can be
found in Supplementary Data S7.
Clustering of full length reads based on basecalling errors
To identify differentially modiﬁed populations of RNA molecules upon
antibiotic exposure, per-read basecalling errors (mismatch, insertion
and deletion frequency) were retrieved using EpiNano (v 1.0)49, which
reports per-read base-calling errors. For each read, basecalling errors
of the 5-mer region centered in each ‘differentially modiﬁed’ site
identiﬁed by NanoConsensus were extracted, and used for down-
stream analyses. For each read, the total summed error per-read was
calculated. The per-read sum of ‘errors’ provides an approximate
measure of the modiﬁcation levels of a given read in those selected
regions, relative to the rest of reads. Reads were binned based on their
total summed score, and the fraction of reads belonging to each bin,
for each treated sample (str-treated, ksg-treated, untreated) was
calculated.
Growth curves of bacterial strains lacking individual
methyltransferases
E. coli starter cultures of multiple strains (BW25113, rsmA KO, rsmG KO,
rsmD KO, rsmB KO, rsmJ KO, rsmH KO and rsmE KO) were grown
overnight in 10 mL tubes at 37 °C 180 rpm, in biological duplicates.
Overnight cultures were added into a ﬁnal volume of 200 μl in 96-well
plates with an initial OD600 of 0.01. Different antibiotic concentrations
(streptomycin: 8, 16, 32, 64 and 128 μl/mL; kasugamycin: 62, 125, 250,
500 and 1000 μl/mL) were tested for each strain. For each strain and
antibiotic concentration, three technical replicates were generated
and the experiment was performed with two biological replicates, in
two independent days. Bacteria were grown at 37 °C and OD600 was
measured every 10 minutes with a TECAN M200 Plate Reader. Area
Under the Curve (AUC) calculations were performed in R using the
growthcurver package94.
Bacterial ribodepletion
Ribodepletion was performed using riboPOOL oligos (siTOOLs, cat
#055) following the manufacturer’s protocol (version: riboPOOL Pro-
tocol_v1-8). Brieﬂy, 5ug of total RNA was mixed together with 1uL
resuspended riboPOOL oligos, 5 uL hybridization buffer (10 mM Tris-
HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 2 M NaCl) and 0.5 uL SUPERase•In RNase
Inhibitor (Thermo Fisher, AM2694) followed by a 10 min incubation at
68 °C and slow cool down to 37 °C for hybridization. In parallel,
Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (Thermo Fisher, #65001) beads
were resuspended, and 80uL of the resuspended beads were trans-
ferred into a tube and placed on a magnetic rack. Then, the super-
natant was removed and 100 uL of bead resuspension buffer (0.1 M
NaOH, 0.05 M NaCl) was added to the sample. Beads were then
resuspended in the buffer by agitation, the tube was placed again on a
magnetic rack, and the supernatant was aspirated. This step was per-
formed twice. Beads were then resuspended in 100 uL of washing
buffer (0.1 M NaCl) and placed again onto the magnet to remove the
supernatant. The beads were then resuspended in 160 uL of depletion
buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1 M NaCl). This mixture was
then divided into two tubes of 80uL, which were used sequentially.
20 uL of hybridized riboPOOL oligos and total RNA was spun down
brieﬂy and then transferred into a tube with 80uL of beads in the
depletion buffer. Then, it was mixed by pipetting carefully and incu-
bated at 37 °C for 15 min, followed by a 50 °C incubation for 5 min. The
reaction was placed on the magnetic rack and the supernatant was
transferred into the second tube of beads, from which the supernatant
was removed before its use. The solution was mixed and incubated at
37 °C for 15 min, followed by a 50 °C incubation for 5 min. After brieﬂy
spinning down the droplets, the mix was placed on a magnet for 2 min
and the supernatant was transferred into a different tube. Finally, long
RNA species (>200 bp) were separated from short ones (<200 nt)
using RNA Clean & Concentrator-5 kit (Zymo, R1013).
End-capture nanopore cDNA sequencing (Nano3P-seq)
E. coli total RNA was sequenced using Nano3P-seq78, which is a cDNA
library preparation variation that relies on the SQK-DCS109 direct cDNA
nanopore sequencing kit. Notably, Nano3P-seq does not require the
presence of polyA tails, which are typically absent in bacterial mRNAs, to
initiate the library (whereas the standard direct cDNA nanopore
sequencing library requires the presence of polyA tail). The protocol was
executed
as
previously
described
(https://www.protocols.io/view/
nano3p-seq-protocol-3byl4j292lo5/v1). Brieﬂy, 50 ng of ribodepleted
total RNA per sample was mixed with 1 µL pre-annealed RNA-DNA oligos
(RNA oligo: 5′ rGrArArGrArUrArGrArGrCrGrArCrArGrGrCrArArGrUr-
GrArUrCrGrGrArArG/3SpC3/3′;
DNA
oligo:
5′/5Phos/CTTCCGAT-
CACTTGCCTGTCGCTCTATCTTCN 3′), 1uL 100 mM DTT, 4 µL 5X TGIRT
buffer, 1uL RNasin Ribonuclease Inhibitor (Promega, N2511), 1uL TGIRT
(InGex) and nuclease-free water (NFW) up to 19uL.This reverse tran-
scription mix was ﬁrst incubated at RT for 30 minutes before 1uL 10 mM
dNTP mix (NEB, N0447S) was added. Then, the solution was brought to
60 °C for 60 min, and inactivated by heating at 75 °C for 15 min before
moving to ice. Afterwards, RNAse Cocktail (Thermo Scientiﬁc, AM2286)
was added followed by an incubation at 37 °C for 10 minutes and a clean
up step using 0.8X AMPure XP Beads (Agencourt, A63881). Then, 1 µL
100 µM of the DNA oligo (5′ GAAGATAGAGCGACAGGCAAGTGAT
CGGAAGA 3′), complementary to the initial one, was added to 15uL
solution containing cDNA with 2.25 µL 0.1 M Tris pH 7.5, 2.25 µL 0.5 M
NaCl and 2 µL NFW. The mix was incubated at 94 °C for 1 min and the
temperature was ramped down to 25 °C (−0.1 °C/s). Later, 2.5uL from a
single native barcode and 25 µL Blunt/TA Ligase Mix (NEB, M0367S)
were added, followed by a 10 min incubation at RT and a clean up step
with 0.5X AMPure XP beads and eluted with 16uL NFW. The con-
centration of each sample was quantiﬁed using Qubit ssDNA HS assay
(Thermo Scientiﬁc, Q10212). Individual samples were pooled together
with a ﬁnal concentration that did not exceed 200 fmol and a ﬁnal
volume of 65uL. All the subsequent steps used reagents from the direct
cDNA nanopore sequencing kit (ONT, SQK-DCS109). The pooled sample
was mixed with 5uL Adapter Mix (AMI), 20uL 5X NEB Quick Ligation
buffer (NEB, B6058S) and 10uL Quick T4 DNA ligase (NEB, M0202M)
and then incubated for 10 min at RT. Finally, the sample was cleaned
with 0.5X AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter, A63881), using washing
buffer (WSB) and elution buffer (EB). The library was mixed with
sequencing buffer (SQB) and loading Beads (LB) prior to loading it onto
a primed R9.4.1 MinION ﬂowcell. Biological triplicates were run on
independent MinION ﬂowcells, and prepared on different days.
Base-calling, demultiplexing and mapping of Nano3P-seq
datasets
FAST5 reads sequenced with the Nano3Pseq protocol were analyzed
using the MasterOfPores version 2 (MoP2) Nextﬂow workﬂow61 (Sup-
plementary Data S4). Firstly, the mop_preprocess module was used to
basecall and demultiplex all FAST5 using Guppy 4.0 (Oxford Nanopore
Technologies) with the DNA basecalling model dna_r9.4.1_70bps_hac.
Reads whose barcode could not be identiﬁed, went through a second
round of demultiplexing using readucks (version 0.0.3)95 with para-
meters --limit_barcodes_to 1 2 3 4 5 6 --adapter_threshold 73 --threshold
50. Demuxed reads were then aligned to the E.coli BW251113 genome
(NCBI ID: CP009273.1) using minimap2 v.2.17 with -ax spliced -k14 -uf
parameters. Both per-gene counts and per-transcript counts were
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
15
generated. Brieﬂy, per-gene counts were obtained by htseq-count
(version 0.13.5)96 with the option --stranded reverse as well as using
the --nonunique all option to account for reads spanning more than
one feature (ie: bacterial operons). On the other hand, to obtain per-
transcript estimates, bacterial reads were aligned to the reference
transcriptome that was built from the reference genome annotation
(NCBI ID: CP009273.1, see code in GitHub: https://github.com/
novoalab/NanoConsensus/Nano3Pseq_analysis/)
using
minimap2
v.2.17 with -ax map-ont -k14 parameters. Per-transcript abundance
estimates were obtained from the aligned reads using salmon quant
(version 1.9.0)97 with the parameters --ont -l SR. Both per-gene
counts (using either –stranded and per-transcript estimates were
used as input for differential expression analysis (Fig. 5C, see
also Fig. S34).
Differential expression and GO term enrichment analysis
Differential expression analysis was performed both on per-gene and
per-transcript counts of untreated samples compared to antibiotic-
treated
samples
(streptomycin
or
kasugamycin)
using
DeSeq2
v.1.34.098. Genes with an absolute log2(Fold Change) greater or equal
than 2 and an adjusted p-value lower or equal than 0.05 were con-
sidered as differentially expressed. Results were visualized using the R
package EnhancedVolcano v.1.12.099 (Fig. 5C and Fig. S34). Scripts
used for differential expression analysis are available in GitHub:
https://github.com/novoalab/NanoConsensus/scripts/Differential_
Expression). Genes with absolute log2(Fold Change) greater or equal
than 2 were used as input for a GO term enrichment analysis, which was
performed using Panther (release 17.0)100. All genes included in the
differential expression analysis were included as the reference list for
this analysis. The annotation data set used was GO biological process
complete, the statistical test was the Fisher’s Exact Test, followed by
calculating the False Discovery Rate (FDR). Only terms with a FDR < 0.05
were included in the ﬁnal results (Fig. 5D).
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The FAST5 data generated in this study have been deposited in the
European National Archive (ENA) database under accession codes
PRJEB42568
[https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/PRJEB42568]
(E. coli total RNA DRS samples from different strains), PRJEB48806
(E. coli total RNA DRS samples exposed to antibiotics), PRJEB58640
[https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/PRJEB58640]
(E.
coli
Nano3P-seq ribodepleted total RNA samples) and PRJEB78295 [https://
www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/PRJEB78295] (NSUN5 KO datasets).
Base-called FAST5 ﬁles from yeast total RNA correspond to ENA under
accession PRJEB37798101. A description of all samples used in this work
with their corresponding ENA numbers can be found in Supplemen-
tary Data S2-S4. Source data are provided with this paper.
Code availability
NanoConsensus code and documentation is publicly available in
GitHub (https://github.com/novoalab/NanoConsensus) and in Zenodo
(https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5805806) Moreover, to facilitate its
implementation by future users, NanoConsensus has been integrated
as a module into the MasterOfPores61 Nextﬂow102 workﬂow for the
analysis of direct RNA nanopore sequencing data (https://github.com/
biocorecrg/MoP2), under version 2.0 of MasterOfPores.
References
1.
Crofts, T. S., Gasparrini, A. J. & Dantas, G. Next-generation
approaches to understand and combat the antibiotic resistome.
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 15, 422–434 (2017).
2.
Arenz, S. & Wilson, D. N. Bacterial protein synthesis as a target for
antibiotic inhibition. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 6, a025361
(2016).
3.
Sutcliffe, J. A. Antibiotics in development targeting protein
synthesis. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1241, 122–152 (2011).
4.
Ennis, H. L. in The Quarterly Review of Biology (eds Gale, E. F.,
Cundliffe, E., Reynolds, P. E., Richmond, M. H. & Waring, M. J.). 336
(The University of Chicago Press, 1974).
5.
Shandrick, S. et al. Monitoring molecular recognition of the ribo-
somal decoding site. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 43, 3177–3182
(2004).
6.
Garneau-Tsodikova, S. & Labby, K. J. Mechanisms of resistance to
aminoglycoside antibiotics: overview and perspectives. Med-
chemcomm 7, 11–27 (2016).
7.
Ramirez, M. S. & Tolmasky, M. E. Aminoglycoside modifying
enzymes. Drug Resist Updat. 13, 151–171 (2010).
8.
Jackson, J., Chen, C. & Buising, K. Aminoglycosides: how should
we use them in the 21st century? Curr. Opin. Infect. Dis. 26, 516
(2013).
9.
Conn, G. L., Savic, M. & Macmaster, R. Antibiotic resistance in
bacteria through modiﬁcation of nucleosides in 16S ribosomal
RNA. DNA and RNA Modiﬁcation Enzymes: Comparative Structure,
Mechanism, Functions, Cellular Interactions and Evolution. Landes
Bioscience, Austin, TX 524–536 (2009).
10.
Sergiev, P. V., Aleksashin, N. A., Chugunova, A. A., Polikanov, Y. S.
& Dontsova, O. A. Structural and evolutionary insights into ribo-
somal RNA methylation. Nat. Chem. Biol. 14, 226–235 (2018).
11.
Sigmund, C. D., Ettayebi, M. & Morgan, E. A. Antibiotic resistance
mutations in 16S and 23S ribosomal RNA genes of Escherichia coli.
Nucleic Acids Res. 12, 4653–4664 (1984).
12.
Ofengand, J. & Del Campo, M. Modiﬁed nucleosides of Escherichia
coli ribosomal RNA. EcoSal Plus 1, (2004).
13.
Kehrenberg, C., Schwarz, S., Jacobsen, L., Hansen, L. H. & Vester,
B. A new mechanism for chloramphenicol, ﬂorfenicol and clin-
damycin resistance: methylation of 23S ribosomal RNA at A2503.
Mol. Microbiol. 57 1064–1073 (2005).
14.
Toh, S.-M. & Mankin, A. S. An indigenous posttranscriptional
modiﬁcation in the ribosomal peptidyl transferase center confers
resistance to an array of protein synthesis inhibitors. J. Mol. Biol.
380, 593–597 (2008).
15.
Weisblum, B. Erythromycin resistance by ribosome modiﬁcation.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 39, 577–585 (1995).
16.
Lai, C. J. & Weisblum, B. Altered methylation of ribosomal RNA in
an erythromycin-resistant strain of Staphylococcus aureus. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 68, 856–860 (1971).
17.
Sparling, P. F. Kasugamycin resistance: 30S ribosomal mutation
with an unusual location on the Escherichia coli chromosome.
Science 167, 56–58 (1970).
18.
Vila-Sanjurjo, A., Squires, C. L. & Dahlberg, A. E. Isolation of
kasugamycin resistant mutants in the 16 S ribosomal RNA of
Escherichia coli. J. Mol. Biol. 293, 1–8 (1999).
19.
Okamoto, S. et al. Loss of a conserved 7-methylguanosine mod-
iﬁcation in 16S rRNA confers low-level streptomycin resistance in
bacteria. Mol. Microbiol. 63, 1096–1106 (2007).
20.
Helm, M. & Motorin, Y. Detecting RNA modiﬁcations in the epitran-
scriptome: predict and validate. Nat. Rev. Genet. 18, 275–291 (2017).
21.
Jonkhout, N. et al. The RNA modiﬁcation landscape in human
disease. RNA 23, 1754–1769 (2017).
22.
Alfonzo, J. D. et al. A call for direct sequencing of full-length RNAs
to identify all modiﬁcations. Nat. Genet. 53, 1113–1116 (2021).
23.
Meyer, K. D. et al. Comprehensive analysis of mRNA methylation
reveals enrichment in 3′ UTRs and near stop codons. Cell 149,
1635–1646 (2012).
24.
Dominissini, D. et al. The dynamic N(1)-methyladenosine methy-
lome in eukaryotic messenger RNA. Nature 530, 441–446 (2016).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
16
25.
Carlile, T. M. et al. Pseudouridine proﬁling reveals regulated
mRNA pseudouridylation in yeast and human cells. Nature 515,
143–146 (2014).
26.
Sas-Chen, A. et al. Dynamic RNA acetylation revealed by quanti-
tative cross-evolutionary mapping. Nature https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41586-020-2418-2 (2020).
27.
Schwartz, S. et al. Transcriptome-wide mapping reveals wide-
spread dynamic-regulated pseudouridylation of ncRNA and
mRNA. Cell 159, 148–162 (2014).
28.
Marchand, V. et al. AlkAniline-Seq: proﬁling of m7 G and m3 C
RNA modiﬁcations at single nucleotide resolution. Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. Engl. 57, 16785–16790 (2018).
29.
Marchand, V., Blanloeil-Oillo, F., Helm, M. & Motorin, Y. Illumina-
based RiboMethSeq approach for mapping of 2′-O-Me residues in
RNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, e135–e135 (2016).
30.
Dai, Q. et al. Nm-seq maps 2′-O-methylation sites in human mRNA
with base precision. Nat. Methods 14, 695–698 (2017).
31.
Delatte, B. et al. Transcriptome-wide distribution and function of
RNA hydroxymethylcytosine. Science 351, 282–285 (2016).
32.
Lovejoy, A. F., Riordan, D. P. & Brown, P. O. Transcriptome-wide
mapping of pseudouridines: pseudouridine synthases modify
speciﬁc mRNAs in S. cerevisiae. PLoS One 9, e110799 (2014).
33.
Li, X. et al. Base-resolution mapping reveals distinct m1A methy-
lome in nuclear- and mitochondrial-encoded transcripts. Mol. Cell
68, 993–1005.e9 (2017).
34.
Edelheit, S., Schwartz, S., Mumbach, M. R., Wurtzel, O. & Sorek, R.
Transcriptome-Wide Mapping of 5-methylcytidine RNA Modiﬁca-
tions in Bacteria, Archaea, and Yeast Reveals m5C within Archaeal
mRNAs. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1003602 (2013).
35.
Suzuki, T., Ueda, H., Okada, S. & Sakurai, M. Transcriptome-wide
identiﬁcation of adenosine-to-inosine editing using the ICE-seq
method. Nat. Protoc. 10, 715–732 (2015).
36.
Motorin, Y. & Helm, M. Methods for RNA modiﬁcation mapping
using deep sequencing: established and new emerging technol-
ogies. Genes 10, 35 (2019).
37.
Novoa, E. M., Mason, C. E. & Mattick, J. S. Charting the unknown
epitranscriptome. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 339–340 (2017).
38.
Anreiter, I., Mir, Q., Simpson, J. T., Janga, S. C. & Soller, M. New
twists in detecting mRNA modiﬁcation dynamics. Trends Bio-
technol. 39, 72–89 (2021).
39.
Zheng, H.-X., Zhang,X.-S. & Sui, N. Advances in the proﬁling of N6-
methyladenosine (m6A) modiﬁcations. Biotechnol. Adv. 45,
107656 (2020).
40.
Grozhik, A. V. et al. Antibody cross-reactivity accounts for wide-
spread appearance of m1A in 5′UTRs. Nat. Commun. 10, 5126 (2019).
41.
Garalde, D. R. et al. Highly parallel direct RNA sequencing on an
array of nanopores. Nat. Methods 15, 201–206 (2018).
42.
Smith, A. M., Jain, M., Mulroney, L., Garalde, D. R. & Akeson, M.
Reading canonical and modiﬁed nucleobases in 16S ribosomal
RNA using nanopore native RNA sequencing. PLoS One 14,
e0216709 (2019).
43.
Begik, O. et al. Quantitative proﬁling of pseudouridylation
dynamics in native RNAs with nanopore sequencing. Nat. Bio-
technol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-021-00915-6 (2021).
44.
Wick, R. R., Judd, L. M. & Holt, K. E. Performance of neural network
basecalling tools for Oxford Nanopore sequencing. Genome Biol.
20, 129 (2019).
45.
Furlan, M. et al. Computational methods for RNA modiﬁcation
detection from nanopore direct RNA sequencing data. RNA Biol.
18, 31–40 (2021).
46.
Wan, Y. K., Hendra, C., Pratanwanich, P. N. & Göke, J. Beyond
sequencing: machine learning algorithms extract biology hidden
in Nanopore signal data. Trends Genet. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tig.2021.09.001 (2021).
47.
Liu, H., Begik, O. & Novoa, E. M. EpiNano: detection of mA RNA
modiﬁcations using oxford nanopore direct RNA sequencing.
Methods Mol. Biol. 2298, 31–52 (2021).
48.
Jenjaroenpun, P. et al. Decoding the epitranscriptional landscape
from native RNA sequences. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, e7 (2021).
49.
Liu, H., et al. Accurate detection of m6A RNA modiﬁcations in
native RNA sequences. Nat. Commun. 10, 4079 (2019)
50.
Parker, M. T. et al. Nanopore direct RNA sequencing maps the
complexity of Arabidopsis mRNA processing and m6A modiﬁca-
tion. Elife 9, e49658 (2020).
51.
Price, A. M. et al. Direct RNA sequencing reveals m 6 A mod-
iﬁcations on adenovirus RNA are necessary for efﬁcient splicing.
Nat. Commun. 11, 1–17 (2020).
52.
Parker, M. T., Barton, G. J. & Simpson, G. G. Yanocomp: robust
prediction of m6A modiﬁcations in individual nanopore direct
RNA reads. bioRxiv 2021.06.15.448494 https://doi.org/10.1101/
2021.06.15.448494 (2021).
53.
Pratanwanich, P. N. et al. Identiﬁcation of differential RNA mod-
iﬁcations from nanopore direct RNA sequencing with xPore. Nat.
Biotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-021-00949-w (2021).
54.
Ueda, H. nanoDoc: RNA modiﬁcation detection using Nanopore
raw reads with Deep One-Class Classiﬁcation. bioRxiv (2020).
55.
Gao, Y. et al. Quantitative proﬁling of N6-methyladenosine at
single-base resolution in stem-differentiating xylem of Populus
trichocarpa using Nanopore direct RNA sequencing. Genome Biol.
22, 22 (2021).
56.
Stoiber, M. et al. De novo Identiﬁcation of DNA Modiﬁcations
Enabled by Genome-Guided Nanopore Signal Processing. Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory 094672 https://doi.org/10.1101/
094672 (2017).
57.
Leger, A., Amaral, P. P., Pandolﬁni, L. & Capitanchik, C. RNA
modiﬁcations detection by comparative Nanopore direct RNA
sequencing. BioRxiv (2019).
58.
Hendra, C. et al. Detection of m6A from direct RNA sequencing
using a Multiple Instance Learning framework. bioRxiv
2021.09.20.461055 https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.09.20.
461055 (2021).
59.
Acera Mateos, P. et al. Identiﬁcation of m6A and m5C RNA mod-
iﬁcations at single-molecule resolution from Nanopore sequen-
cing. bioRxiv 2022.03.14.484124 https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.03.
14.484124 (2022).
60.
Simpson, J. T. et al. Detecting DNA cytosine methylation using
nanopore sequencing. Nat. Methods 14, 407–410 (2017).
61.
Cozzuto, L. et al. MasterOfPores: a workﬂow for the analysis of
Oxford nanopore direct RNA sequencing datasets. Front. Genet.
11, 211 (2020).
62.
Blair, J. M. A., Webber, M. A., Baylay, A. J., Ogbolu, D. O. & Piddock,
L. J. V. Molecular mechanisms of antibiotic resistance. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 13, 42–51 (2015).
63.
Inoue, K., Basu, S. & Inouye, M. Dissection of 16S rRNA methyl-
transferase (KsgA) function in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 189,
8510–8518 (2007).
64.
Bailey, A. D. et al. Concerted modiﬁcation of nucleotides at
functional centers of the ribosome revealed by single-molecule
RNA modiﬁcation proﬁling. Elife 11, e76562 (2022).
65.
Lorenz, D. A., Sathe, S., Einstein, J. M. & Yeo, G. W. Direct RNA
sequencing enables m6A detection in endogenous transcript
isoforms at base-speciﬁc resolution. RNA 26, 19–28 (2020).
66.
Huang, S. et al. Interferon inducible pseudouridine modiﬁcation in
human mRNA by quantitative nanopore proﬁling. Genome Biol.
22, 330 (2021).
67.
Tavakoli, S. et al. Semi-quantitative detection of pseudouridine
modiﬁcations and type I/II hypermodiﬁcations in human mRNAs
using direct long-read sequencing. Nat. Commun. 14, 334 (2023).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
17
68.
Hassan, D., Acevedo, D., Daulatabad, S. V., Mir, Q. & Janga, S. C.
Penguin: a tool for predicting pseudouridine sites in direct RNA
nanopore sequencing data. Methods 203, 478–487 (2022).
69.
Nguyen, T. A. et al. Direct identiﬁcation of A-to-I editing sites with
nanopore native RNA sequencing. Nat. Methods 19, 833–844
(2022).
70.
Stephenson, W. et al. Direct detection of RNA modiﬁcations and
structure using single-molecule nanopore sequencing. Cell
Genom 2, 100097 (2022).
71.
Loman, N. J., Quick, J. & Simpson, J. T. A complete bacterial
genome assembled de novo using only nanopore sequencing
data. Nat. Methods 12, 733–735 (2015).
72.
Begik, O., Mattick, J. S. & Novoa, E. M. Exploring the epitran-
scriptome by native RNA sequencing. RNA https://doi.org/10.
1261/rna.079404.122 (2022).
73.
Acinas, S. G., Marcelino, L. A., Klepac-Ceraj, V. & Polz, M. F.
Divergence and redundancy of 16S rRNA sequences in genomes
with multiple rrn operons. J. Bacteriol. 186, 2629–2635 (2004).
74.
Hillebrand, A., Wurm, R., Menzel, A. & Wagner, R. The seven E. coli
ribosomal RNA operon upstream regulatory regions differ in
structure and transcription factor binding efﬁciencies. Biol. Chem.
386, 523–534 (2005).
75.
Kurylo, C. M. et al. Endogenous rRNA sequence variation can
regulate stress response gene expression and phenotype. Cell
Rep. 25, 236–248.e6 (2018).
76.
Condon, C., Philips, J., Fu, Z. Y., Squires, C. & Squires, C. L.
Comparison of the expression of the seven ribosomal RNA oper-
ons in Escherichia coli. EMBO J. 11, 4175–4185 (1992).
77.
Watson, M., Liu, J.-W. & Ollis, D. Directed evolution of trimetho-
prim resistance in Escherichia coli. FEBS J. 274, 2661–2671 (2007).
78.
Begik, O. et al. Nano3P-seq: transcriptome-wide analysis of gene
expression and tail dynamics using end-capture nanopore cDNA
sequencing. bioRxiv 2021.09.22.461331 https://doi.org/10.1101/
2021.09.22.461331 (2022).
79.
Zhong, Z.-D. et al. Systematic comparison of tools used for m6A
mapping from nanopore direct RNA sequencing. Nat. Commun.
14, 1906 (2023).
80.
Maestri, S. et al. Benchmarking of computational methods for
m6A proﬁling with Nanopore direct RNA sequencing. Brief.
Bioinform. 25, bbae001 (2024).
81.
Cozzuto, L., Delgado-Tejedor, A., Hermoso Pulido, T., Novoa, E. M.
& Ponomarenko, J. Nanopore direct RNA sequencing data pro-
cessing and analysis using MasterOfPores. Methods Mol. Biol.
2624, 185–205 (2023).
82.
Yuen, Z. W.-S. et al. Systematic benchmarking of tools for CpG
methylation detection from nanopore sequencing. Nat. Commun.
12, 3438 (2021).
83.
Carter, A. P. et al. Functional insights from the structure of the 30S
ribosomal subunit and its interactions with antibiotics. Nature 407,
340–348 (2000).
84.
Schuwirth, B. S. et al. Structural analysis of kasugamycin inhibition
of translation. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 13, 879–886 (2006).
85.
Kaberdina, A. C., Szaﬂarski, W., Nierhaus, K. H. & Moll, I. An
unexpected type of ribosomes induced by kasugamycin: a look
into ancestral times of protein synthesis? Mol. Cell 33,
227–236 (2009).
86.
Doi, Y., Wachino, J. & Arakawa, Y. Aminoglycoside Resistance: The
Emergence of Acquired 16S Ribosomal RNA Methyltransferases.
Infect. Dis. Clin. North Am. 30, 523–537 (2016).
87.
Vester, B. The cfr and cfr-like multiple resistance genes. Res.
Microbiol. 169, 61–66 (2018).
88.
Toh, S.-M. et al. Acquisition of a natural resistance gene renders a
clinical strain of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
resistant to the synthetic antibiotic linezolid. Mol. Microbiol. 64,
1506–1514 (2007).
89.
Bijpuria, S., Sharma, R. & Taneja, B. Loss of U1498 methylation in
16S rRNA by RsmE methyltransferase associates its role with
aminoglycoside resistance in mycobacteria. J. Glob. Antimicrob.
Resist 23, 359–369 (2020).
90.
Baba, T. et al. Construction of Escherichia coli K-12 in-frame,
single-gene knockout mutants: the Keio collection. Mol. Syst. Biol.
2, 2006.0008 (2006).
91.
Smith, M. A. et al. Molecular barcoding of native RNAs using
nanopore sequencing and deep learning. Genome Res. 30,
1345–1353 (2020).
92.
Vohra, D. Apache Parquet. in Practical Hadoop Ecosystem
325–335 (Apress, 2016).
93.
Ryan, D., Grüning, B. & Ramirez, F. pyBigWig 0.2.4. https://doi.org/
10.5281/zenodo.45238 (2016).
94.
Sprouffske, K. & Wagner, A. Growthcurver: an R package for
obtaining interpretable metrics from microbial growth curves.
BMC Bioinforma. 17, 1–4 (2016).
95.
GitHub - artic-network/readucks: Nanopore read de-multiplexer.
GitHub https://github.com/artic-network/readucks.
96.
Anders, S., Pyl, P. T. & Huber, W. HTSeq - A Python framework to
work with high-throughput sequencing data. bioRxiv https://doi.
org/10.1101/002824 (2014) .
97.
Patro, R., Duggal, G., Love, M. I., Irizarry, R. A. & Kingsford, C.
Salmon provides fast and bias-aware quantiﬁcation of transcript
expression. Nat. Methods 14, 417–419 (2017).
98.
Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome
Biol. 15, 550 (2014).
99.
Website. https://github.com/kevinblighe/EnhancedVolcano
100. Mi, H., Muruganujan, A., Ebert, D., Huang, X. & Thomas, P. D.
PANTHER version 14: more genomes, a new PANTHER GO-slim
and improvements in enrichment analysis tools. Nucleic Acids
Res. 47, D419–D426 (2019).
101.
Begik, O. et al. Quantitative proﬁling of pseudouridylation
dynamics in native RNAs with nanopore sequencing. Nat. Bio-
technol. 39, 1278–1291 (2021).
102.
Di Tommaso, P. et al. Nextﬂow enables reproducible computa-
tional workﬂows. Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 316–319 (2017).
Acknowledgements
We thank all the members of the Novoa lab for their insightful discus-
sions. We thank Prof. Xavier Barril for his discussions and help withPymol
to obtain the structural alignments of PDB structures of ribosomes from
different species containing diverse antibiotics. AD-T is supported by an
FPI Severo-Ochoa fellowship by the Spanish Ministry of Economy,
Industry and Competitiveness (MEIC). The work of S.B. work was sup-
ported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation MCIN/AEI/
10.13039/501100011033 and by “ERDF A way of making Europe”
(PID2019-111692RB-I00 and PID2022-139598OB-I00), and The Scientiﬁc
Foundation AECC AECC (LABAE19040BLAN). J.L-L. was supported by
the AECC (PRDSA19002LÓPE) and MIU (FPU19/01190). This work was
supported by funds from the Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and
Competitiveness (MEIC) (PID2021-128193NB-100 to EMN) and the Eur-
opean Research Council (ERC-StG-2021 No 101042103 to EMN). We
acknowledge the support of the MEIC to the EMBL partnership, Centro
de Excelencia Severo Ochoa and CERCA Program / Generalitat de
Catalunya.
Author contributions
A.D.-T. performed most wet lab experiments and data analyses descri-
bed in this work, including the development, implementation and
benchmarking of NanoConsensus. R.M. helped with the E. coli growth
curve experiments. O.B. helped with preparing and sequencing some of
the direct RNA libraries used in this work. L.C. implemented Nano-
Consensus into a Nextﬂow module and into the MasterOfPores general
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
18
workﬂow. J.P. supervised the implementation of NanoConsensus into
MasterOfPores. S.B. and J.L. generated NSUN5 KO mice and validated its
phenotype. E.M.N. conceived and supervised the work. A.D.-T. built the
ﬁgures. A.D.-T. and E.M.N. wrote the manuscript, withcontributions from
all authors.
Competing interests
E.M.N. is a member of the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board of IMMAGINA Bio-
tech. E.M.N. has received travel and accommodation expenses to speak
at Oxford Nanopore Technologies conferences. A.D.-T. and O.B. have
received travel bursaries from ONT to present their work in conferences.
The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Eva Maria Novoa.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
ymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A
peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed
material. You do not have permission under this licence toshare adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54368-x
Nature Communications|       (2024) 15:10054 
19
