time. All right, chapter one, Ada countless of loveless, political science. In May 1833,
when she was 17, Ada Byron was among the young women presented at the British Royal Court.
Family members had worried about how she would acquit herself, given her high, strong and independent
nature, but she ended up behaving. Her mother reported, quote, tolerably well.
Among those Ada met that evening were the Duke of Wellington, who straightforward manner she
admired, and the 79 year old French ambassador, Tallie Rand, who struck her as, quote, an old monkey.
The only legitimate child of the poet Lord Byron, Ada had inherited her father's romantic
spirit, a trait that her mother tried to temper by having her tutored in mathematics.
The combination produced an Ada a love for what she took to calling, quote, political science,
poetical science, which linked her rebellious imagination to her enchantment with numbers.
For many, including her father, the rarefied sensibilities of the romantic era clashed with
the techno excitement of the industrial revolution. But Ada was comfortable at the intersection of
both areas of both eras. So it was not surprising that her debut at court, despite the glamour of
the occasion, made less impression on her than than her attendance a few weeks later at another
majestic event at of the London season, at which she met Charles Babbage, a 41 year old widowed
science and math eminence who had established himself as a luminary on London's social circuit,
quote, Ada was more pleased with the party she was at at the on Wednesday than with any of the
assemblages in the Grand Monde, her mother reported to a friend. She met there a few scientific people
among them Babbage, who with whom she was very delighted, end quote. Babbage is galvanizing
weekly salons, which included up to 300 guests brought together lords in swallowtail coats,
and ladies in brocade gowns, and writers, industrialist poets, actors, statesmen, explorers,
botanists, and other scientists, the word that Babbage's friends had recently coined.
By bringing scientific scholars into the into the exalted realm said one of the geologists,
Babbage quote, successfully asserted asserted the rank in society due to science.
They invented the word science, my friends.
The evenings feature dancing, readings, games, and lectures accompanied by the assortment of
seafood, meat, foul, exotic drinks, and ice desserts. Cheers.
The ladies staged tableau viviant vivant, in which they dressed in costumes to recreate famous
paintings. Astronomers set up telescopes, researchers displayed their electric and
magnetic contrivances, and Babbage allowed guests to play with his mechanical dolls.
The centerpiece of the evening, and one of Babbage's many motives for hosting them,
was his demonstration of a model portion of his quote, difference engine, a mammoth mechanical
calculating contraption that he was building in the fireproof structure adjacent to his home.
Babbage would display the model with great drama, cranking his arm as it calculated a
sequence of numbers, and just as the audience began to get bored, showed how the pattern
could suddenly be changed based on the instructions that he had coded into the machine.
Those who were especially intrigued would be invited through the yard to the former stables,
where the complete machine was being constructed.
Babbage's difference engine, which could solve polynomial equations, impressed people in
different ways. The Duke of Wellington commented that it could be useful in analyzing the
variables a general might face before going into battle. Ada's mother, Lord Byron, marveled that
it was a quote, thinking machine. As for Ada, who would later famously note that machines could
never truly think, a friend who went with them to the demonstration reported, quote, Ms Byron,
young as she was, understood its workings, and she was the quote, great beauty of the invention.
Ada's love of both poetry and math primed her to see the beauty in the computing machine.
She was an exemplar of the era of romantic science, which was characterized by a lyrical
enthusiasm for invention and discovery. It was a period that brought quote, imaginative intensity
and excitement to the scientific work. Richard Holmes wrote in his Age of the Wonder,
quote, it was driven by the common ideal of intense, even reckless, personal commitment to
discovery, unquote. In short, it was a time not unlike our own. The advances of the industrial
revolution, including the steam engine, mechanical loom and telegraph, transformed the 19th century
in much the same way that the advances of the digital revolution, the computer, microchip,
and the internet have transformed us in our own. At the heart of both eras were innovators who
combined imagination and passion with wondrous technology, a mix that produced Ada's poetic
goal science. And what the 20th century poet, Richard, brought a gun would call, quote, machines of
lovely grace. Lord Byron. Ada inherited her poetic insubordinate temper from her father,
but he was not the source of her love for machinery. He was, in fact, a Luddite. In the maiden speech
in the House of Lords, given in February 1812, when he was about 24, Byron defended the followers
of Ned Blood, who were rampaging against mechanical weaving machines. With sarcastic scorn, Byron mocked
the mill owners of Nottingham, who were pushing a bill that would have made destroying automated
looms a crime punishable by death. Quote, these machines were to them an advantage in so much
as they superseded the necessity of employing a number of workmen who were left in consequence
to starve, end quote Byron declared. The rejected workmen and the blindness of their ignorance
instead of rejoicing at the improvements in the arts so beneficial to mankind, conceived themselves
to be sacrificed to the improvements of the mechanism, end quote. Two weeks later, Byron
published the first two cantos of his epic poem, Child Harold's Pilgrimage, a romanticized account
of his wanderings through Portugal, Malta, and Greece, and, as he later remarked, quote,
awoke one morning and found myself famous, end quote. Beautiful, seductive, troubled, brooding,
and sexually adventurous, Byron was living a life of a bioronic hero while creating the archetype
in his poetry. He became the toast of literary London and was fed at three parties each day,
most memorable a lavish morning dance hosted by Lady Caroline Lamb. Lady Caroline, though married
to a political powerful aristocrat who was later prime prime minister, fell madly in love with Byron.
He thought she was, quote, too thin, yet she had an unconventional sexual ambiguity.
She liked to dress like a page boy. He found that enticing. They had a turbulent affair and
after it ended, she stalked him obsessively. She famously declared to him, quote, be mad, bad,
and dangerous to know, which she was. So was she. At Lady Caroline's party, Lord Byron had also
noticed a reserved young woman who was, as he recalled, quote, more simply dressed. Annabella
Milbunk, 19, was from the wealthy and multi-titled family. The night before the party, she had read
child Harold and had mixed feelings, quote. He is rather too much of a mannerist, she wrote.
He excels most in the delineation of deep feelings. Upon seeing him across the room at the party,
her feelings were conflicted, dangerously so, quote. I did not seek an introduction to him for
all the women were absurdly courting him and trying to deserve a lash of his satire, she wrote to
her mother. I am not the Cyrus of a place in his laze. I made no offering at the shrine of child
child Harold, though I shall not refuse you, Quain, as if it comes my way.
That acquaintance, as it turned out, did come her way. After he was introduced to her formally,
Byron decided that she might make a suitable wife. It was for him a rare display of reason over
romanticism. Rather than arousing his passion, she seemed to be the sort of woman who might team
those passions and protect him from his successes, as well as help him pay off his burdensome debts.
He proposed to her half-heartedly by letter. She sensibly declined.
He wandered off to far less appropriate liaisons, including one with his half-sister,
Augustus Lay. But after a year, Annabella rekindled her, Annabella rekindled the courtship.
Byron, falling more deeply in debt while gasping for air at the curb of his
enthusiasm, saw the rationale if not the romance in the possible relationship.
Nothing but marriage and a speedy one can save me, he admitted, Tana Belle's aunt.
If your niece is obtainable, I should prefer her if not the very first woman who does not
look as if she would spit in my face. There were times when Lord Byron was not a romantic.
He and Annabella were married in January, 1815. Byron initiated the marriage in his
bironic fashion. Had Lady Byron on the sofa before dinner, he wrote in his wedding day journal.
Their relationship was still active when they visited his half-two sisters months later because
around then Annabella got pregnant. However, during the visit, she began to suspect that
her husband's friendships with Augusta had been beyond fraternal, especially after he lay on a
sofa and asked them both to take him, turns kissing him. The marriage started to unravel.
Annabella had been tutored in mathematics, which amused Lord Byron. And during that,
he was such a fucking asshole. Lord Byron was such an asshole, man. And during the courtship,
he had joked about his own disdain for the exactitude of numbers. Quote,
I know that two and two make four and should be glad to prove it if I could, he wrote,
though I must say, if any sort of process I could convert two and two into five,
it would give me great pleasure. Early on, he affectionately dubbed her the quote,
Princess of Parallelograms. I want somebody to call me the Princess of Parallelograms. That's a
great name. But when the marriage began to sour, we refined the mathematical image.
We are two parallel lines prolonged by infinite side by side, but never to meet, he said. Later
in his first can to have his epic poem, Don one, he would mock her. Her favorite science was the
mathematical. She was a walking calculation. The marriage was not saved by the birth of their
daughter or on December 10th, 1815, which may or may not be my exact birthday.
Some years later, of course, she was named Augusta Ada Byron, her first name that of Byron's
two beloved half sister. When Lady Byron became convinced of her husband's profidity,
she thereafter called her daughter by her middle name. Five weeks later, she packed belongings
into a carriage and fled into her parents country home with the infant Ada. Ada never knew her
father again. Lord Byron left the country that April after Lady Byron and led her so calculating
that she earned his sub requet of mathematical media threatened to expose his alleged incestuous
and homosexual affairs as a way to secure a separation agreement that gave her custody
of their child. The opening of the can to three of chilled Harold written a few weeks later
invokes Anna as his muse in my face like their mother's my fair child Ada sole daughter of my
house of my heart. When last I saw that young blue eyes they smiled and then we pardoned
Byron wrote these lines in a villa like by Lake Geneva when he was staying with the poet
Percy Bessel Shelley and Shelley's future wife Mary. It rained relentlessly, trapped inside for
days by it's like a franchise. It's like an industrial age franchise, like a movie franchise.
He meets the author of Frankenstein. Byron suggested that they write horror stories. He produced a
fragment of the tale about a vampire, one of the first literary efforts of the subject, but Mary's
story was the one that became classic Frankenstein or the modern Prometheus playing on the ancient
Greek myth of the hero who crafted a living man out of clay and snatched fire from the gods for
human use. Frankenstein was a story of a scientist who galvanized the man made assemblage into a
thinking human. It was a cautionary tale about technology and science and also raised the question
that would become associated with Ada. Can man made machines ever truly think?
Third canto of chilled herald ends with Byron's prediction that Annabella would try to keep Ada
from knowing about her father and so it happened. There was a portrait of Lord Byron in the house
but Lady Byron kept it securely veiled and Ada never saw it until she was 20. Lord Byron by
contrast kept a picture of Ada on his desk wherever he was. His letters often requested news
or portraits of her. When she was seven he wrote to Augusta, quote, I wish you would obtain from Lady
B some accounts of Ada's disposition. Is the girl imaginative? Is she passionate? I hope that the
gods have made her anything save political. It is enough to have one such fool in the family.
Lady Byron reported that Ada had an imagination that was quote chiefly exercised in connection
with her mechanical ingenuity. Around the time Byron, who had been wandering through Italy,
writing and having an assortment of affairs, grew bored and decided to enlist in the Greek
struggle for independence from the Ottoman Empire. He sailed to Missologna, wherever he
took command of the part of the rebel army and prepared to attack the Turkish forces.
But before he could engage in battle he caught a violent cold that was made worse by the doctor's
decision to treat him by bloodletting. On April 19th, 1824 he died. According to his valet,
among his final words were quote, Oh, my poor dear child, my dear Ada, my God, could I have seen her
give her my blessing? Ada. Lord Byron wanted to make sure that Ada did not turn out like her
father. In Byron's strategy was to have the girls rigorously study math, as if it were an antidote
to poetic imagination. When Ada at age five showed a preference for geography, Lady Byron
ordered that the subject be replaced by additional arithmetic lessons, and her governess soon
proudly reported, quote, She adds up sums of five and six rows of figures with accuracy.
Despite these efforts, Ada developed some of her father's propensities. She had an
affair with a young teenager with one of her tutors, and with one of her tutors,
and when they were caught and the tutor banished, she tried to run away from the home to be with him.
In addition, she had mood swings that took her from feelings of grandiosity to despair,
and she suffered various maladies, both physical and psychological.
Ada accepted her mother's conviction that the immersion in math could help pertain
her Byronic tendencies. After her dangerous liaison with her tutor and inspired by Babbage's
difference engine, she decided on her own at 18 to begin a new series of lessons, quote,
I must cease to think of living for pleasure and self-critification, she wrote to her new tutor.
I find that nothing but very close and intense application of subjects of a scientific nature
now seems to keep my imagination running wild from running wild. It appears to me that the first
thing to go through the course of mathematics, the first thing is to go through a course of
mathematics. He agreed with the prescription. You are right in supposing that your chief resource
and safeguard at the present is the course of severe intellectual study. For this purpose,
there is no subject to be compared to mathematics. The tutor prescribed Euclidean geometry,
followed by a dose of trigonometry and algebra. That should cure anyone, they both thought,
from having too much artistic and romantic passion. That's awesome.
Ada's interest in technology was stoked when her mother took her on a trip through the British
Industrial Midlands to see the new factories and machinery. It was particularly impressed with an
automated weaving loom that used punch cars to direct the creation of the desired fabrics the
way she wanted to. She drew a sketch of how it worked. Her father's famous speech in the House
of Lords had defended the Luddites who would smash such looms because of their fear of what
technology might do to their humanity, but Ada waxed political about them and saw the connection
with what would someday be called computers. This machine reminds me of Babbage and the gem of all
mechanisms she wrote. Ada's interest in applied science was further simulated when she met with
one of Bruton's few noted female mathematician scientists, Mary Somerville. Somerville had
just finished writing one of her great works on the connection of the physical sciences in which
she tied together developments of astronomy, optics, and electricity, chemistry, physics, botany,
and geology. In Le Manic of the Time, it proved in a unified sense of the extraordinary endeavors
of discovery that were underway. She proclaimed her opening sentence, quote,
The progress of modern science, especially within the last five years, has been remarkable for a
tendency to simplify the laws of nature and to unite detached branches of general principles.
Somerville became a friend, teacher, inspiration, and mentor, Ada. She met with Ada regularly.
She sent her math books, devised problems for her to solve, and patiently explained the correct
answers. Mentorship, my friends, mentorship. She was a good friend of Babbage's, and during
the fall of 1834, she and Ada would often visit his Saturday evening salons.
Somerville's son, Lorenzo Gregg, aided Ada's efforts to settle down by suggesting to one of
his former classmates at Cambridge that she would make a suitable, or at least interesting, wife.
William King was socially prominent, financially secure, quietly intelligent,
and as taciturn as Ada was excitable. Like her, he was a student of the science, but his focus
was more practical and less poetic. His primary interests were crop rotation theories and advances
in livestock breeding techniques. He proposed marriage within a few weeks of meeting Ada,
and she accepted. Her mother, with motives that only a psychiatrist could fathom, decided it was
imperative to tell William about Ada's attempted elopement with her tutor. Despite the news,
William was willing to proceed with the wedding, which was held on July 1835. Gracious God, who
has so mercifully given you an opportunity for turning aside the dangerous past, has given you
a friend and guardian. Lady Byron wrote to her daughter, adding that she should use this opportunity
to quote, bid adieu to all of her peculiarities, capriciousnesses, and self-seeking. The marriage
was a match made in rational calculus. For Ada had offered her a chance to adapt much more steady
and grounded life. More importantly, it allowed her to escape dependence on her domineering mother,
for William had been having a fascinating, eccentric wife from a wealthy and famous family.
Lord Byron's first cousin, Viscut Melbourne, who had the misfortune of having been married
to Lady Caroline Lamb by then deceased, was the prime minister, and he arranged that Queen Victoria's
coronation list of honors William would become the Earl of Loveless. His wife, this became
Ada, Countess of Loveless. She is therefore properly referred to as Ada or Lady Loveless,
though she is now commonly known as Ada Loveless. That Christmas in 1835, Ada received from her
mother the most fam- family-side portrait of her father, painted by Thomas Phillips,
it showed Lord Byron in a romantic profile, gazing at the horizon, dressed in a traditional
Albanian costume, featuring a red velvet jacket, ceremonial sword, and headrest. For years it had
hung over Ada's grandparents' metal, but it had never been veiled and unseen by the green cloth
from the day her parents had separated. Now she was trusted not only to see it, but to possess it,
along with its ink stand and pen. Her mother did something that was even more surprising,
when the loveless first child, a son, was born. A few months later, despite her disdain for her
late husband's memory, she agreed that Ada could name the boy Byron, which she did.
The following year, Ada had a daughter whom she dutifully named Annabella, after her mother.
Ada then came down with yet another mysterious malady, which kept her bedridden for months.
She recovered well enough to have a third child, a son named Ralph. But her health remained fragile.
She had digestive and respiratory problems, and these were compounded by being treated by, with
londonum, morphine, and other forms of opium, which led to mood swings and occasional delusions.
Ada was further unsettled by the by the eruption of a personal drama that was bizarre enough by
the standards of the Byron family. It involved Madora Le, the daughter of Byron's half-sister
and occasional lover. According to the widely accepted rumors, Madora was Byron's daughter.
She seemed determined to show that that darkness ran in the family. She had an affair with a
sister's husband and then ran off with him to France and had two little limited illegitimate
children. In a fit of self-righteousness, Lady Byron went to France to rescue Madora,
then revealed to Ada that the story of her father's incest.
This, quote, most strange and dreadful story did not seem to surprise Ada. I'm not happy in the
least astonished, but I'm not in least astonished, she wrote to her mother. You merely confirm that
I have known for years and felt scarcely doubt about. Rather than being outraged, she seemed
oddly energized by the news. She declared that she could relate to her father's defiance authority,
referring to his, quote, misused genius. She wrote to her mother, quote, if he had transmitted
to me any portion of that genius, I would use it to bring out great truths and principles.
I think he has bequested me this task, in fact. I have this feeling strongly and there is a pleasure
attending to it, end quote. Once again, Ada took up the study of math in order to settle herself.
She tried to convince Babish to become her tutor. I have a peculiar way of learning and I think it
is, it must be a peculiar man to teach me, she said, whether due to her opiates or her breeding
or both. She developed a somewhat outsized opinion of her own talents and began to describe herself
as a genius. In her letter to Babish, she wrote, quote, do not reckon me conceited, but I believe
I have the power of going just as far as I like in such pursuits and where were there is no decided
to taste, I should almost say a passion as I have for them. I question if there is not always some
portion of natural genius even. Babish deflected Ada's request, which was probably wise. It preserved
their friendship for an even more important collaboration as she was able to secure a first
rate math tutor instead, Augustus de Morgan, a patient gentleman who was pioneer in the field of
symbolic logic. He had propounded a concept that Ada would one day employ with great significance,
which was an algebraic equation could apply to things other than numbers. The relations
among symbols, for example, A plus B equals B plus A could be part of the logic that applied
to things that were not numerical. That's Lambda calculus, by the way. I've been reading about it.
Oh, great. Love it. Am I drinking? I'm drinking rum.
Ada was never the great mathematician in her canonizer's claim,
but she was an eager pupil, able to grasp most of the basic concepts in calculus and with her
artistic sensibility, she liked to visualize the changing curves and trajectories of the
equations being described. De Morgan, her tutor, encouraged her to focus on the rules for working
through equations, but she was more eager to discuss the underlying concepts. Likewise with
geometry, she often asked for visual ways to picture problems, such as how the intersections
of circles in a sphere divided into various shapes. Ada's ability to appreciate the beauty
of mathematics is a gift that eludes many people, including some who think of themselves as
intellectual. She realized that math was a loving language, one that described the harmoniousness
of the universe and can be poetic at times. Despite her mother's efforts, she remained her
father's daughter with a poetic sensibility that allowed her to view the equations of the brush
stroke that painted an aspect of nature's physical splendor, just as she could visualize the, quote,
wire dark sea, or a woman who, quote, walks in beauty light at night. But math's appeal went
even deeper for her. It was spiritual. Math constitutes the language through which alone
we can adequately express the great facts of the natural world, she said. And it allows us to
portray, quote, the changes of mutual relationship that unfold in creation. It is the instrument
through which the weak mind of man can most effectually read his creator's works.
This ability to apply imagination to science characterized the industrial revolution as well
as the computer revolution, for which Ada was to become a major patron saint. She was able,
as she told Babbage, to understand the connection between poetry and analysis in ways that transcended
her father's talents. I do not believe that my father was or ever could have been
such a poet as I shall be an analyst. For with me, the two go together in dissolute,
dissolubly, she wrote. Her re-engagement with math, she told her mother, spurred her
creativity and led to an, quote, immense development of imagination so much so
that I feel no doubt that I continue my studies, I shall do in due time become a poet.
The whole concept of imagination, especially as it was applied to technology, intrigued her.
What is imagination, she asked in 1841. It is the combining faculty. It brings together
things, facts, and ideas, conceptions in new, original, endless, ever-varying combinations.
It is that which penetrates into the unseen worlds around us and the worlds of science.
By then Ada believed she possessed special, even supernatural abilities, what she called, quote,
an intuitive perception of hidden things. Her exalted view of her talents led her to pursue
aspirations that were unusual for an aristocratic woman and a mother of the early Victorian age,
quote, I believe myself to possess a most singular combination of qualities exactly
fitted to make my preeminently a discoverer of the hidden realities of nature, end quote.
She explained in a letter that her mother in 1841, quote, I can throw rays from every
core of the universe into one vast focus. It was while this fame of mine that she just,
it was in this frame of mind that she decided to engage again with Charles Babbage,
whose salons she had first attended eight years earlier.
She thinks she's Sheldon. She really does.
This is the innovators from Walter Isaacson.
Charles Babbage and his engines.
Probably this probably be the last one.
From an early age, Charles Babbage had been interested in machinery that could
perform human tests. When he was a child, his mother took him to many of the exhibition halls
and new museums out that were that were springing up in London in the early 1800s.
At one in Hanover Square, a proprietor aptly named Merlin invited him up to the to the
attic workshop where he would where there was a variety of mechanical dolls known as a tomata.
One was a silver female dancer about a foot tall whose arms moved with grace and who held in
her hand a bird that could wag its tail, flip its wings and open its beak. The silver lady's
ability to display feelings and personality captured the boys fancy. Her eyes were full
of imagination, he recalled. Years later, he discovered the silver lady had a bankruptcy
auction and bought it. It served as an amusement at the evening of salons which he celebrated
with wonders of technology later. At Cambridge, Babbage became friends with groups including
John Herschel and George Peacock who were who were disappointed by the many by the way math was
being taught there. They formed a club called the Analytical Society which campaigned to get the
university to abandon the calculus notation devised by the alumnus Newton which relied on dots and
replace it with the one devised by Leibniz which used dx and dy to represent infinitesimally increments
in what was known as denotation. Babbage's title titled the manifesto quote the principles of pure
deism in opposition to the dot edge of the university. He was picky but he had a good sense of humor.
One day Babbage was at the Analytical Society's room working on a table of logarithms that was
littered with discrepancies. Herschel asked if him what he was thinking quote he said I wish to
god these calculations had been executed by steam Babbage answered. To this idea of mechanical
method for tabulating logarithms Herschel replied it is quite possible in 1821 Babbage turned his
attention to building just such a machine. Over the years many had fiddled with making
with making calculations contraptions and in the 1640s Blaise Pascal a French mathematician
philosopher created the mechanism the mechanical calculator to reduce the drudgery of his father's
work as a tax supervisor. It had spoke metal wheels with a digits zero through nine on their
circumference. To add or subtract numbers the operator used a stylus to dial a number as if
using a rotary phone then dialed in the next number an armature then carried or borrowed a one
when necessary it became the first calculator to be patented in sold commercially.
30 years later Godfried Lipnitz the German mathematician philosopher
tried to improve upon Pascal's contraption with a quote stepped reckoner that had the
capacity to multiply and divide. It had a hand crake cylinder and a set of teeth that meshed
with counting wheels. But Lipnitz ran into a problem that would be a recurring theme for the
digital age. Unlike Pascal an adwatt engineer who could combine scientific theories with mechanical
genius Lipnitz had engineering skills that did not surround himself with those who did.
So like many great theories who lacked practical collaborators he was unable to produce reliable
working versions of his device. Nevertheless his core concepts known as the Lipnitz wheel
would influence calculator design through the time of Babbage.
Babbage knew of the devices of Pascal and Lipnitz and he was trying to do something better than them
that was more complex. He wanted to construct a mechanical method for tabulating logarithmic
signs and cosines and tangents. To do so he adapted an idea from the French mathematician Gaspar
de Pony who had come up in the 1790s. In order to create logarithmic and trigonometric tables
de Pony broke down the operations into very simple steps that involved only addition and
mess of traction. Then he provided easy instructions so that the scores of human laborers who knew
the little math could perform these simple tasks and pass along their answers to the next set of
laborers. In other words he created an assembly line the great industrial age innovation that
was memorably analyzed by Adam Smith in his description of the division of labor in the
pin making factory. After a trip to Paris in which he heard of de Pony's method Babbage wrote quote
I conceived all of a sudden the idea of applying this same method to the immense work with which I
had been burdened and to manufacture logarithms as one manufactures pins. Even complex mathematical
tasks Babbage realized could be broken into steps that came down into calculating quote finite differences.
All right calculating finite differences through simple adding and subtracting.
For example in order to make a table of squares one to the second, two to the second, three to
the second, four to the second and so on. You could list the initial numbers in such a sequence
one four nine sixteen. This would be column A. Beside it in column B you could figure out the
differences between each and the numbers in this case three five nine seven and nine. Column C
would be a list of differences between the column B numbers which is two two two and two. Once the
process was a simplified it could be reversed and the task parceled out to untutored laborers.
One would be in charge of adding two to the last number of the column B and then the hand that
resulted to the other person would then add the results to the number A thus generating the next
number in the sequence of squares. Babbage devised a way to mechanize the process and he named it
the difference engine. It could tabulate any polynomial function and provide a number a digital
method of approximating the solution to differential equations. How did it work? The difference engine
used vertical shafts with discs that could be turned to any numeral. They were attached to cogs
that would be cranked in order to add that numeral or to subtract from it a disc on an adjacent shaft.
The contraption was even store the interim result on another shaft. The main complexity was how to
carry or borrow when necessary and what to do with pencils when we calculate the same thing we do
with pencils when we do 36 plus 19 or 42 minus 17. Drawing on Pascal's devices Babbage came up with
a few ingenious contrivances and allowed the cogs and shafts to handle the calculation. The machine
wasn't concept of true marvel. Babbage even figured out a way to get it to create a table of prime
numbers up to 10 million. The British government was impressed and at least initially in 1823 it gave
him a seed money of 1,700 pounds and would eventually sink more than 17,000 pounds twice the cost of a
warship into the device during the decade Babbage spent trying to build in. But the project ran into
two problems. First, Babbage had his hired engineer did not quite have the skills to get the device
working. Second, he began dreaming up something even better. Babbage's new idea which you can
see in 1834 was a general purpose computer that could carry out the very a variety of different
operations based on programmatic instructions given to it. It could perform one task and it made a
switch to perform another. It could even tell itself to switch tasks or alter its quote patterns of
action as Babbage called it based on its own interim calculations. Babbage names this proposed
machine the quote analytical engine. He was 100 years ahead of his time. The analytical engine
was the product of what Ada Lovelace in her essay of imagination had called quote the combining
faculty. Babbage had combined innovations that had cropped up in other fields to trick many great
inventors have done. He had originally used a metal drum for what had that was studded with spikes to
control the shafts and how they would turn. Then he studied as Ada had the automated loom invented
by 1801 by the Frenchman named Joseph Marie Jacquel which transformed the silk weaving industry.
Looms created a pattern by using hooks to lift selected warp threads and then a rod pushes a
wolf thread underneath. Jacquel invented a method of using cards with hole punches
in order to control this process. The holes determine which hooks and rods would be activated
for each pass of the weave thus automating the creation of intricate patterns. Each time the
shuttle that was thrown to create a new pass of the thread a new punch card was coming to play.
On June 30th 1836 Babbage made an entry into what he called his quote scribbling books that would
represent the milestone in his pre in the prehistory of computers quote suggested Jacquard's loom
as a substitute for the drums. Using punch cards rather than still drums meant that an unlimited
number of instructions could be input into the machine. In addition the sequence of tasks could
be unmodified thus making it easier to devise a general purpose machine that was versatile
and reprogrammable. Babbage brought a portrait of Jacquard and began to display at the salons.
This showed his inventor he showed his he showed the inventor sitting in an armchair
a loom in the background holding a pair of calipers over irregularly punch cards. Babbage
amused his guest by asking him to guess what it was. Most thought it was a superb engraving.
He would then reveal that it was actually a finely woven silk tapestry with 24,000 rows of
threads each controlled by a different punch card. When Prince Albert the husband of Queen Victoria
came to one of Babbage's salons he asked Babbage why he found the tapestry so interesting. Babbage
replied it will greatly assist in explaining the nature of my calculating machine the analytical
engine. Few people however saw the beauty of Babbage's proposed new machine as the British
government had no inclination to fund it. Triacy my Babbage had could generate little notice in
the either popular press or the scientific journals but he did find one believer aida loveless fully
appreciated the concept of the general purpose machine. More importantly she envisioned an
attribute that might make it truly amazing if it could potentially process not only numbers
but any symbolic notation including musical and artistic notes. She saw the poet the poetry in
the such an idea and she set out to encourage others to see it as well. She barraged Babbage
with letters some of which verged on cheeky even though even though he was 24 years her senior
and once she described her solitary game using 26 marbles where she goal where where the goal is to
execute jumps so that only one of the marbles remains. She had mastered it but was trying to
derive a quote mathematical formula on which the solution depends and which she could put her symbolic
language to. Then she asked quote I am too imaginative for you I think not. Her goal was to work
with Babbage as his publicist and partner and trying to get support to build the analytical
engine quote I am very anxious to talk to you she wrote in early 1841 quote I will give you a hint
on what it strikes me that at some future time my head may be made by you subservient to some of
your proposals and plans if so if ever I could be worthy of capable of being used by you my head
will be yours. A year later a tailor-made opportunity presented itself to the young Ada.
