The first part is about what our society is like, and Pope Gregory VII will play a very
important role in that account, and then the second part is a series of thought experiments
which I'm going to rely on you to give me input for, and how that works.
I'm not quite sure yet, since I've never done this before, these ideas were developed
long before there were such things as PowerPoint slides, but we'll see, it's an experiment.
All right, so these are various ideas which have been put forward in the course of time
about what the key might be to leading a meaningful life, and the obvious key is that if you lead
a happy life, then you lead a meaningful life, and then there are various other ideas that
people have put forward in history.
The thesis I'm going to defend is rather towards the end of this list, so living creatively
would be a fairly good first approximation, and changing the world would be also a fairly
good approximation, but neither of these completely capture the central position here, which will
become clear only as we move forward.
So the basis is Durkheim's taxonomy of suicides, and different kinds of cultures have different
kinds of suicide, and studying the phenomenon of suicide, you can also understand what it
is to be leading a meaningful life.
Basically, people who do not lead meaningful lives are more likely to commit suicide, and
so there is, first of all, altruistic suicide, which is a phenomenon where somebody begins
to feel that it's their duty to commit suicide, as for instance in Japan in the phenomenon
of hirakiri.
So you feel that you have to commit suicide because otherwise the world will not be an
organic place, because you don't belong in it anymore.
And a subform of altruistic suicide is terroristic suicide, the suicide who, as an act of jihad,
kills himself in order to send a message to God, or something like that.
The next kind distinguished by Durkheim was anomic suicide, and this arises in periods
of social breakdown.
So in a stock market crash, you have people who commit suicide, because the world seems
to be becoming unintelligible and everything is going wrong.
And then you have fatalistic suicide, which occurs when people can't cope with the rules
that surround them.
They feel as if they're being strangled by society, and they have no way of coping under
these conditions, and so they end their own lives.
And then finally, and this is the most important one, we have what Durkheim called egoistic
suicide, and this is a case where individuals may be living in a perfectly good, happy society,
but they feel that their own lives are meaningless.
This is the key to the story I'm going to be telling.
Now, in traditional societies, this feeling of meaninglessness is avoided because people
are living in traditional societies or communities.
There's a strong collective consciousness.
People trust each other.
They rely on each other.
They're integrated, and this is often a matter of religion.
And in such societies, people are indeed less likely to commit suicide.
They belong.
Things have meaning.
For some reason, I just lost the light.
Can you hear the voice still?
Yes, we can hear you.
Okay, so just give me one minute to see if I can switch a light on, which doesn't cause too
many problems.
I guess you don't notice the loss of light because you're only seeing my slides.
But still, we'll go on.
So the traditional road to a meaningful life, most societies in human history
was through a community of trust, strong integration into society.
We're not living in a society like that anymore.
And yet, there is not a high level of suicide.
Why?
In virtue of what do people not commit suicide today?
Given that the sources of meaning of former times are weakened so considerably.
That's the puzzle that I'm going to try and solve.
I think that most people in developed societies today are leading mostly meaningful lives.
And that's why we don't have particularly high suicide rates.
And so the question is, what does it mean to lead a meaningful life if not to be part
of a traditional community?
And to put the thing in another direction, what provides meaning in a modern society?
Well, this is where Gregory VII comes into the story.
And the account I'm giving of Gregory VII is based on these two writings,
which I strongly recommend, particularly the Byman piece.
So Gregory faced what was then thought of as the year 1000 problems.
So some of you will remember, all of you I imagine will remember the Y2K problem.
I'm not even sure whether the younger people actually will remember the Y2K problem,
but all of the older people in the audience will remember the Y2K problem.
There was a Y1K problem.
Jesus did not come back.
Everyone was expecting Jesus to come back at the end of the millennium.
And this was a big embarrassment for the church and specifically for Pope Gregory.
And so he responded to this embarrassment in an encyclical which was disseminated in the year 1076.
And this encyclical introduced a new, we might think of it as a post-religious view of humanity.
Or anyway, it's a post-apocalyptic view of humanity.
According to this view, what you do here on earth is important for your salvation.
Now this was a radical change.
The idea was that the reason why Christ did not return is because the world wasn't good enough for him yet.
So we had a thousand years to make the world a good enough place for Christ and we failed.
And so Pope Gregory wants to try again.
But this time on the basis of what today we would think of as reason, free choice, acts of will,
science and so forth.
And so the encyclical was all about making the world a better place.
The first component was the adoption of Roman law.
So there would be a new universal legislation.
The whole of Christian society would be under one legal system.
The legal system, which was introduced by the Romans, of course, but which was now going to be passed through to the whole of society.
So that we would rationally organize our social lives and even our private lives
on the basis of what we would, again, nowadays think of as economic principles.
And this is the birth of the modern idea of the Reichstag, the idea of a state of laws,
rather than a state in which your position in society mattered more than the objective
statements of the law.
And this was also a basis for a new kind of politics.
The book by Bearman that I recommended a few slides ago is actually all about the relationship, the new relationship
between the law on the one hand and the church on the other hand.
That relationship is now so completely familiar to the way we see everything that we don't think about it.
But in the year 10,076,
matters were quite different.
The intimate connection between the church and the state was, as it still is, in certain Islamic countries today.
And then the law served as a basis for a new kind of economics.
The ideas of a just wage, for instance, and similar ideas were introduced at this time.
So you use legal proceedings to settle disputes.
You don't use violence or the whim of some lord or king.
Law is impersonal.
And it's known.
It's made of abstract rules.
And so a more structured, ordered society comes into being.
Now, if I were to jump ahead 47 slides or so,
I would point here to the thesis that a meaningful life is a structured, ordered life.
And what that means will become clear later on.
But this idea of a structured, ordered life is rooted in this
primeval document of the modern age, namely the encyclical of Poges, Gregory VII.
Okay, so other elements, not just law, but also universities were established.
So 1088 already, only 12 years later, the first university was founded in Bologna,
which was actually a center for the study of law, more than anything else, law and medicine.
And then Oxford and Paris and Cambridge and Schenectady followed in the obvious order.
And the characteristic of these universities to a greater or lesser degree was the idea
that we should search for knowledge for its own sake.
This was an idea which came from the Greeks, which was reinvented, as it were, by Pope Gregory.
And then disseminated by Pope Gregory through universities and through monasteries,
which often were responsible for teaching the children who would go on to be monks in
these new universities, who also spread new ideas in agriculture and viticulture and so forth,
and medicine, of course. All of this is part of the same new project to make the world a better place,
beautiful buildings,
nice food, nice drink, healthy people, healthy animals, and so forth.
So we are now to be living in a world in which we understand, which we improve,
not which we affect through prayer or apocalypse, but through good works and sound institutions.
Now, before that, we had the threat of hell and damnation and so forth.
And we had the problem of original sin. So original sin is infinitely bad.
The small things that human beings can do in their lives for the good are of no value when compared
to the infinitely negative value of original sin. And so the idea until Gregory was,
I'm simplifying a lot now, I hope you're clear about that, human action has no value.
And so the moral order or the legal order under which you live is arbitrary. It could be that
everything is subject to the whim of the gods. This is the problem which people like Gregory
faced. This means there is no measure on earth. That's going to be important later on. To lead
a meaningful life, you have to lead a life which is conforming to a standard or measure.
So if you're living in a world in which everything is subject to the whims of the gods,
then you may as well just abstain from acting completely. That might indeed be the holy way,
the righteous way to lead your life. Or you may isolate yourself. Or you may appeal to
supernatural forces, for instance, when you're deciding whether somebody is guilty of some
kind of crime or sin. And you may believe in prayer as having a causal power. Or you may
believe in relics. Because in this magical world where everything might be subject to the whim
of the gods, reason does not really necessarily bring you anywhere.
And now Anson was one of the people who codified, as it were, or philosophized about
this new institution of worldly order brought about by Gregory. So I believe in order to know
is the creed. And in order to know, in order to make the world better via reason in small steps.
Now, this means that the small steps of individual humans become meaningful once again.
You yourself can determine that you will be saved by good works. Because human life here on
earth matters. Because we are here on earth to make the world better so that Jesus Christ will
come back. So this is Anson's new balance sheet. This is the original view was that all our good
works are infinitely outweighed by original sin. Now Anson says that we have original sin and the
actual sins and the actual sins are of course irrelevant because they are eaten away by the
infinity of original sin. But the infinity of original sin is balanced out by Christ's sacrifice.
And so good works matter. And we can count them and we can see that they matter because they bring
meaningful changes, changes which make the world a better place.
And this applies also to crimes. So now you pay your debt to society by serving time in jail.
There is a measure on earth, the time you spend in jail is proportionate to the crime or the sin
that you committed. And this too is part of the new legal order which Gregory introduced.
So this has implications also for the doctrine of purgatory. So it's never too late to start doing
good. You can even do good after you're dead in order to increase your chance of going to heaven.
Now Jesus going to jail gives you a chance to atone for your sins before death.
So purgatory gives you a chance to atone for your sins before either you go to heaven or to hell.
Going to jail means that you can wipe the slate clean and this is the idea of criminal justice.
It's part of a new idea called guilt. So we're now living in a guilt society
where before people were living in a shame society. And again there was no measure. If you did
something wrong then the shame that you acquired would affect not only you but your whole family
and all your descendants for all eternity. So shame is impergable and purgatory and impergable,
unpurgeable I have here. They come from the same root and if you suffer shame as in
haraqiri again then suicide may be the only solution. That is the only way that you can pay
the debt which will otherwise accrue to all your descendants for all eternity. Suicide is honorable.
Suicide is part of a meaningful life according to the culture of shame
but not according to the culture of the modern world introduced by Gregory. So the old
path of salvation was just one big jump if you're lucky. The new path of salvation allows you to
proceed in a measured way from earth where you perform good works to heaven where you receive
the reward for your good works. So according to all of this salvation is no longer an all or
nothing matter. You can make use of your reason and thereby receive salvation. And in the second
piece of literature that I referred to by a French political philosopher by the name of Nemo,
the West, he has a book about the West, is defined as a scientific and legal civilization
based on this principle namely that life here on earth matters.
All right so
the West means those societies which fell under the influence of the Gregorian reforms which
includes North America, South America and Silicon Valley for instance. All of the other
things that we are surrounded by the technological world in which we live. This is all part of the
West and it's all a reflection of people doing good works in order to make the world a better place
according to Gregory's original schema things. Now if life here on earth is meaningful then
that means that the church and the state are separated. The state and all of the things that
private people do and all of the things that companies do are separate from the issues which
relate to heaven and hell, issues of the church. So a materially successful society can also be
a moral and religious society and that may be connected to with the idea of meaningfulness.
That's something we have to see but it's not the same thing, a successful society
and a moral and religious society they point in two different directions, the two issues are
orthogonal to each other. And that's because life here on earth is significant,
garden society can be separated. There are other moral forms of social order other than
theocratic totalitarianism. All right so now let's go to the meaning of life that we finish
with Pope Gregory. One very attractive summary of the meaning of life and again for people who
live in modern societies is that we get meaning in our lives from helping others. So Mother Teresa
is the ideal to which we can all think of ourselves as approximating in little ways, small steps.
So we are all here to help others. This is W. H. Orden, an English poet of a somewhat
what's the word, doom laden spirit. So we're all here to help others but what the others are here
for says W. H. Orden, God only knows. So there has to be some things that we're here for which are not
for others because those others have to be doing something which is it's worth helping them to do.
So that's the first small thought experiment. Now if you think I'm making a mistake in my
logic or in my rhetoric here then from this point onwards you should just feel free to interrupt
and you can shout, I'm sure we're all here, providing you're not muted. All right so
Socrates and the Happy Dog. This is an old challenge question. Which is it better to be an
unhappy Socrates or a happy dog? Now viewed from the idea of meaningfulness, assuming that you want
to lead a meaningful life, I think it's obvious that we would all like to be Socrates and that if
we're unhappy that's not really important because we are doing good works, we are engaging with the
world, we're acting, we're getting some kind of feedback response and even if we end up committing
suicide or being killed by our surroundings by the people that we engage with, we're still
leading a meaningful life but a happy dog is not leading a meaningful life.
And now I'm assuming that many people have heard of the experience machine described by Nozick and
I have talked about this in public and I have rooms of students and I challenge them with Nozick's
question. The question goes something like this. I have a super duper machine which looks a bit like a
MRI machine which you can go into and then I'll close the door forever and my machine is
insured by the best Swiss insurance company that you could imagine. If anything goes wrong
your family will receive four billion dollars or something and nothing does go wrong. I have
thousands and thousands of happy customers who are happy that are inside the machine.
The rule is you can't come back out but if you do go inside the machine then your life
will continue just as it was before. You will have just the same experiences, the same family
surroundings and so forth except you will be more successful, more happy, you will engage in more
meaningful experiences. In general everything will be better than it is if you stay outside
the machine. There will be even occasional downfalls. You will suffer accidents and so forth but you
will suffer just the right number of accidents to make your life the most perfect life that it could
be for someone like you but in a way that you don't notice the change it will all be very gradual
and then the challenge is do you go into the machine? Now if there is anyone in the audience
who would go into the machine I would like them to make themselves known.
So I infer from this that you're all leading rather happy, satisfied lives. Am I correct? Is that
the rough and ready reason? If somebody has a different reason I'd be very happy to hear it.
So you're all just not going in because you're already happy? Is that no deeper reason?
I'm not going in because I want to live an authentic life. Very good. So that is actually on my list
of definitions of a meaningful life. A meaningful life is an authentic life. Do you want to define
what you mean by authentic? I wanted to be in touch with reality I guess. I don't know if that's
the same thing or if that's something different. No but it's closely connected. In fact you're
hitting several nails on the head even with just that one phrase as you will see as we go along.
So I'm very happy that at least one person reacted. Now is someone going to be the second person?
Just as a matter of interest to the talking person from a second ago have you heard about
the experienced machine in your in your class here at Union College? Oh yeah I'm a faculty member. I
was talking about it in class last week. Okay good good yeah I hope I'm not repeating things you
already said. No no this is good. So anyone else want to volunteer? I was hoping the students
would jump in but I will just echo what David says. I teach the experienced machine in my intro
class and I'm always surprised at how many students say that sign me up put me in but I agree with
David. I would rather I would rather stay in touch with reality. So I'm going to give you
several reasons why you should not go in before we're finished. I'm sure you'll recognize all of
them but probably not listed in the way that I listed. Are there any students who would want
to stay in the machine or go in the machine or not? There's some students here.
I've outed them so they're like I'm not gonna. So they've all seen the film The Matrix I imagine
and so they think of the experienced machine in rather dark terms.
All right so let's move on then. So the meaning of life cannot be just happiness being happy
because you get much more happiness in the experience machine than you do in the real
world. In fact you get the perfect amount of happiness that would make your life the perfect
life. It's just not really a life that you're living it's kind of as that's and the reason
one reason is that you're not acting freely. So the the machine is determining everything that
happens to you because the machine is determining that flow of experiences which you enjoy and that
flow of experiences includes experiences according to which you are acting freely. So you think you're
acting freely at every moment inside the machine but you're never acting it's all just a feed
from the computer. So then the question is why is free action important? Where free action
means that you're not just thinking that you're acting freely but you truly are acting freely.
Now John Stuart Mill had an answer to this question. He was thinking actually about freedom of
speech but that we can generalize. So freedom means that you have more alternative views options
actions and so forth to choose from and now I don't think that this kind of answer to the question
is quite good enough because just having more alternatives doesn't necessarily mean that you
have more meaningfulness. In fact having more alternatives may take away some of the meaning
from your life. So I remember in the time when people living in communist countries could travel
to the West for the first time I had a Polish philosopher who visited me in Switzerland and
I took him to a Swiss cheese shop which was just a shop full of cheese. In Poland under
communism you had perhaps two alternative kinds of cheese to choose from and on any given day it
may be that both of them were sold out. In this Swiss cheese shop he had thousands of different
kinds of cheeses and he hated it. He said that this was this was bad it was wasteful you shouldn't
have so many kinds of cheese. Anyway so another now we're coming in at random from a completely
different direction. There is a story about a university in Saudi Arabia which had a board of
directors who'd been placed in charge of the university and then they issued instructions
to the faculty explaining exactly what and how they are to teach. Now all the faculty on this
Zoom exchange I know would hate to be a member of the faculty of a university like that
so they want to decide what and how they are to teach and I'm hoping that the students
want to be in a university where faculty are explaining what so deciding what
and how they are to teach. Now why supposing that we could go to a university which we knew would
teach exactly what we want in exactly the way we wanted because all the teachers in that university
were instructed to do that would we still want to go to that university I think we would not
because we want and someone earlier used the word authentic we want the faculty to be authentically
believing in what they're teaching. We want them to believe that it's true and not be retelling
what they've been instructed to believe by the university board of directors. So
why is it important not nearly to do the right thing but to do the right thing of your own
free will and the answer I think has to do with a distinction between real feelings which are
well grounded in a way that I will explain and fake feelings so this is another view on the idea of
authenticity. Now another question which is parallel to the first question is why is it
important to have genuine achievements rather than achievements which bring or rather than actions
which bring all the marks of genuine achievements but are not genuine achievements. Now an example
here would be you have a rich uncle a very rich uncle and he wants you to go through life being
successful and so he pays all the people in your surroundings to praise everything that you do so
all the faculty members are told to give you good marks they get well rewarded all your friends are
told to praise you all the time for being so so witty and so forth so you you have all the marks of
success but you you don't actually do any of the things which would justify those marks of success
so what what we all feel that this would be a horrible thing to do to somebody even though
in fact they experience all of the positive marks of success the uncle does this for the whole life
of this poor person why do we feel that they are a poor person why do we feel that it would be a bad
thing to live in a world where they were enjoying only fake success and the answer is something like
your feelings should track the reality around you so that's what a meaningful life I believe
has to be it has to be a life in which your feelings and your beliefs and so forth track
reality now another example would be you want to be at the you want to get to the top of a mountain
and you have two ways to get to the top of the mountain you can either climb the mountain
or you can get your rich uncle to deposit you on the top of the mountain having hypnotized you to
believe that you were climbing up the mountain so he has a helicopter and a hypnotist when you get
to the top of the mountain you think you climbed the mountain so you you feel successful you feel
that you have achieved something but you haven't achieved something you're you're experiencing
fake success all right so what is a genuine achievement it's an activity directed towards
a goal along with a measure of how well you realize the goal a standard of right or wrong so
getting to the top of the mountain the obvious measure is that how far you get and ideally you get
to the top now if you want to lead a meaningful life then presumably you want to
lead a maximum meaningful life and that would seem to mean that the goal
of your life or the goal that you embrace the prime goal of your life must be far in the future
it ideally you should realize the goal one second before you die now that probably is not going to
work but still we I hope we all feel that if meaningfulness is a value then we should try
and maximize it and if meaningfulness as I shall argue is a matter of having genuine achievements
and if genuine achievements is a matter of having a measure then we want to maximize the measure
so we want to have this step from earth to heaven and we want the steps to go directly to heaven
but by tiny steps like this so this is now path to meaningfulness
so do I have to I mean you have to believe that the goal is kind of far away in the future or
the goal has to be far away in the future so I can't think of a case where the goal would be
so far in the future but I'm going to talk quite a bit about Beethoven later on so let's take Beethoven
as the example Beethoven wrote symphonies he wrote works of music each one of those works of music
is a step and then he dies now he didn't have a goal that was fulfilled just before he died
but he was fulfilling a goal through his life which was to write music
does that make sense okay sorry so maybe I'm not making some but so I have to think that I have a
goal and that's a good question which actually I do not have a slide devoted to that question
which disappoints me so I've not achieved my goal can you write it down
um so I do have a very similar question I think it's on the next slide
but it's a good question so let me give you the similar question
do other people have to know the measure of success so I guess you could do I have to know
the measure of success I have to think about that given your question but let me do this one first
so it's not the case that other people had to know the measure of success while the
genuine achievement is going on so the resistance fighters in France in the Second World War
were not allowed to tell people what they were doing they could not be applauded
that the measure of success did indeed become clear after the war and then they were appropriately
rewarded most of them were dead of course but they were they received their measure of success
another example is Aristarchus who discovered that the earth orbits around the sun but he was ignored
then for 1853 years but he still has his measure of success we all think now that Aristarchus led
a meaningful life and I think we think that truly I don't know if that helps you in any way but I
can try and answer your question now if you wish sure yeah okay so excellent I thinking through so
I like to think through great composers Beethoven Bach and Mozart because they are the the paradigms
of meaningful lives according to the view I'm defending now now I'm sure that Bach had a goal
which was to glorify God and so he would be a case where my account would fit with a positive
answer to your question Bach led a meaningful life and he had a goal which he was aiming to
realize through his whole life I think also I can give a positive answer to the question with
regard to Beethoven he wanted to create music wanted really hard so that it was painful for him
towards the end and with regard to Mozart we're not so sure about Mozart he seems to be a less
clear case whether he had a goal like Beethoven or Bach I'm just talking off the top of my head
no I haven't saw this through am I making any sort of sense yeah yeah absolutely thank you
okay so I'm not sure I understand the format can I jump in anyone can jump in at any time
although that makes all our lives slightly less meaningful because we're deviating from the plan
but I can live with that all right so this is this is not the question I wanted to ask
currently but this is speaking back in on Marianna's question yes and and also with your
choice of composers yes so take Pushkin's version of the of the competitiveness between Mozart
and Salieri yes so apparently as you yourself said we're not clear whether Mozart had a goal
was conscious of a goal but Salieri in the way that Pushkin it wasn't popularized in the movie
so Salieri had not only less success in terms of the of the recognition he received but apparently
I'm not an expert his music was not nearly as admirable in trance and yet he did have
the consciousness of the goals and so on so I mean what do we do with that sort of case
yes so as I did say that I had not thought about this consciousness of the goal dimension
and I will I'll build it into the the thing before I do this again which may not be for
another 30 years if I'm still here so let me let me just explain the goal is not
central to the account if the goal may indeed be just a a crutch for thinking about the account
so it is as if you have a goal which is far far in the future so that you can lead a maximally
meaningful life by creating a plan to realize that goal so the plan is more important than the goal
and the plan is broken down in these successive steps such as writing symphonies
so I think I'm still in good shape but yeah it's up to you to to judge what we are two
thirds of the way through all right
so we've already determined or at least I've determined that only a free ashen can contribute
to the meaningfulness of your life
and and so the right kind of university is one which helps you to lead a meaningful life that's
the point I wanted to make here and so everyone who is in uni and college whether as a faculty
member or a student is by the very fact that they are in a university doing what they're doing
leading a meaningful life they are engaging in activities according to a plan which add
step by step to some sort of measurable value even if the measurableness is in terms of diplomas
or promotions and so forth all right so we've talked a little bit about the hypnotist your
your hypnotist your uncle hires a hypnotist and hypnotizes you into thinking that you are happy
or this this proves that what is going on inside your mind is not necessarily very important in
determining whether you're leading a meaningful life or not we can make you think that you're
meaning reading a meaningful life by hypnotizing but now supposing that we have a hypnotist who we
pay and we tell the hypnotist to hypnotize us to do what we want to be hypnotized to do
for instance giving up smoking which people do a lot I understand they pay a hypnotist
to hypnotize them so that they will give up smoking supposing we pay a hypnotist to hypnotize us
so that we will work much harder on our exams
does that add to the measure which to the accounting so that it adds to the meaningfulness
of our life I do not know the answer to this question so if anyone thinks they have a good
answer I would be happy to hear it it seems to me that paying a hypnotist to make it easier for
you to make your life more meaningful in a real well-grounded sense is itself well grounded in
fact probably more people should do it if hypnotism works of course so if no one has anything to say
about this I will just move on actually I have something to say I think about this so I don't
know if I have an answer to it but this kind of ties into what I was thinking about with the idea
that free action is central to having a meaningful life and I was thinking about it in terms of like
so I guess to what extent what do we mean by a free action I'm thinking
it matters to me that what I do is caused by me which is why I wouldn't want to be in the
in the experiment experience machine right I wouldn't want it to be the case that I didn't
really earn my PhD that it was just I just thought I did that kind of thing so I think that's that
seems right to me but then if it turned out that somebody had said I know determinism is true and
so you really didn't have a choice in what you were doing I don't know that that bothers me that
much and that's kind of what I'm thinking about this hypnotist example that if you know I hire a
hypnotist to talk to to hypnotize me so I work harder I like am more successful at the goals
that I want and then somebody says well then the action wasn't really free because you had this kind
of interference it still stems from me I'm still part like I don't think that I'm not tracking reality
anymore um and so in that sense I'm just thinking that maybe I guess that's what I'm what I'm thinking
and I'm wondering how to what extent like how robust is our notion of freedom have to be in this
account okay I I like the the argument that you just presented so I'm not going to object to it okay
and my question still remains why don't more people pay hypnotists to come to hypnotize them to
work harder anyway let's move on unless someone else has something to say
all right so it has to be the meaning of your life can't be the meaning that your uncle would
like you to lead so you it has to be you who commands the hypnotist or it has to be you who
climbs the mountain but now the question is what is your life I don't know how many people have
watched this amazon um tv series called upload so I I was able to watch about 15 minutes of it and
then I just stopped because it's so bad but the idea is rather good it the idea is that in the
future it's a good idea it will never happen of course but in the future we will be able to
become immortal by having the contents of our brains uploaded digitally into the cloud
and the cloud is is in mom talk so that's where you go if you pay for the elite service
on the digital immortality scheme and sometimes the the digits digital representation goes
wonky at the end it's never quite clear but still it's the story according to which the man on the
left here dies in a traffic accident but his girlfriend is very rich and she pays for him to
become immortal through digital means now as I said this is nonsense that we will never achieve
digital immortality because the the conscious the machines are never conscious and in order to
continue to exist you would have to continue to exist in such a way that you are conscious
so you wouldn't want to be uploaded into the cloud and never have any experiences in fact that
would be an experience machine that you would be being uploaded into and so you wouldn't want to
be uploaded anyway because of all the reasons that we discussed earlier on when we dealt with
the experience machine of the simple down here on earth sort but now what is your life so we
see that it has to include a consciousness presumably it would have to include the memories
that you have I've heard of people who've maintained that it would have to include the other people
around you so the people that you can affect so you would have to at least have the consciousness
memory and other people around you whom you can affect in order to be worth your while to have
your brain uploaded into the cloud and perhaps another another better so this this says the same
thing but more more extensively another better challenge is the following supposing you're in
a really horrible traffic accident and this you still have consciousness you can't remember very
much and and your arms and legs are paralyzed so the surgeon bends down and looks in your eyes and
he says mr smith do you want us to save you or do you want us to bring your life to an end
and then the question would be how much of you would you want to survive before you would say
that you want to survive and so you would want again memory other people whom you can affect
consciousness but you would also want to be able to perform acts of will you'd also want to be able
to behave spontaneously and creatively and imaginatively if you couldn't do those things
you probably would say no i do not want to be saved you can harvest my organs
now so when we say that it has to be you that performs a free action then we we're understanding
you as being a combination of things like this and will spontaneity creativity imagination
in a way which can affect others will involve also physical actions it couldn't just be a matter of
exchanging digital messages electronically or maybe it could maybe we could do a mathematics in the
cloud um all right so we talked about the mountaineer who didn't really climb another
case would be the artist the rich uncle wants you to think that everybody likes your paintings
because you're an artist and so he buys them all behind your back and so you think that everyone
is buying your paintings no one would want to be that failed artist another example is the failed
student so again your uncle pays all your student friends and your teachers to give you full marks
and praise you all the time now a more interesting one is the failed mathematician
so let's suppose that you are a mathematician and you have proved
Thamma's last theorem took you 40 years then you die but there is a flaw in your theorem
did you lead a meaningful life
and any takers
no so I think that that you thought you did because you did experience the
the experience of proving the theorem finishing the proof and maybe even got applause from your
fellow mathematicians but I don't think you led a meaningful life because it wasn't a valid proof
well but it depends because if if if it were me and I'm a good mathematician and my effort
really is impressive and so on and then I die without finding out that I made a major mistake
but the thing is competent even even beautiful math then of course but it's not beautiful if
there's a mistake in it even if it looks beautiful we have fake beauty too well but there are
mistakes and there are mistakes if Leo Zeibert were to try to prove that theorem
and were to be convinced that he did that would not be beautiful at all but even a real
mathematician might do it and fail in my she might fail in ways that are meaningful and worthwhile
and so on yeah but that would be that would be a different kind of story where the theorem
does have interesting lessons for the future mathematician but this is just a case well
anyway I get I get your point I agree it's not quite a cut-and-dried case but still the point is
that all of these cases would be cases where there is a departure from the truth and the
meaningful life I think has to be maximally true in some sense and it shouldn't be based on a lie
I think we'd all agree on that it also shouldn't be based upon a falsehood and there is a falsehood
involved here which is that he proves the theorem he did not prove the theorem and that's a very
important difference precisely for mathematicians so if I could just just jump in for a clarification
then so when we're talking about like the failed artist or the failed student we're talking about
failed insofar as it appeared as though they were successful at their goals but in fact
they were not yeah and but but what about an actual failed artist somebody who dedicated their
life to art and just never were successful and their goal was to create not just art but to be
a successful artist is that mean so so there's no there's no deception it's all true but does
I'm just curious that does that mean that they didn't leave a meaningful life or they did my
intuition says that they did not leave a meaningful life they picked the wrong plan
they should have picked another plan wow now now the stakes are really high for
for leading a meaningful life okay thank you well but you described it as failure it was it
I guess I guess so now I'm thinking I mean all of this seems very intuitive to me I think that
you know like truth matters I think that's right um I now I'm wondering how much
does success matter I don't know success we we already saw that you could be successful
without anybody knowing about it for 1500 years so success in the sense of winning prizes and awards
and and praise and so forth does not matter so the the mathematician who really does prove
the theorem leads a meaningful life even if no one knows about it for 100 years
and I think we we I hope anyway that we all share that intuition
so success is not important failed success or fake success is something which may make people
think that someone is leading a meaningful life but they're not
I I have a question about a couple cases I'll start with one um what if I don't remember what
the name of this profession was but there are people who their their their professional goal
was to like catalog um like Shakespeare like how many times the word love appears in Shakespeare
spend lots of time so imagine you're you like do that your whole life and then
you're very good at it and then right after you die um google is able to do this like in seconds
yeah that's a that's a very good example unfortunately it's not a counter example to my
basic theory which I will unveil shortly okay cool um so that that that would not be a meaningful
life independently of google uh and I will I can explain why I believe okay can I ask you about my
second case um please please and I don't know these are counter examples these are just cases I
thought were interesting so um uh I think about two philosophers one philosopher is like really
trying to do something like what the mathematician is doing they're trying to give sound arguments
and discover the truth and prove the truth and then you have another philosopher who's maybe
the way Leo is thinking about the mathematician where they ultimately don't care their goal isn't
to necessarily make sound arguments they're trying to make interesting arguments that that can be
beautiful even if they're flawed um just like changing like what your goal is affect whether
you live a meaningful life in that way like it's just like by saying okay I'm not aiming for truth
I'm aiming for interesting or something like that can that actually that's a very interesting
example um so I think most of our philosophy colleagues are exactly as you describe them
let me let me um so I think I will take the mathematics and science is one thing that truth
matters in philosophy the there's something else which matters namely argumentative power
and the reason for that and I'm sure you're familiar with this thought experiment is that in
in philosophy we don't have any empirical tests for the truth or falsity of what given
philosopher claims and so what we do is we find hard arguments to try and beat down the
thesis of the philosopher that we're that we're considering and so having a witty or convincing
or beautiful arguments in philosophy is already a value it's already on the positive side and so
it contributes to the meaningfulness of a philosopher's life it would not contribute under
the conditions you described to the meaningfulness of a mathematician's life
okay thanks thank you that was a good one I'm going to write that one down too
all right uh so we talked about the failed art mountaineer and the failed artists now let's go
back to Beethoven so Beethoven had had a meaningful life let's just take that as as as accepted
let's suppose that Beethoven at the age of 42 decides to give up music and take up tennis
and let's suppose I don't know when did Beethoven die let's suppose he died at 47 so let's suppose
at the age of 46 and a half he gives up music and says to all his friends I'm going to play
tennis for the rest of my life I think we would say that even though he made exactly the same
amount of music in the two lives we would say that first life is more meaningful than the second
life he messed up the meaning by messing up the organic unity of a single life
and I think everyone will I hope everyone will agree with that now let's change it slightly let's
suppose that Beethoven gives up tennis at the gives up music at the age of 32 but then becomes a
world champion tennis player and invents a whole new ways of playing tennis for the remaining 15
years of his life then we would have we would have a problem in deciding how to give Beethoven's life
a meaningfulness score because both segments are meaningful in their own right but they don't seem
to fit together so that's just a dangling question I'm not expecting an answer to that the question
does throw light on sport as a way a channel or an avenue to achieve meaningfulness I the years
didn't work for Beethoven but for ordinary people who are good at sport they cease to be good rather
early on in their lives and so sport seems to be a bad recipe for achieving a meaningful life
and again I'm this is not the challenge question I'm not expecting any sort of response if you want
to respond then please do so the Beethoven and mathematics would be the same as the Beethoven
and successful tennis player but this time Beethoven at the age of 31 decides to become
the world's greatest mathematician and succeeds I find that we would find it much easier to give
Beethoven a high meaningfulness score on this scenario than on the Beethoven and championship
tennis scenario and so if someone disagrees with that then I would be happy to hear an argument
but probably I'm already way out on on the limb here the question we're addressing now is at the
bottom does meaningfulness imply a single life plan or can you lead a meaningful life by leading
two lives in series or even by leading two lives in parallel could you meet me fulfill
serious meaningfulness goals in multiples so that you're you're achieving two goals in the course of
your life um I this is these are just questions I I don't have any example answers myself I just
have the questions I still think however that there is a good idea behind the idea that we
should plan for maximal meaningfulness so a meaningful life is a planned life that's one
thesis which I'm defending that means when should you make your plan should you make your plan at
the earliest possible moment when you can make the maximally coherent plan to lead to the maximal
meaningfulness score so it shouldn't be too early it probably shouldn't be at the age of 13
but it probably shouldn't be after the age of 19 and then the question is what should you plan to
do what are the avenues in which you can maximize the meaningfulness of your life now Plato thought
that philosophers led maximally meaningful lives and that kings led maximally meaningful
life so the maximally maximally meaningful life would be a philosopher king but we don't have to
go all the way up into that extreme to find a meaningful life which is meaningful in the sense
that there's a very high meaningfulness score which extends over the whole life which is just
family life so your plan is to raise a family and this gives you a lifelong goal which is realized
in steps which involves difficulties it's not trivial and which goes on for all eternity
so this is the the princely I lived in Liechtenstein for a short time
and every year the prince of Liechtenstein organizes a national party in his the grounds
around his palace which is on the top right hand corner there and this family has a family contract
it's actually it's part of the law of Liechtenstein the family law of the Liechtenstein family which
which goes back to the 11th century and they have a plan which extends over a thousand years
or nearly a thousand years and which will extend much further if they keep going on as they are
and so this really is a route to having an exceedingly meaningful life this is the
the law of the princely house of Liechtenstein which is part of the law of the country called Liechtenstein
all right so when should you begin age 19 what should you do well some ideas we've we've gone
through two obvious ones but science and medicine we've sort of considered all the mathematics of
course artistic creativity music teachers lead meaningful lives which go on after their lives
so they have they affect others in very meaningful ways builders who build buildings or carpenters
who make chairs they all lead meaningful lives which again leave behind something which affects
people for the life here after so all of these are obvious avenues and I'm sure that there are
many more obvious avenues for maximal meaningfulness and now one of the reasons well we're living the
modern society is a society in which we measure many things we have clocks we can be punctual
so we can plan very strictly how we maximize the meaningfulness of our lives by using things
like clocks and calendars which is what we do we make an appointment to be on zoom at 4 30 on a
given day because we have clocks which enable us to do that and this this talk is contributing
in a small way to the meaningfulness of at least my life I hope all right now we can measure
then along various axes so we measure in family size family success measured in diplomas salary
promotions I have collecting air miles here which is one of the ways I do it and so forth all of
these are measures which we can use not because having a high salary implies that you have a
meaningful life but because having a meaningful life requires that you have some measure against
which to measure your small actions if you can't measure them then you they're not adding up to
anything so this is a rather key thesis now unless you have a life which comes in measured steps
which you can measure by an objective measure even if it's right only after your death you're not
leading a meaningful life so this is the basic statement there are one or two things missing
which I will fill in so in order to lead a meaningful life you need to have a plan it
should be possible that you realize that plan but it should not be too easy so the problem with the
collecting occurrences of words in Shakespeare plan is that it's too easy it has to be really hard
it has to be something which is difficult for you to realize but not impossible it has to be
associated with an objective metric or set of metrics and it has to be such that you're realizing
it already now but you're realizing it more or less continuously you're always realizing your plan
or you're doing things like eating which are necessary in order to be able to go back to the
realizing of your plan that's the idea and now we have some questions and then I'm finished this is
the pre-antipenultimate slide so we say objective metrics so what does objective mean so it could
be that you think I'm wasting my time here someone else might think I'm doing very well I might think
I'm doing very well but someone else might have a different measure so what does objective mean I
don't know the answer to that question does it have to yield value for others I don't know the
answer to that question either so I think probably proving a really difficult mathematical theorem
yields value for other mathematicians but it would still have value even if no other mathematicians
heard about it but again I'm not sure about the answer to that question and then finally
did Hitler lead a meaningful life so if we're not sure about yielding value I do have an answer
to this question but I'm not going to tell you what it is unless you insist so that's it that's the end
okay thank you um so I know we've been kind of just like people are asking questions when they
want usually we try to let the students ask uh some questions before um professors jump in so
any students want to jump in
if not I'll just make it a free for all
all right then um Marianna did you want to get in
um sure I I guess my question is it's not well formed so but I uh one point that you
you mentioned maybe a meaningful life requires only one plan um and I'm thinking okay what if
my plan is over like I had this plan I wanted to do x was hold the requirements that you mentioned
um does it mean that from that point on my life is not meaningful anymore does it mean that because
I satisfy my plan but I'm still living that makes the whole the thing before not meaningful
as in the case of Beethoven so that that's a good question I really I'm not happy about being in
the dark so let me try another lighting uh idea it's not very good but still better than the
dark it's gonna sort of finish uh and also kind of the what kind of normative implications that
is have like thinking about the working idea of Margot she had a plan for her life and and at one
point she getting dementia she that the state of dementia would kind of go would go against
the plan that she had for her life so it seems that they're um drawing draw some normative
implications out of that so I'm thinking and so I'm curious and interested in this idea of
you get to a point what happens yeah so I think I can answer the first question quite easily I
need more help from you for the second question so if you stop because you've fulfilled your plan
then you still get meaningfulness points as far as you got but then the the rest of your life is
you you should really find another plan in order to keep the score going that would be my response
so it's not a difficult question so I think the Beethoven tennis question is is a difficult one
because of the contrast between the meaningfulness that we are at crew that accrues to beta writing
music like Beethoven and the apparent meaning of meaninglessness of playing tennis although
I'm not sure that tennis is so meaningless it does it is beautiful sometimes and it's exciting
but now I don't I don't know what the more normative point was that Dworkin drew from the
margo case so can you tell me so um if I remember correctly um the idea was um I can't remember
how I put it but the idea with margo is that she had this sort of um or at least let's imagine a
sort of a margo situation in which she has led a certain kind of life a sort of type of type of
life that requires sort of rational engagement and and a certain level of autonomy as she develops
dementia um what kind of sort of the what should we how should we interpret that shift
and does it mean that for instance if she left sort of some guidelines on how to treat her okay
good good yeah okay so this is this is a difficult question I I have a student actually or he's
he's now a professor but his thesis is on uh precisely that sort of question so hospitals
have a duty of care which means that they should uh try to maximize the welfare of the patient
now what does it mean to maximize the welfare of the patient who is uh in a coma or who has
a Alzheimer's and he develops a theory about this which is sort of related to this theory that
whatever the patient can do you should make sure that the environment allows them to realize their
capability of doing that thing um that and that is sort of normative but so hospitals
typically do not take that attitude to their patients when they're beyond a certain state
a certain mental state they tend to getting dark again um but I don't have anything very
interesting to say I don't think this has normative implications except for those people who think
a that it's important to lead a meaningful life and b who are convinced by the kind of account
that I've been sketching here then it has a normative implication thank you
so I have um people can just raise their hands and I'll try Mike did I see that you had a hand
earlier did you want to go okay so I'll go next hi thank you very much for your talk um at the very
end you mentioned the possibility of you mentioned the question of whether doing good good to others
would be a criterion uh for living a meaningful life and I was wondering whether independently of
its whether it's necessary or not um if you think uh doing good to others could be a maybe a defeater
or a separate criterion that overrides the criteria criteria you mentioned so I'm envisioning a
situation where somebody doesn't have a plan uh but just spontaneously performs actions that have
enormous impact positive impact to others and it's not a forest gump kind of person
so they don't do it accidentally they do it on purpose but it just happens spontaneously
without any kind of premeditation or plan or project going into it and it seems to me very
counterintuitive to say that that person's life wouldn't be meaningful even though it doesn't
have this well-structured pattern that you see a meaningful life having so I'm just
wondering if you see your theory as allowing exceptions or other other considerations to
override the criteria so you'd rather took the the the the beef out of your question by saying it
wasn't a forest gump kind of case so as long as there was no forest gump case here as long in
otherwise they're choosing to help others over and over and over again then each one of those
steps does contribute to the meaningfulness of their lives um now that they would have according
to the approach that I've been defending a more meaningful life if they were doing this in uh
against the background of a longer term goal so let me let me try and describe the story so
you have the kind old lady of the village she wants she wants to sit at home and read the
newspaper and but every day she goes out and sees something where she can help someone
every day so every day she sees something and she helps somebody but it's always by accident
she doesn't have a plan to help anybody not even except insofar as when she sees the person who
needs to help then she creates a plan um so I would say that that person is not really leading a
meaningful life on the strength of what she does to help other people because in each case it's an
accident it's a kind of instinctive response to the case in hand and it's complete it's a very
far end of the of the poll from the mother to raise a kind where you have somebody who really
does devote her life to helping other people so I think it doesn't defeat uh what I'm saying
she does lead a meaningful life in bits and pieces but it's not adding up to a very high
meaningfulness score. Leo did you want to add on to that? Yeah because it was Joseph on my
best question I just thought uh Schindler in the Schindler list story so I mean the way I
remember it he certainly had no plan in fact his motives were not that admirable but he had a little
bit of decency and he saved many many many people so it seems to me that to take points away because
he didn't have a plan he had a list I mean not a list but the list that's the plan the list with
the plan. No the plan was to make money and uh but but but he also he was making money is a
meaningful activity. Well correct but we find I think we all find a lot of meaning in the fact
that he saved so many people and the the story is interesting towards because it wasn't Mother Teresa
it was not a particularly noble enterprise just he had enough humanity not to allow for innocent
people to be murdered and then he ended up helping them so I mean I just thought of it because of
my best question in the sense well here's someone I want to believe without a plan to save people that
wasn't how he ended sorry how he approached. So he was a he was a good businessman he was very well
organized he could save all of those people's lives because he had plans for doing all kinds of
things and he had a list which brought it all together I think he sees a very high meaningfulness
score case. So I have um sorry Maite did you want to respond at all I'm sorry. Um no it's okay but I
think um I'm trying to think of a if I I'm trying to see if I can think of a concrete example but I
think um if the action is high impacting off I mean it's a one-time action it doesn't even
happen repeatedly you do like what you have a one-time moment of glory where you do something
that affects humanity and it wasn't part of your plan I think I would uh you know if if that was
me at the end of my life I would feel like yeah that was a meaningful life. No actually I I I
think that you have a wrong intuition here uh so there are such one-off cases but we regard them
as being somehow miserable um I think and let me try and think of a one-off case. So one hit wonders
pop groups who just have one hit and then they disappear we think of them as being a sad
cases we because we like to think of people who lead lives and not just have one
really lucky hit and and and if we go back to Schindler if Schindler did really act in the way
that you described my day in other words he picked up a person at random in the street
but without thinking that he was going to do it again and again again then we wouldn't regard
his life as being so meaningful it was because he had a plan and he had a plan because he had a list
so you a what one
how can I express this if you have a pop group that has a list of 16 songs that they want to
turn into hits and the first one is a really big hit but all the others are failures then we would
say that that was a sad case it was a and that's how we deal with those those uh ex famous pop
singers yes but that's a different example but because that's a situation in which somebody
tried and failed at something so I tried to make all our hits and failed I'm thinking of a situation
in which I have my own life maybe I I just read books and watch movies and don't do anything of
note but one day I have a chance to save humanity I don't know what it would involve but I let's say
I get a chance to save humanity and it's just a matter of like doing something for one hour
and I do it I maybe take something that takes skill uh takes skill from me but it was not
premeditated okay good this is how to do let's say I decide to apply my philosophical skills
to solving some problem that will save humanity and I do it for just one hour and then I go home
and continue my life with just like reading books and watching movies
I think that would give you a pretty high score we could make a film about it we start with you
reading and eating and then and then one hour then you go back to reading and eating it makes a
nice story so you would get real points to that just doing it once is better than doing it by accident
a few times right but of course if you want to consider a counter example or
no because you're saving humanity and it takes an hour
but it wasn't premeditated there was no goal to do it
um you have to tell me more about how you saved humanity did you want to did you know that you
were doing it at the time give me a read read give me some flesh on these bones
I go out for a walk and somebody tells me if you write a paper about why humanity should be saved
and it's convincing enough no you're not convincing you're not convincing so I do that and it's
convincing and humanity is saved no no you have it has to be something we can make a really good
film about okay okay fair enough well but if sorry could I because it wasn't my this again
chris and I don't want to if you want to go ahead I'll come back after you go ahead no that I mean
take cases of people who are just by accident plays on on on contexts in which they do do
the people who overpower the terrorists on that flight 93 or whatever yeah they were probably
going to vegas to waste money or whatever but they ended up saving a bunch of people and they
didn't plan it there was certainly no premeditation and it happened and it is arguably the case that
they led short but meaningful lives even though there was no plan they did I mean we're stipulating
that it was a very good thing and so on and so forth so there are there are all sorts of heroic
acts lives that end heroically in ways that the heroes never planned and to deny that to take
because you're not forced to deny value to those lives but you are forced to say they are less
valuable than had there be a plan and that's I think there was a plan in the case of flight 96
there was a plan six of them were discussing in the back of the plane that they say look we know
enough now to know that we had to take over this plane and they realized their plan and it was a great
deed and also very meaningful and it was a plan they it wasn't an accident well but now the notion
of plan is shrinking to the point that it has to shrink for the short quick actions and I did
say that you maximize meaning by having a lifelong plan but you can get a big chunk of meaning when
you're saving the whole of humanity even for a short-term plan and that that that would indeed
did make a quite good film but I have two different questions I'll start with the first one because
I'm still not sure about the role of success in meaning in a meaningful life so I would I mean
one of the things that I'm thinking about is that some of what I would consider to be the most
meaningful lives are those of kind of activists who didn't mean to become activists hadn't planned
on becoming activists and then became activists and they had in a sense I don't know if I would
say impossible implausible goals at least for their own lifetime of you know think of like
civil rights activists my uncle were civil rights activists and they did a lot of they were successful
and a lot of incremental things like protests that that had the kind of effect they had hoped
but you know that wasn't just their goal their goal was for equal opportunity in the United States
for black people I mean that was the goal and I don't think when when they passed that they were
under any illusion that they had succeeded in that in that goal although they've had many
successes so and I don't know that like had their life been more meaningful if they had
like took the scope of their goal down and said well we're just gonna like these this is what we
want to do and if that's all we do then we have lived a meaningful life so I'm just I'm just not
I'm hesitant on this idea that success of the goal is is really important okay so
I think that I'm optimistic enough to think that we will one day be able to say that success was
achieved and that the civil rights movement was a crucial part of that success it's just like
Aristotle because it may take a long time and I don't so that the arguments that you're putting
forward to me now make me think that maybe I overemphasize the idea of meaningful life
and maybe I should insert into the argument the dimension of a meaningful action or a meaningful
phase in a life maybe an hour long so that would be one action and then the the civil
rights activists they spent weeks and months years in some cases I would imagine so having
those meaningful actions in in the life makes the life meaningful having more of those makes
it more meaningful and I think I don't think that that case is is is an argument against the kind
of view I was defending I just defended it and overemphasized the long-lastingness of the effort
and but I did say that you need even if you have a plan which is a lifelong plan
you still need to eat and and sleep that's because eating and sleeping are life necessities now
in a certain situation becoming a part of the civil rights movement would be
become a life's necessity for some people and so they would put their life plan on the
back burner and attend to the more urgent goals and thereby acquire a new plan which could become
a new life plan in some cases they would devote their lives to politics
I think that's helpful if I could just I just follow up on that
but even if I don't know let's say they had a shorter life and they weren't and they weren't
able to see any of their successes I guess I still feel like unlike with the one hit one and I mean
I'm not to to say that that musicians lives aren't very important to me but I'm just saying unlike
though and hit wonder it still seems like there's meaning in the goal and the action
towards that particular this these kinds of goals right and and that even when not successful
or if not successful there's meaning in doing the action there's okay good so I was rather
suggesting in fact I was quite explicitly suggesting that failure would take away from
meaning so let's consider your apparently reasonable counter example to that namely we have an activist
movement which is in and of itself doing something which is good but which fails to achieve its end
do the members of that movement lead meaningful lives in virtue of having engaged in a failed
activist movement off the top of my head I would say no it failed it was
it's a bit like trying to learn to ride a bicycle and failing you keep falling off
um
my intuition is is very different on that one but I was like to say go ahead Leo
no but I think that Barry's own basically infinite time frame negates this line because it could be
that they failed in their lifetime but they don't see that spice interest from then then they will
have succeeded therefore you cannot claim I know but remember we were we were taking it
as a presupposition of the argument that they failed buster they the in the future from any
point in time they were regarded as having failed so it was a flat earth movement or something
think black earth is activists but you that you clearly have to be open to the possibility
that they failed during their lifetime we already accepted that that clearly clearly the measure
may be such that it can only be applied posthumously I just want to like jump in though and say that
it's but the activists um for a movement like the civil rights activists wouldn't be engaging in
activity like the flat earth movement because there's truth and I mean in addition to the moral
element there's also a truth that they're pursuing right and that the fact that the rest of the
like the society hasn't come around to that truth even if they never come around to that truth
there is not only I think meaningfulness in the action towards something towards making the
world more moral but also towards truth and so and then so I just want to point out I don't think
that the the flat earth activists would have meaning in the same way not because of failure but
because they're not pursuing a true goal I mean let alone a moral goal if that I'm trying I'm trying
to think of an example that would be convincing for either of us which would involve both truth
and failure truth and high moral value and failure so let's take activists against Hitler in the
1930s in Germany so did the people who lost their lives in campaigning and marching and so forth
against Hitler in the 1930s lead meaningful lives they failed of course but I think we would say
they did lead meaningful lives because in the long run we realized that Hitler was a monster
and they saw it beforehand they were heroes so we there that would not count as failure it was
just a success but it took longer looking back they were doing the right thing they they led
meaningful lives because looking back we can see that they were doing the right thing where
flat earth is marching through Berlin we would never be in a position to look back and say that
they were doing the right thing so then that almost seems to suggest that what's doing the work here
is still truth and that success has has not as much to do with like getting everybody to see the
truth but just your success at doing something truthful and so therefore I mean it almost
then builds it in that if you are an activist in pursuit of a morally good you know goal
as if you've hit upon something that is true even if you're never successful in the
in achieving it you have succeeded in so far as you have reached the truth even if no one ever
so I think I think you've convinced me so we know that there were
not a lot of people but some people who just felt that they had to protest against what Hitler
was doing even though they knew that that would cause not only their own deaths but the deaths
of their family members in principle there were some people who did that and I think we we think
that they led meaningful lives and I think we have to do some possible world semantics now I
think we would still think that if even if Hitler had won and we were all now living in a Nazi
world we would still quay philosophers looking at this thing abstractly say that they led
meaningful lives because they stood up already then against the the consequences that we were
all now living under but we're not allowed to say it who knows who's listening thank you
other other thoughts can I I don't know Chris can I relate to the sorry if you guys hear me
yes yes good so um maybe this has been covered already but the case of Christopher Columbus
um so I would say intuitively he led a meaningful life he had a plan
he with multiple steps he went through them he thought he reached his plan
succeeded he didn't
but what he did it was still quite remarkable yeah because of what we know and he never
know never know and he did succeed in realizing many parts of his plan he did find lands to the
west of the Eurasian land mass the reason why we think it's meaningful really really meaningful
is because something because what was actually discovered something I didn't know I discovered
but yes but all the other things he did so there were many many obstacles which had to
over be overcome and he was the first to overcome many of those obstacles even just getting the
money for the for the expedition so it was the long plan a big plan and most of it succeeded
the the one thing which didn't quite succeed is that he got the continent wrong but that
wasn't his fault no I I guess I get it but if I can sort of Chris on a suggestion was that the
truth is what really should lead the intuition that but there is a lot of truth here that's the
point so 99 no that the fact that he didn't find India is not important the fact that he found a
continent to the west of the Eurasian land mass is what is important he just thought it was India
he found the continent. Yeah so his project he was con misconceived from from the start
it was a false project that happened to him. Only in only in one respect so in many respects he was
because he thought that you could navigate and find land by going west.
Yeah, yeah, sure, yeah.
And he was right.
Could I ask another question if there's no one else?
Go ahead.
So I mean, this emphasis on the plan, I think that part of the damage I wanted to cause
on your argument I have already caused because you are now basically a plan could last a
couple of seconds.
But I'll give a concrete example of one that is even shorter than the flight 93 or whatever
the flight was.
And this is on another plane.
I don't know if you remember, there was a shoe bomber.
Some guy wanted to blow up the plane on a shoe.
And I saw an interview on TV with some Dutch movie director who was on that plane and who
overpowered this guy.
And he was being interviewed on TV and treated like a hero.
And then the guy replied and said, what hero?
I'm on a plane and there's a guy sitting next to me lighting himself on fire.
I mean, the only thing any person would do is just to overpower him.
And in a way, I thought it was very humble of him, but also true.
And I don't want to, I hope I would have done the same, but it's very likely the case that
any of us would have just tried to prevent this guy from setting himself on fire on a
plane.
Now, you could, of course, play the game and say, well, that's the plan right there for
a, you know, but by now that's unrecognizable as a plan.
Okay.
No, no.
I think I'm still in good shape.
So if we agree that it's important to try and lead a meaningful life, that we should
not lead a life which might lead to suicide of the egoistic kind, then with, with the
next question is, well, how do I lead a meaningful life?
How do I guarantee?
How do I maximize the likelihood that I will lead a meaningful life?
Well, I have a plan early in my life.
I study, I go to university, I get all the skills I need by the land, I build the factory,
I invent the new kind of magic gizmo and lead a meaningful life.
Now that's what you can do by long-term planning, but then there are things that are going to
happen along the way.
You're going to run out of vegetables and you need to go to the grocer.
That's a short-term plan, realizing it doesn't, doesn't contribute anything to the meaningfulness
of your life.
But along the way to the grocer, you can save somebody's life and they, they leave you millions
of dollars in their will and then you can realize your factory much better.
And so you lead a more meaningful life because of a small plan that you made along the way.
Yeah, except that overpowering this guy is not buying groceries in the supermarket.
So even if we now think about it and the guy died just after he gave the, the guy who saved
the plane died immediately after the interview, we would say, okay, just, just on that basis
that he saved all these people that plane, he led a meaningful life.
Yeah.
So there, there is a way and I agree that I did not take account of this in the talk,
but there is a way in which you can win a meaningfulness jackpot.
So, but you shouldn't bet your life on winning the jackpot.
You should have a plan and then occasionally some people will win the jackpot.
And then there are the activists.
So I have another question if, and people should just jump in or raise your hands.
I don't want to, you know, like leave anybody out, but since I didn't see any hands, I'll
go ahead and ask my other question.
So as a preface it by saying, I like plans and I think plans are really great and meaningful.
However, like a little bit, I think the part that I'm like unsure about is that this idea
that if you figure out your plan at 19 and you stick with it and you go through, you
know, you live a nice long life and you're exercising and successful at this plan, that
it's going to be maximally meaningful.
And, and the reason I'm skeptical about that is Beethoven.
Beethoven.
Yeah.
No, I mean, Beethoven had, I think probably a very meaningful life and especially on that
measure, he would have a meaningful life, but I, I think I think that it leaves out
that there's something, I think there can be a lot of meaning derived and I'll try to
explain what I have in mind, meaning derived and not having that plan right off the bat
in all of these unexpected experiences that you have that may lead you to a plan or may
just, or just unexpected experiences, not part of the plan that I think inform, inform
kind of like the way that your life takes shape.
And I don't mean experiences like I got ice cream and that was really pleasurable and fun
and made me happy.
I'm talking about, there are experiences that have meaning that were not because of a plan.
And I'm thinking, and the reason this was, I'm thinking this is I'm going back to the
experience machine that you're talking about and my, and this is just intuition, but my
intuition that what would bother me about being in the machine isn't so much that the
things are happening to me and I'm just passive and it wasn't part of my own plan that I've
activated, but because I, in some real sense, I'm not experiencing like you pointed out
reality.
Right.
It's like, it's not true.
What's happening to me.
So I think that's the part that I'm just very skeptical that like the person who kind
of tripped through their early twenties trying to figure things out, didn't have a meaningful
life up to that point at all.
And it wasn't until they got into their thirties and found their plan and then took off, you
know, it's like, oh, too bad you didn't figure that out earlier.
That would have been more meaningful.
I just, I'm very skeptical about that.
Okay.
Um, we would have been nice if we had more symphonies from Beethoven.
Yeah.
Um, and is it you that was wasting that twenties and only found your plan when you were 30?
Is that what you were saying?
Um, probably my early twenties.
I found, I found philosophy earlier than my thirties.
Okay.
So, um, it would have been good if you had done more philosophy already from your early
twenties, wouldn't it?
I don't think so.
I really don't, because here's why, one of the reasons why the, what I bring to the,
my plan in now, I'm not even sure I have one, but what I bring to my plan and doing philosophy
right now, I think is greatly informed by all of the other kinds of things I did when
I was early.
I didn't think that those,
But you were lucky, you were lucky that your pre-planned life contributed positively to
your post-planned life.
That's fine.
We allow that.
But I also don't think, I mean, this isn't so much just a, because of my personal narrative.
I'm just thinking a lot of the, some of our greatest stories, right?
Are of these people who, um, didn't know what they were going to do, but were greatly informed
by, uh, kind of their pre-planned era.
So give me your best, I give you Beethoven for my, what's your best example?
That's a good, that's a good, like, give me a little bit.
I hadn't thought, I didn't come with handy examples.
So let me think about it.
But I think, but I know there are, because those are like the greats, you were just talking
about great stories, right?
Some of the great stories are how people trip into these life paths.
Yeah, but you should have one off the top of your head if that's so common and impressive.
Um, I would like Greg to ask a question.
He has one.
I have a good example.
Uh, Steve Jobs took a calligraphy class in college and then that like 10 years later.
So it helped him with like, okay, that's a good example.
But then by being in college, Steve Jobs was already following a plan.
So it's not, it's not such a good example.
It's part of a, a general plan to improve yourself by going to college and then you,
you get a job.
And if you're lucky, you can use what you learned in college to do your job better.
And if you're really lucky, you will have done those things in college,
which you will need in order to realize the plan that you, you take later.
So thank you for that example, Greg.
So, but then this leads me very to like a question, another question, I guess,
because the way you just answered Greg makes it sound like what's important is having a
plan, not necessarily a plan to revolutionize.
Okay, good, good.
This is another dimension, which actually I had, um, uh, we have written down.
So Barry and I did write some of this down a long time ago.
Um, plans mature.
So you start off with a very general plan.
I want to go to college.
I want to get educated and then I want to do philosophy.
I want to do logic.
In order to be able to compute, do computer programming better in this way.
And then I want to join this company because they will allow me to show them what my way of programming computers can do and so forth.
So you, this is the same plan, but it's getting more and more precise as time goes by.
Um, as, as, as you experience things from the outside, but also as the plan gets supplied in its next phase,
it's just that you can't know the details of the next phases at the beginning.
Uh, and a lot of it or some, some of it will depend on luck.
Um, happen, happen stunts.
By the same logic, can you argue that Beethoven, uh, Beethoven's first career and then him playing tennis,
like that was all one collective plan?
No, that, no, that's, that's the reason why that example is so intriguing because there's no.
There's no plan which could start with, I'm going to be a great composer and then I'm going to take up tennis.
That's why I chose that example.
I could probably find a better example, which is more historically reasonable, but, um, that would be an incoherent plan mix,
which would take away meaningfulness points from poor Beethoven's life, but he didn't do it.
Because he was not, he stuck it through to the end.
Can you define his meaning in like some greater overarching sense?
I mean, this sounds a little absurd, but like, you know, if to make music and then to play tennis,
neither of those were your true meanings and perhaps maybe something like, um, to, you know, one view I really like is, um,
to bear the greatest burden you can and, um, and do it with pride, like, uh, you know, just some other meaning.
Okay, then I will pursue that thought.
You give me a real world example of it.
So, um, what's his name?
Um, the sports, uh, um, he, he is sponsored by Nike all the time.
Yeah, um, Michael Jordan.
Michael Jordan, he's sweet.
Yeah.
So, but there was clearly some kind of a plan in those switches.
He wanted to prove things that were coherent.
Beethoven music to tennis would not be coherent in any sense.
And there's no audience that he would be proving to.
Leaving aside the fact that there was no tennis when Beethoven was alive.
Um, so Michael Jordan is a good example of the switching.
And I don't, I can't think of a good example of a radical switching like music to tennis.
There may be one, but I can't think of that.
I mean, I am roughly in agreement with, with what you're saying, but, but, but I don't get what exactly is incoherent in a full sense of, of tennis and music.
I mean, I, uh, again, in a rough sense, yeah, I get the point, but I mean, maybe someone would actually combine tennis and music in ways we never thought had much to recommend them and it would work.
I mean,
That's a bad argument.
That's like Wittgenstein's maybe there are people behind the mountain somewhere who measure the value of carpets by the height of the piles.
Okay, so I used to play squash and I used to play squash against a guy, a guy who was a stock broker.
And then he claimed that, that whatever was happening in the court between us was what he applied in the stock market. This is a true story of me.
I certainly never got any stock tips.
I buy that story.
But that's what he said. And you know, stock trading and playing squash seem to have zero in common.
And in this guy's mind, they combine and he made a lot of money and I mean, I have no idea what he was talking about.
But again, as I began by saying with this, I am roughly in agreement with you, but I still am troubled by the sense of incoherence.
Yeah.
So Beethoven might have played tennis on the side to keep himself fit for the music and your stock broker, he was playing tennis to keep himself fit for the stock broker.
It's perfectly coherent.
And fit to the stock broker meant also that he could think about possible good deals.
Yeah.
And maybe Beethoven on the tennis court was thinking about possible good symphonies.
I mean, this may be just a complete intuitive bias, but it does seem like
there's something meaningful and valuable about experiences that this kind of like you make a plan at 19 and then even if it evolves,
you've got this like tunnel vision of like this is what I'm going to do.
And you're really great at it and you're really successful and I don't, you know, it just kind of, you know, I don't say there's anything wrong with it.
It's just that the idea that that's the maximally meaningful life as opposed to one that has multiple experiences and considers multiple avenues of where their life's going to go.
I don't know.
I'm just, it doesn't Beethoven.
Yeah.
But I mean, look, I, okay, so I love his music, but I don't know that that is a maximum like the fact that it's maximally productive.
I mean, and I didn't think that's how we were thinking about this because if we're thinking of a maximally meaningful life is a maximally productive life.
Well, no, even Beethoven, we could say that that his deafness at the end added to the meaningfulness of his life and that was a handicap.
Right.
It makes his, his single minded obsession with realizing this one plan, which Mozart started at the age of eight or something.
That's what makes it life so meaningful.
The plan is there from the beginning to the end.
And if you, that's, it was the same with Steve Jobs.
It's the same with what's his name, the Tesla person, Elon Musk.
He's, I mean, Elon Musk realizes his plan in all directions, but he has a single minded plan and it's not just to get rich.
It's to show all these bastards that he can do things they thought was impossible.
We really have walked away though from like the connection to truth and things like that to like just a maximally meaningful life is one that is maximally impactful or maximally.
No, no, no, I still think that the idea of truth arises where we are dealing with, for instance, a fake Elon Musk who makes claims that are not held up or we're dealing with somebody who makes shoddy driverless cars.
Maybe he does that.
So the truth factor is still here.
So if you, even if you have all the razzmatazz in the world and everyone thinks you're successful, if it turns out that the gadget that you were supposed to have invented doesn't work or that it breaks after six months, it takes away all the meaningfulness.
You, you're back to square one.
One hit wonder, but this time without even one hit.
Well, thank you so much. I'm even more disappointed now that we're not in person and because I think this would have been a great dinner conversation to extend, but thank you.
I'm not allowed to have dinner that deviates from the plan.
