But that effect is the soul of the Aronoff-Bohm effect, which surprised the world in the late
fifties because it was discovered so late into the game.
It is the same sort of thing that's right.
Well, of course, like so many things, people point out that this Oscar Reutersfad, who's
a Swedish artist, had drawn things like this before.
I think round about the year I was born, he had a picture with cubes going around.
It wasn't exactly the same, but it was...
I think I've seen these floating.
Yes, the one with the cubes, yes.
And then he had versions with staircases too.
He never put any perspective in it, which seemed to me that was a...
Missed opportunity.
Yes.
In my triangle, I did put some perspective in it, so that slightly you can see it, but
you can do it with a perspective, and it still works.
So what I want to get at is, I think also that we have this very funny thing that happened
recently, starting from the early seventies, where we started mis-telling our own physics
history because of the needs of the community to look like we were succeeding when we weren't
or we were succeeding at something different than we were trying to succeed at.
And in part, one of the reasons that I want to use this podcast to discuss science is
to give alternate versions of what's happened, and I want to explore one or two of them with
you.
Now, you and I have a very funny relationship, which we don't really know each other, but
we were quite close to Michael Atiyah at various points.
And I was...
Well, we were graduate students together in the same group.
In the same year.
Absolutely, same year.
Yes, we're the same supervisor.
Incredible.
Yes, that's right.
And then you continued to cross-pollinate ideas through the years.
Yes, absolutely.
Now, for listeners who don't know, Michael Atiyah was one of the absolutely most dominant
and generative, I don't even know what to call him, like beyond genius, a seer of type.
And he had such a broad understanding of mathematics, it's partly...
And geometry, more generally, and analysis, it was just incredible.
And algebra.
I mean, he wrote a book on community of algebra.
Now, he had a partner for much of his career, Isidore Singer, who I was quite close to for
a period of time.
And is was, again, another one of these figures that if I'd never met one, I wouldn't know
that the human mind was capable of that level of repeated insight.
And they came up with something called the Atiyah Singer Index Theorem, which governs
worlds in which there are no time dimensions, but only space dimensions or no space dimensions
and only time dimensions.
But there's no...
Just equations without any differential equations.
Well, differential equations, if you think about differential equations as coming very
often in three main fields of study, elliptic hyperbolic and parabolic, then the idea is
that wave equations would be hyperbolic, the type that you're worried about in physics.
But things like soap films look like elliptic equations.
And Atiyah and Singer had this incredible insight into the nature of elliptic equations.
Do you...
Go ahead.
The Atiyah Singer Index, extremely general theorem, which covers, goes over all sorts
of different areas of mathematics and has applications.
Well, it sort of tells you that the knottedness of some beautiful space that you might be
exploring, like some kind of high-dimensional doughnut that's knotted many times around
itself, whatever you want, that that topological knottedness tells you something about the kinds
of waves that can dance on that space.
Yeah.
No, it's a very remarkable theorem, certainly.
Does that theorem in the so-called elliptic category, a world of space in no time, let's
say, relate strongly in your estimation to the most important hyperbolic equations that
govern the waves that make up our physical world due to the constraints of relativity
in a world with one time and three spatial dimensions?
Well, all I can say if I use the theorem, and it loose two different contexts, yes,
maybe more.
So, I mean, I'm not an expert in that area at all.
And it was mainly when I was trying to solve a particular problem, I don't know how much
detail you want to go into these things, it had to do with how to make Twister theory
work in curved spaces.
But I ran up into a question which had to do, it has to do with complex geometry.
So you've got geometry in which instead of using real numbers to use, you think of measuring
with ruler, say, and the ruler is one-dimensional.
The numbers go along one dimension, if you like.
And complex numbers, where you have the square root of minus one incorporated into the number
system, they're really two-dimensional.
So the geometry of complex numbers has twice as many as the real numbers.
But the geometry of complex numbers is particularly fascinating, or you might say the analysis
or whatever it is, it's particularly fascinating.
And when I learned about this when I was an undergraduate doing mathematics, and I thought
it was incredibly beautiful.
Because when you talk about real numbers, you can have a draw curve, which is a function.
So this curve has some shape.
And you might want to see, is it a smooth curve?
That means you have a tangent direction as you go around it.
Maybe it jumps, so it's not even continuous, or maybe it's smooth.
Or maybe you have to have a curvature of this curve, and you might not be smooth enough
to have curvature.
So if there's one degree of smoothness, or two degrees, or you can have three degrees
or four degrees, and they're all different, or an infinite number of degrees, or that
you can expand your function in the power series, they're all different.
And then when you learn about complex, you say, oh, now do it all over again, and you've
got your analysis, or an algebra if you like, or geometry, where it uses complex numbers.
And then suddenly you find that if it's smooth, everything comes with it.
You can differentiate as many times as you like.
You can expand as the power series, and I thought it was incredibly magic.
You just have to do it once.
Rather than there's all these different kinds of...
I should say that mathematicians...
Yes.
Quite often view the complex case, the case of complex numbers as the natural case, and
the case of real numbers as artificially tortured, which is a complete reversal from how most
engineers and physicists...
And you actually have been quite instrumental in making the case for the fundamentally complex
nature.
It's not just a convenience that we use complex numbers in physics, but that nature appears
to be essentially complex.
I think you see, by just hearing nature of complex analysis, and how beautiful it struck
me as being, and I had this sort of feeling, wouldn't it be wonderful if these numbers
were somehow the basis of way physical world operates?
I have no reason to think that.
And then I learned about quantum mechanics, and I was amazed to find, yeah, there they
are.
They're not just useful convenience.
You can use them to simplify ideas in mathematics.
You can, you know, might have an integral.
You would have to work awfully hard to get rid of them.
Yes.
But there are things you finally...
You're a little tricked to do it.
Now, these four of me come with contour integrals, and they drop out in an amazing way.
And I thought, well, that's a piece of magic, but it doesn't tell you anything about the
world.
It just tells you, this is a neat way of doing things.
And then I learned about quantum mechanics.
And suddenly these numbers are right there at the basis of the whole subject.
And I thought that was an amazing thing.
Maybe these complex numbers are really there at the root of everything.
I mean, I think you wanted to talk about twisters.
Well, that was...
Yeah, yes.
And maybe I can intro that and then try to fit that into this history that I'm claiming
we don't tell.
Now, one of the ways of describing what twister theory is, and of course, it's a bit of a
tall order for a podcast, is that you are replacing Einstein's space time with a...
A larger structure that in some sense implies space time, where you can take all the data
that roams around on space time, the waves, the force, the matter, what have you.
And you can, as mathematicians might say, pull it upstairs to this larger twister space
where you might have a couple of extra tricks up your sleeve because the extra space that
you've created to augment space time with has this kind of complex number aspect baked
into it.
Yes.
Well, it was something...
Just to go back for a moment.
Sure.
It was to explain the A.T.
a single term.
That's why it was useful.
I could come to that in a minute because it's a very interesting story, the way these things
sort of come together and take many, many years sometimes before they come together.
But I was really intrigued by these complex numbers.
And there is, well, something...
Let me tell you sort of the origin of the twister idea.
I was struck by the fact that, you see, people know that when things travel with a great
speed and according to Einstein's special relativity, they get sort of flattened in
the direction of motion.
Now this is a way of talking about it and you get this Lorentz contraction as it's called.
Now I was playing around with relativity and thinking about...
It was this two component spinners and thinking about the geometry of it worked.
And I realized if you think of the sky, you see, the sky is where you have vectors in
four dimensions.
Think of a vector as something which has a magnitude and a direction to it as well.
And in ordinary three space, you've got this idea of a vector which is quite common to
people know about.
But when you're in four dimensions, then you have space and time together.
But you have particular vectors which are called null and these are the ones along the
light cone.
So this is...
See, an ordinary vector might represent a velocity.
So you have a particle moving along with a certain speed and your four-dimensional vector
would point along the velocity or the momentum of that particle.
So weirdly, in the space-time metric of Einstein, these are vectors that are not zero, but if
you used Einstein's special rulers and protractors, what would the length of these vectors be?
The vector is zero.
So it's a really...
It's linguistically tricky to talk about these things because they're non-zero things that
would be measured to be of zero length if that concept of length was in fact extended
from your normal concept of length.
Yes, the idea that something of length zero means it's...
Two points, the distance between them is zero, you think of them right on top of each other.
Or if the distance is very, very small, they're pretty close to each other.
But in the kind of geometry, we'll call it Minkowski geometry because although it's describing
Einstein's special relativity, the geometry was not Einstein.
People often say, oh, Einstein introduced his four-dimensional space-time.
That's not true.
It was Minkowski.
And Einstein...
Einstein said that this is real and this is not just a sort of a weird artifact of the
description of various processes that we're being entertained.
Yes, but it's a kind of geometry.
And Minkowski showed that the space of special relativity is really four-dimensional and it's
this kind of geometry in which you can have distances which is zero, although the points
are sort of a long way away from each other.
And this represents a light ray.
You have one event, say, and a light through that event reaches another event.
When I say event, I mean not just a spatial position, but the time as well.
You mean a position in space-time.
In space-time.
So you need four coordinates, three space and one time coordinate.
So that's what we call an event.
And so you have a point or an event in space-time and imagine a particle moving the speed of
light to another such event.
Now the distance between those two in this kind of geometry that Minkowski introduced
is zero.
And Minkowski played around with different kinds of geometry and he realized that special
relativity is really best described by this kind of what we call Minkowski in geometry.
So you can have zero distances and yet the points are not on top of each other.
So your idea was to take all the points that are bizarrely zero distance away and then
make those the new points in a new space?
Well it wasn't quite that, I had to come up to this slowly because it took years.
But the initial idea isn't so hard to understand really.
You see if you look out at the sky, what do you see?
Well you're seeing light rays or you're seeing photons coming to your eye which have traveled
the speed of light.
So the world line in four dimensions of that photon is tilted over at what represents the
speed of light.
Now in this Minkowski geometry that distance, well it has a clear meaning so let me give
that.
Suppose the photon is emitted at one point, one event, and received at another event.
Now to that photon, the time between one and the other is zero.
And that time measure is exactly the distance measure in Minkowski geometry.
Suppose the particle was not traveling with speed of light.
Suppose it traveled with half the speed of light or some other speed.
Then its time, experience of time is exactly the distance according to Minkowski's geometry.
So you say if it traveled with very, very, very great speed, suppose you traveled to
a planet which is four light years away and you travel with, I won't do the calculation
right here but with half the speed of light, then you would, the experience that you would
of time you experience is less than the time that somebody here on earth would think that
it took you to get there.
So as you travel faster, your experience of the passage of time slows down in a sense.
You don't think it's as long.
And if you actually traveled with speed of light, that experience would be zero.
So this is the experience of the length of time.
If you had, well you could have a very, very good clock you carry with you and you see
how, how, how, how that-
The clock made of pure light, it all gets pretty, pretty heavy out here.
Well you don't make enough, you can imagine a clock, say a nuclear clock or something
and you're not traveling with the speed of light because you can't get to the speed
of light.
Well that's what, okay.
But the time measured by that nuclear clock would be the distance in Minkowski geometry.
I should point out just for our listeners that even people who do this field of differential
geometry morning, noon, and night in math departments almost never choose to work in
world with some temporal and some spatial dimension because it just, it breaks your head.
It's a very different, different intuition.
Very different intuition.
And when you go back and you think about the puzzles that people had when Einstein introduced
his special and then most particularly general relativity, they found it very puzzling.
You could see, look at the arguments people had.
Well we keep using these words like time and length and all of these things that have become,
we don't recognize that in that one innocent decision to break off one degree of freedom
and treat it differently.
That's right.
That all of our linguistic intuition goes out in the window.
You have to start all over again.
Yeah.
It was a curious experience I had because I was giving a series of lectures in Seattle.
These were the Bataille lectures given in what was the, I forget exactly what the dates
were.
Maybe it's around about 1970 or something like that.
And there was a collection of mathematicians and a collection of physicists.
John Wheeler and Cecile DeWitt had organized this.
It was a very interesting meeting where people from both areas of expertise were brought
together.
And at that time, it's hard to believe now, but at that time mathematicians and physicists
were barely talking to each other.
And they got me to give a series of lectures.
And I got...
This is before Jim Simons and C. N. Yang get together and...
Ah, there's a good question.
When was that?
I'm very poor.
That was 75, 76.
It was before that.
Yes, it must have been before that, is that right?
I think so.
Yes.
I really have to...
My memory of dates is not really clear.
I know you're hot on the trail of this, but just to leaven something in.
Roman Jacque at MIT once beautifully said, and I don't think you wrote it down, he said,
we used...
We didn't understand the partnership that was possible between mathematics and physics
because we, the physicists, used to talk to the analysts.
And he said, the analysts either told us things that were absolutely trivial and irrelevant
or things that we already understood.
Yes, I know what you mean.
Yes.
He said, when we talked to the geometers, we started to learn new things that we'd never
considered.
Yes.
Well, there was very much cross-fertilization there.
But I was going to say, I gave these lectures, I think it was 12 lectures, and I wasted my
time on some things that weren't going to...
Until I left myself only three lectures to describe the singularities, the black hole
idea, which wasn't...
The term black hole wasn't used just then, but the collapse.
You just called the Schwartzschild singularity?
Yes.
Well, it was called the singularity when it...
That was the thing.
People called it the Schwartzschild singularity.
It's what we now call a horizon.
And I remember in my third lecture from the end, describing the basically what we call
a black hole.
I was talking about the Schwartzschild singularity.
And I was explaining that it was basically to do with the zero-length business.
And Steenrod was a very distinguished mathematician.
From Princeton, Norman Steenrod.
Yeah.
And he'd written this book on five bundles, which is absolutely...
Impenetrable.
Well, impenetrable, but also fundamental to the subject.
Yes, but it's so impenetrable that I never got to the point of being...
But anyway, he was there at the back of the room.
And I remember telling him about it.
And he was absolutely dumbfounded.
Now, you see, here's somebody who's a real expert at this kind of geometry, Riemannian
geometry or whatever you call it, where you have the notion of when the distances are
small, then the points are close together.
And here you have this other kind of geometry.
And the intuition you need for that geometry was completely foreign.
That's the point you were just making.
Well, because we do have this weird way of talking about something that sounds like
this.
We might call it like non-Hausdorff topology, but it is a Hausdorff topology.
Yes, this is a Hausdorff topology.
So the problem is, is it's pulling apart two different notions of the word close.
That's right, exactly.
Because you think of close means a small distance.
Right.
A little tiny ball, where the distance from that point is small.
Mathematics makes you pay for every attempt to sort of intuitively encode something that
isn't precise.
