So with Rupak, this is how I feel it.
I go...
Tick-a-boom, tick-a-boom, tick-a-tack,
tick-a-tick-a-boom, tick-a-boom, tick-a-tack.
Hey everyone, Sarah Thower here at Drumeo once again.
I'm here to teach you the tala called Rupak.
It's one of my favorite talas to play.
It's a cycle, a rhythmic cycle in seven.
And that's what tala means, tala or tal,
is known as a rhythmic cycle.
There are so many amazing rhythmic cycles,
but today we're just gonna tackle one of the many,
which is Rupak.
And this one is from the North Indian
Hindustani classical system.
The cool thing about talas and growing up
playing a lot of tabla is that you learn
how to feel odd time signatures very differently.
So for the Rupak, it's divided in three, two, two.
One, two, three, one, two, one, two, one, two, three,
one, two, one, two.
And you know, usually I'm so used to hitting the beat one
and being like one, two, three, one, two, three, four,
one, two, three, one, two, three, four.
But the cool thing about this one is that on the one,
there is no accent.
So what it is, it's one, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
Now we're getting into something else.
This is a concept called bari,
which means heavy or accent.
And kali, which means empty.
Hey everyone, so before we dive in,
I just wanted to let you know that Sarah actually
has two incredible courses inside of Drumeo,
where she dives way deeper into Indian rhythms
and talks about how she turns them into different grooves
that she uses on the drum kit.
So you can check those out by clicking the link
right below this video.
And right now, let's get into the lesson.
So one, two, three starts off with a kali
and then it goes into the bari, bari.
So one, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
So one, two, three is the kali,
one, two, three, four is where we're gonna clap.
Now this concept of bari and kali,
I love taking it onto the drum kit.
When I'm soloing, when I'm playing a bunch of grooves,
you know, playing odd time signatures
or different time signatures,
I don't like thinking one, two, three, one, two, three,
four, one, two, three, four.
It's like so anxiety provoking
and I can't really feel the music.
So with this concept of bari and kali,
it helps me kind of think of the accents and the open spots.
So with Rupak, this is how I feel it.
I go,
tic, tic, tic, boom, tic, boom, tic, tic, tic, tic,
tic, tic, tic, tic, boom, tic, tic, tic, tic, tic,
tic, tic, tic, tic, tic, tic, tic, tic, boom, tic, boom.
Such a great way to feel it.
Now we're gonna talk about how we can understand
the syllables of this thala.
Each thala has syllables
and these syllables come from
the North Indian classical percussion instrument, the tabla.
So the bowls, which is the notation,
is thin, thin, na, which is one, two, three,
thin, thin, na,
thin, na, thin, na.
So if we can visualize a tabla,
it's two drums, you have a high and you have a low.
When you're saying thin,
that literally just means the right hand,
the high pitched frequency.
When you're saying thin,
you're adding the bass of the tabla.
So we're gonna go thin, thin, na,
thin, na, thin, na,
thin, thin, na, thin, na, thin, na.
Now, why don't we take it to the kit?
So I love bringing percussion-based music
onto the drum kit,
especially because there are no rules.
So taking the Rupak, okay, we have the Kali,
thin, thin, na.
All right, so if I'm looking at the drum kit,
high frequency, you know, you got the cross stick,
snare, hi-hat, I love going thin, thin, na,
or thin, thin, na, or thin, thin, na.
So many options.
Now, when I go to thin, na, thin, na,
what low-frequency do we have here?
We have the kick.
All right, so I think we kind of got the groove, right?
Let's see here.
Thin, thin, na, thin, na, thin, na,
thin, thing, na, thin, na, thin, na,
thin, thin, na, thin, na, thin, na,
thin, thin, na, thin, na, thin, na.
Thin!
Thin!
Thin, thin, thin!
Okay, I'm just getting so ahead of myself, I'm supposed to be teaching and I've already
started playing.
Anyway, there's two things that I want to try with you.
I want to have some fun to really get the feeling of this thala, aside from understanding
it with our mind.
I really want us to grasp the feeling of this thala.
So two things that I want to try out with you, I would love for you to help me keep
time so I don't get lost.
And I would love to play some grooves and do some soloing.
In this music and in this tradition, there's somebody keeping time, keeping the thala,
keeping you on point and the thabla player and the percussionists are soloing, playing
grooves, trading, it's so beautiful.
So I want to try this and then I also want to try something else, where I like to practice
myself to make sure that I am in check of where my one is and where the time is.
So what I like to do is I kind of like to speak and fill in, speak and fill in and challenge
myself.
Am I aware of where the down beat is or technically the upbeat since it is the kali.
We're going to load up this incredible thabla loop and let me walk you through it.
Hit it guys.
Okay.
So listen very carefully.
There's a sound of a bell.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
Another component to listen for.
Hear the bass.
Kali, bhari, bhari, kali, bhari, bhari, tin, tinna, dinna, dinna, tin, tinna, dinna, dinna.
So I'll need your help to clap along while I take a solo, play some notes.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
All right.
I'll need you to join along.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
So this next exercise is so much fun for me, and I think it's going to be for you too.
We're going to have a click on, and we're going to have the accents on the one.
One, two, three, one, two, one, two.
So one, two, three, four, five, six, seven.
And I'm going to be trading with myself and really keeping myself accountable to the click.
We're going to have the click on as a reference, so when I listen back, I can hear if I'm on time or not.
And so you guys can get used to the feeling of this Rupakthal.
All right, let's hit it.
Let's hit it.
Dina, dina, dina, dina, dina, dina, dina, dina.
Dina, dina, dina, dina, dina, dina, dina.
Dina, dina.
Dina, dina, dina, dina, dina, dina, dina.
So my friends, that is the Rupakthal.
Let me know what you think in the comments if you enjoy this, and please try it at home.
You know what I like to do as a side note is I like to walk around and I like to go one, two, three, four, five, six, seven.
And if you enjoy the loop that I play to, please click on the link in the description box to check it out.
So I hope you enjoyed that video from Sarah.
And if you're looking for some other videos just like this one, she actually did another one with us called Exploring Indian Rhythms on the Drums.
So if you want to check that out, it's right here on the Drumeo YouTube channel.
Go check it out.
Thanks for watching.
