Oh! Here we go. I'm just goofing. New merch goofing.
What is up, guys? I am so excited to be here today for this video.
One of my favorite things to do with my friends is watch terrible movies.
Not stuff like Justice League, but the so good it's bad movies like The Room, Troll 2, Miami Connection,
Other ones I can't think of right now because I don't plan my videos enough.
When I was starting out college, my friend Paul, my brother and I would watch these bad movies and make fun of them while having a couple of beers.
We had kind of a marathon for about a year where we found every single bad movie we could watch.
And then the following years were kind of disappointing because we would hang out again and we would want one of those bad movies to watch and we couldn't find one.
But when I went back home for Christmas break, we found a new one.
It's called The Peanut Butter Solution and it's a kids movie with ghosts and other things.
I think giving any context would ruin the experience because I watched it without it.
Really quick before that, I do want to say I have new merch. It's all the Yikes meme stuff.
We got like an embroidered one with hats. I haven't launched merch in like a year.
So if you want to support me, this is a fantastic way to do it.
It's like kind of the best way to do it and you get something out of it.
But you know what merch is because you're watching YouTube videos. So I shouldn't explain that. Let's watch the movie.
That's my sister, Susan Allison Baskin. The wretch.
See the blue rope she's wearing? Looks too big, eh?
Well, it's mom's and she's gone away. She's wearing it because she knows it really, really bugs me.
I told her she said I could.
Did she just respond to the voiceover? If we look back, she's not moving his mouth when the voiceover is happening.
She just responds to that voiceover like he spoke to her and there's no reaction.
So this isn't canon in the movie, but I'm making it canon. She can read minds and everyone's cool with it.
So as long as we got that out of the way, right off the bat.
But why? It's too big for you anyway.
I'm sorry, but there's nothing I can do about it. I can play.
I don't want any of that. God.
Just so you know, the mom didn't die. She's away on a trip.
And while she's gone, her daughter's like, I'll just wear mom's clothes and be mom now.
What? So Michael refuses to eat the breakfast she made because he doesn't want to accept that his sister is his new mom now.
And she storms away to go talk to their dad, who is an amazing character.
I can't stand him. Do you hear? I can't stand him. Everything I do is wrong.
The food, the money, the dishes. Dad, are you listening to me?
Yeah. Yeah. I hear you, Suze. I am just too tired for all your squabbling today. I have been up all night.
Dude, your daughter is taking care of your son and you don't have time to listen to her complain about it.
As you'll find out, he's just painting upstairs. That's all he's doing.
So Michael's friend arrives to, I guess, pick him up for school so they can walk together and also steal breakfast from the family.
But he's also there to talk about how there was a fire at a home in the neighborhood.
Fire last night, dad. Yeah, it was fabulous. I started about midnight. Half the neighborhood was there, but I got the closest.
I suffocated from the smoke, coughing like this.
Boy, those flames. You should have seen them.
So he definitely burned the house down. I know, you know, there should be a trial and everything, innocent until proven guilty,
but he's definitely guilty he burned that fucking house down. I know it.
Old spooky house next door. You know, the one that Wino's been sleeping in all winter.
What's wrong with you?
So when his friend mentions that it's the house that Wino's were sneaking into all winter, Michael has like a weird, horrible flashback to giving this homeless dude some money.
And he says like, it's funny how little things can change your life.
Funny how little things you do can change your whole life.
This doesn't affect his life at all. The choice he makes later has literally nothing to do with him giving this homeless dude money.
So I need you guys to prepare yourself for the character named the Senor.
He is, um, how do I put this? A fucking maniac.
Look at him. Look at the way he sits. Look at the muscles replaying under the skin. That's anatomy. Every great artist knows anatomy.
I'm sorry. Did you say muscles rippling under his skin? It's a dog, dude.
Maybe a pit bull or something like that or a kangaroo. You know what you should have gotten a kangaroo.
Have you ever seen one of those fucking things? I'll put up a picture here.
You know what? This is still body.
Silence you! Look at him!
That's a pig. He's not a dog. Start again.
Okay. First, don't grab her like that, dude. Please do not do that.
It's a pig. It is not a dog.
Where do you see pig in this picture? Where did you get pig out of this?
Okay. What? You looked at that last picture. Here's the dog. Here's that last picture.
When he sees this piece of shit and he's like caressing his hair telling him how good this is, you got to be blunt with this kid.
That's a piece of shit. He needs to drop out of art class.
Look at him. Don't use imagination.
Oh, beautiful. Beautiful, Jennifer. Fantastic.
I don't like it. I don't like it. Stop touching the kids, dude. Stop grabbing their shoulders.
Give them critiques with your hands behind your head.
So this movie is long. We're going to have to move fast through a lot of parts.
The rest of this scene, he starts ripping up art and then Michael's friend says,
If you do that, senior, I will never come to your class again. And I swear it.
And that's not how being a student works. You can't just say, I won't come back to class again.
And he rips up his art. So that's that scene.
Okay, Arthur. Come on up.
Rise, he said.
Now here is one of my favorite scenes in the movie, just for a specific reason.
This guy wants to sell the dad's paintings and he goes to the attic to see what he has been working on.
Relaxing Bert.
Well dressed Bert.
Well dressed Bert?
Show it to me again.
Music
The Oscar goes to...
Well dressed Bert.
Music
I'm so sorry. I've never had a reaction to art like that before.
If anyone can make their own Well Dressed Bert, so I can maybe make a print of it. That was, wow.
Let's see how much money he will get as an offer for Well Dressed Bert.
What's I'm using?
It's But Empty.
I'm using But Empty?
I'm using But Empty?
It's a Well Dressed Bert, asshole.
Birds don't dress up, especially not in a good manner.
Let me see. Have you ever seen a fucking Bert wearing his shirt?
You've never seen something. You're not ready for Well Dressed Bert.
He just doesn't get it. He doesn't...
We'll move past it. Michael and his friend go to the burnt down house for some reason,
because Michael has this draw to it, and I don't know why, because he gave a homeless dude money,
and I guess that guy's dead, so he has to see his body.
Come on, Mike, please. Don't be so stupid.
Look, I'm sorry I suggested it, okay?
Then Michael sees something that makes him go full marve from home alone.
And it just fucking shoots him out of the building down a slide.
Mike! Speak to me!
His friend brings him back to his family home,
because Michael's now unconscious from being scared so bad,
and also maybe electrocuted, I don't know.
I found the hospital. Dr. Zomek has called us home.
Great, the kid could be dying for all they care.
Am I dying?
No, you look pretty much alive to me, kiddo.
Don't in front of your sick kid be like, he could be dying. Am I dying?
No, no, you fucking said it right in front of him, dude.
So they put Michael to sleep, and he comes down the next day, like this.
And strap in, because this movie's gonna get way weirder.
Hi, Connie. Do we have soccer today?
Michael, where's your hair?
What's wrong with my hair?
You don't have any.
But dad-
Shut up, Zeus.
It's the cat. It's that damn cat I'm gonna ring its neck.
No, dad, no, not the cat!
It's the cat? What?
What do you think the cat did fucking shaved his head overnight?
Or you think that, what, he's allergic to the cat so he lost his hair?
So you're gonna ring its neck? What the fuck, dude?
What are you doing?
Michael is not alarmed about being bald for like two straight minutes until he looks in the toaster.
And then he's like, oh shit, three people telling me I'm bald is now true that I see it.
I'm bald.
So they go to the doctor, and there's not much to say other than the doctor's explanation for his hair leaving.
He says it's called-
The proper medical term is harem scarm.
Hair of what?
Scarm, yeah. Let me show you what I mean.
And here's his explanation.
Well, this desk was scarm, okay?
Okay, now, on the harem. Sorry, there's a rock.
Now Michael, give me a good fright.
Faggot!
With the females.
One moment, there, there, there, holding on, hanging on to the dance.
Along came a fight on Pim, the bar.
So he's saying that your hair has a tight grip on your head.
If you get scared real bad, it just lets go and you go bald.
I know you can lose hair from stress or anxiety,
but not like boo and then you're Vin Diesel immediately.
That is not a thing.
Also, I don't see any other wacky sound effects in this movie,
but when the doctor moves his fingers, makes a weird like bone noise,
and I hate it a lot.
In the next scene, the senior yanks Michael's friend into his office,
which I guess is like a supply closet.
And to paraphrase here, the senior is like,
Michael's hair is fucking weird, where'd it go?
And his friend just lies and says he doesn't know what he's talking about.
So you don't know that there is something very funny about his problem?
No sir, no problem sir.
But Michael's bald.
I'm bald.
So that's a weird lie to tell.
Constable then calls the senior into her office,
and apparently he's been faking his identity the whole time?
I found out that you've been thrown out of two schools,
that you've faked famous paintings,
and that you've changed your name and appearance four times.
And doesn't call the police because he's been working with children?
She just fires him and is like,
alright, go back to your house in this community.
So that's um, dumb.
That's a dumb thing to do.
So then they decide to sneak attack Michael with a wig.
Okay, quick, slip it on, slip it on.
No, I don't want a wig!
Come on, Mike, it's for your own good.
Quick, slip it on.
Mike, listen to me, listen to me for just a minute.
No, it's fake!
It's for your own good we're doing this, you silly kid.
Do you want to stay in the house for the rest of your life?
Hold still for one minute and let her slip it on.
Just for a second.
If you don't like it, we'll take it right off again.
When they're about to show him the wig in the mirror, he looks like this.
So I'm glad they adjusted the hair for the shot of him looking,
because that would be horrifying.
Michael is really worried that the wig is going to fall off his head,
so they decide to glue it to him.
And the only reason I mention that is because the next scene when you see it,
it would be alarming if you didn't know there was glue.
So Michael's happy with his wig,
and he goes back to playing soccer.
But a bully like trips him.
Rips him.
And then rips the wig off.
And you know how kids are, when you see a bald kid,
you immediately stop your soccer game and chase him through the neighborhood.
Then the next scene is actually kind of unsettling.
Michael hears a noise in his kitchen,
and when he goes there, there's two homeless old people in the dark,
just like going through the cabinets.
Hi there, young baldie.
Hi.
Don't you remember me?
Michael's like pretty unfazed, but they happen to be the ghosts
from the house that burnt down,
one of which he gave money to when they were on the street.
In being really creepy old ghosts.
They obviously, you guys know this movie trope,
give him ingredients to grow his hair back,
and it's like a bunch of mud and shit.
One really ripe banana?
Come on, say it.
One really ripe banana.
One really ripe banana.
Put it on my head.
You have to say put it on my head after each thing.
You ain't very bright, are you?
It's so bizarre, because he has to like repeat what she's saying,
and then say put it on my head.
And it's like, weren't these just regular homeless people
that died in a fire?
Why do they have like ingredients to grow your hair back
if you get scared?
Why would that be one of your belongings?
I carry, I just carry that around.
I just have Rogaine ingredients in case I die in a fire
and scare a child's hair off.
It doesn't make sense.
None of this makes any sense.
Michael just gathers a bunch of gross shit
and mixes it up in a jar, puts it on his head,
and goes to sleep.
Michael goes to the shower.
He takes the stuff off.
He looks in the mirror.
Oh no, still bald.
But a couple of minutes later,
something different happens.
You've got some little baby bristles.
You sure it's not guck?
No, it's hair.
Michael's got hair.
All right, Mike.
All right, this is it, buddy.
So if you're watching through this scene normally,
you see every shot,
and for a second you're like,
is Michael's hair getting longer in each shot?
And at first, my brother, Paul, and I were like,
what a bad movie.
The kid's hair is growing back
and they had to do reshoots,
and they didn't time them correctly.
But no, this movie's not as bad as you thought.
It's supposed to happen like that.
It's the one thing that kind of makes sense in this movie.
Oh, wow.
Look at this.
So here's where this movie
genuinely starts to go off the fucking rails.
Michael is in class,
and no joke, his hair is growing
in math class,
but his teacher is getting mad about it.
But Mr. Jinguist, it's moving.
But it's alive, sir.
It's not moving.
It's just too long.
It was short this morning, sir.
Nonsense.
What kind of a dodo do you take me for?
It's not fucking growing.
I've looked at it for two seconds.
So as you just saw, Michael says it was short this morning,
and he was in class bald yesterday.
And the math teacher is like,
what do you think of some kind of fucking idiot, Michael?
You were here in my class
bald yesterday, and now it's long.
You expect me to believe that your hair grew fast?
What are you trying to pull, Michael?
The next day in class, Michael gives this
speech about education
for no reason.
The scene doesn't matter at all.
But now my hair won't stop.
My only chance is for this guy to keep on cutting.
Please let me stay.
I want to be educated.
A tip to Michael's friend,
if hair is growing fast,
don't cut it at the tips.
Cut it at the top.
Why is he just like trimming it?
Fucking shave your head every morning, Michael.
I've had three teachers
tell me today they'll resign
if you go back in their classes.
So finish your class
and then you better go home.
So the principal is just like,
yeah, the teachers are threatening
to resign
because your hair is too long, Michael.
So...
leave school?
That's not how schools work with kids.
They're not like, oh, this kid has a problem.
So the teachers will quit
if you don't stop coming here.
And you, Connie,
I think you've got a problem too.
Holy shit.
Why? Where's that hair coming from?
Where's that hair coming from?
This is a children's movie.
Is it his knees?
Is the hair coming from his knees?
So then it shows his friend at night
and I guess it's coming from his thighs.
When did that happen?
I don't know.
And then we see how Michael has been sleeping
with his hair.
What? What?
What? How is that more comfortable
than just laying down?
Where are you going?
To school?
You can't go to school, Mike. They've phoned.
They don't want you there.
Come back.
No! Your hair is trailing on the ground!
So when Michael's trying to walk to school,
his dad's like, they just told you
not to come back to school.
And then like a lot of wind hits
when Michael's trying to walk
and he like blows over and I guess passes out
and a mysterious figure.
It's the fucking senior, obviously.
Because that's where we're at now.
So Michael's gone
and the sister and the friend go to look for him
and they're in an art store
and they see this.
That's so weird
for so many different reasons.
So I says, what do I call you?
He says, call me senior.
The senior!
Okay, here's the third
and I believe final time I'm gonna say
this movie's about to go
off the rails again.
They tail the senior
to a sweatshop
where kids are making brushes
out of Michael's hair.
Why, you might ask,
why would someone do that?
Because Michael's hair has
magic paintbrush powers.
The hair can paint magic paintings.
That's real. That's a real fucking thing
and I want you to know that.
Also, the kids in the sweatshop
are the kids from school.
Everybody in the neighborhood is now in a sweatshop
and nobody noticed.
So one of the kids brings them to the magic paintings
that are made with Michael's magic
hair brushes.
What the fuck?
What a weird example
for real places.
He never paints a real place
you know, like a town
or a road
or street or anything like that.
What the fuck?
What a weird example for real places.
He never paints a real place
you know, like a town
or a road or a street.
You can paint a town or a road or a street
and they can be fictional.
You can paint your school
or like your house
and I know it feels like I'm moving fast
through the ending of this movie
because it sounds like the most exciting part.
It's not. Michael's friend like rebels
and it's really not that interesting at all.
It's just like a weird
prison breakout thing.
Children, I have been asked
to demonstrate the art
of magic painting
which is to do something
that I never seen
before.
Michael's friend wants the senior
to demonstrate the magical paintings
and he tricks him into painting
the house that scared Michael
like the senior knows that immediately
and what follows is the weirdest fucking scene
I've ever seen in any movie.
It's this insane
Willy Wonka fun
painting scene
as the kids cheer him on
and he's enjoying it
but the kids are really tricking him.
I thought he was the villain
but he's enjoying
like this childhood joy
of his art.
So is he a villain after all?
Yeah!
He kidnapped a kid
and is stealing his hair.
Why did you think he would be a hero?
So the senior gets scared
from going in the painting
and seeing exactly what Michael saw.
The sister comes in, wakes up Michael
and he goes back in the painting
to tell the homeless people
he's not scared of them anymore.
Anyway, you don't frighten me anymore.
That's for sure.
And they're kind of like, oh you passed the test.
You're a brave boy.
You'll go far.
You were bald to make you
not scared of ghosts.
Was that the lesson this whole time?
The kids escape
and Michael goes home
and then his mom's there.
I could go scene by scene for the ending
but it really just wraps up nicely
and like that's it.
So, bye!
Derek, Amiko,
Carrie, Business, Vulture, Liz,
Bernard, Josie,
Sophia, Damien, Allie,
Gabriella, Julia, Dom,
Child of Burbank, Kenzie,
Casey, Lindsay, Aurora, Danny,
Kimberly, Diana, Colleen,
Adam, Goldbrusky's,
Megan, Rhys, Luke, Amanda, Kyle,
Nietzsche, Bonn, Brian,
Ashley, Jasmine,
Slashmaster, Dave and Janet, Matthew.
Thank you guys so much.
Thank you.
