Tradition, Poetry, Sensitivity, Sharing
Open sidebar
Tradition, Poetry, Sensitivity, Sharing
See if you can extract the English, and make it more idiomatic: y
and to

retener la palabra es decir construir
retain the word, that is, to build

mundos es construir mundos imaginarios
worlds, is to build imaginary worlds

con la palabra ya sea en la poesía en la
with the word, whether in poetry in

vida
life

o en la manera cotidiana de ver así que
or in the daily way of seeing, so

la poesía tiene relación con la palabra
that poetry is related to the word

y la palabra
and the word is

un acercamiento a los mundos imaginarios
an approach to the imaginary worlds

por lo tanto en realidad en realidad
for what  both in reality in reality

cercanía y el lejanía las dos cosas
closeness and distance both

están implícitas
are implicit

y la educación literaria es también
and literary education is also

acercarse a los mundos imaginarios que
approaching the imaginary worlds that

todos tenemos
we all have

trasladados a una palabra escrita pero
transferred to a written word but it

puede ser también a una palabra oral y
can also be to an oral word and

la educación literaria en mi entender no
literary education in my opinion

es nada más que educar la sensibilidad
is not  nothing more than educating the sensitivity

de los sentimientos y los afectos de los
of the feelings and affections from

que todos necesitamos estar protegidos
which we all need to be protected,

amparados y compartidos y entonces la
protected and shared and then

literatura puede establecer esa relación
literature can establish that relationship

con los afectos y también con la
with the affections and also with the

imaginación de cada uno y de todos
imagination of each and everyone

y la tradición oral es aquello que en un
and the oral tradition is that  that at one

momento estaba vivo en una comunidad y
point I was alive in a community and

la comunidad formaba
the community

hacía un hilo común y eso estaba muy
formed a common thread and that was very

unido a ritos y creencias y un mundo
close to ri  coughs and beliefs and a

simbólico así que la tradición oral
symbolic world so the oral tradition

también en permitirnos a los mundos
also allows us to the symbolic worlds whether

simbólicos

seamos conscientes o no
or not

permanencia de símbolos todos vivimos en
we are aware of the permanence of symbols we all live in

mundos simbólicos seamos conscientes de
symbolic worlds let's be aware of

la tradición oral es eso y además
the oral tradition is that and also

compartir
sharing

compartir compartir la palabra con
sharing sharing the word with

varias la tradición oral es lo
various tradition  oral is the

tradicional en lo oral
traditional thing in the oral it

va extendiéndose no nos tenemos que
is spreading we do not have to

aplicar hay muchas cosas que se
apply ourselves there are many things that are

extinguen reviven
extinguished revive

mueren renacen como la vida
die are reborn like life

en literatura aprender a leer
in literature learning to read to

poder poder leer no sé si se seguirá el
be able to read I don't know if the book will be followed

libro como tal pero
as such but

leer también es un ejercicio con uno
reading is also an exercise with

mismo y también compartir supongo con
oneself and also, I suppose, share with

otros de las lecturas que uno ha leído
others the readings that one has read

en un momento determinado y en la
at a certain moment and in the

educación del niño pues tal vez
education of the child, well, perhaps

enseñarle a pensar porque la palabra es
teach him to think because the word is

pensamiento no sé si es necesario hoy en
thought, I don't know if it is necessary

día tener siquiera pensamiento ni
nowadays to even have a thought or a

palabra
word

lo digo
what  I say

subrayando la terrible ironía de estas
emphasizing the terrible irony of these

palabras pero en el caso de que fuera
words but in the event that

aún necesario el pensamiento y la
the thought was still necessary  and the

palabra la literatura forma una parte de
word literature forms a part of

ese pensamiento
that thought

los cuentos de fernán caballero están
the tales of fernán caballero are

recogidos de la tradición oral y vueltos
collected from the oral tradition and

a contar al menos los cuentos de
retold at least the tales of

encantamiento así que pueden tener
enchantment so they may be

relación con
related to

y otras
and others

con otras maneras de otras maneras de
with other ways of other ways of

contar y julia sense y realmente debo
telling and julia  sense and I really must

confesar que de haberla leído una vez
confess that having read it once

casi como un libro histórico
almost as a historical book

y lo he olvidado ya como investigadora y
and I have already forgotten it as a researcher

en cuanto al padre coloma creo que lo
and as for Father Coloma I think that what

que pertenece a la historia de la
belongs to the history of

literatura pero a un momento muy
literature but at a very

determinado con que saca o renueva lo
specific moment with which he takes or  renew the thing about

del célebre ratoncito pérez creo
the famous little mouse perez I think I

entender que me estás preguntando eso de
understand that you are asking me about

los libros pequeñeces pero pienso más
the little books but I think more

que es como si estuviéramos zorrilla o
that it is as if we were zorrilla or

espronceda dentro de la literatura
espronceda within children's literature they

infantil son momentos determinados de
are certain moments of

una historia literaria
a literary history
Retaining the word is to build, and building worlds is to construct imaginary worlds. Poetry and daily life are both connected to the word, and it is an approach to the imaginary worlds we all have. Both closeness and distance are implicit in this relationship, and literary education is about educating the sensitivity of feelings and affections that we all need to be protected, shared and protected. Oral tradition is also a way to approach the symbolic worlds, whether we are aware of it or not. The oral tradition is traditional and oral, and it is spreading, whether it is extinct or revived, like life in literature. Learning to read and reading is an exercise with oneself and also sharing with others, even though the traditional format of a book may not be followed.
más o menos sería sería eso pienso que
more or less it would be that I think they

están más vivo fernán caballero porque
are more  I live Fernán Caballero because

fernancaballero estaba más ligada a una
Fernancaballero was more linked to a

mayor comunidad
larger community,

qué es la de la tradición no porque
which is that of tradition, not because  ue

defienda a ultranza la tradición
defend tradition at all costs

sino porque tiene más resonancia
but because it has more resonance

a uno
to one

en generaciones 100 niños
in generations 100 children

antonio robles es en los años 30 o
antonio robles is in the 30s or

veintitantos pero sobre todo en los años
twenties but especially in the

30 es muy importante porque trae lo
30s it is very important because it brings the

absurdo y lo cotidiano a la escritura
absurd and the everyday to writing

para los niños en realidad entre los
for children in  reality between the

años 20 y 30 en mi entender comienza a
20s and 30s in my opinion contemporary

escribirse la literatura infantil
children's literature began to be written

contemporánea

y el mundo de las cosas el mundo animado
and the world of things the animated world

y también el mundo de las absurdas
and also the world of absurdities

cobran vida a través de las aleluyas de
come to life through the hallelujahs of

rompe tacones y elena fortún también
heel breakers and elena fortún also

trae la cotidianidad desde una niña
brings everyday life  from a girl from

madrileña con un lenguaje muy peculiar
Madrid with a very peculiar language

de las niñas madrileñas de ese momento
of the girls from Madrid at that time

pero que es un lenguaje muy vivo
but which is a very lively language

de frases muy cortas y es el pensamiento
with very short sentences and it is the thought

de una niña de siete años siempre
of a seven-year-old girl I always

recuerdo a carmen garcía y martín gaité
remember Carmen García and Martín Gaité

que acaba de

que acaba de dejarnos hace dos años que
who just finished  After leaving us two years ago, she

decía que cuando ella leyó a elena
said that when she read Elena

fortún
Fortún

a celia que era la niña
to Celia, who was the girl, she

sintió que estaba representada toda su
felt that all her

imaginación de ese momento en esa
imagination of that moment was represented.  At that time,

después de escribir su rosa fría
after writing his cold rose

patinadora de la luna creo recordar que
skater of the moon, I think I remember that it

es un libro donde el consenso sea el
is a book where the consensus is the

absurdo la mezcla y todas todas un
absurd, the mixture, and all of them, an

estilo de vanguardia se estaba mezclando
avant-garde style was mixed

en ese libro que de muy difícil
in that book that is very difficult to

comprensión en este momento para
understand at this time for

nuestros niños lectores
our  reading children

ah
ah,

es decir
that

de difícil comprensión significa que a
is, difficult to understand means that at

la primera lectura
the first reading

no pueden comprender rápidamente el
they cannot quickly understand the

texto porque maría teresa león está
text because María Teresa León is

poniendo ahí todos los estilos de la
putting there all the styles of the

vanguardia de los años 20 y luego
avant-garde of the 1920s and

posteriormente escribió
later she wrote

cuando partió al exilio en el año 39 en
when she went into exile in 1939 in

argentina
argentina

publicó un libro que es sobre rodrigo
published a book that is about rodrigo

díaz de vivar el mio cid campeador asi
díaz de vivar el mio cid campeador so

que hizo un giro desde la escritura de
he made a turn from avant-

vanguardia hacia el rescate vamos a
garde writing towards the rescue we are going to

decir de los clásicos del clásico como
say of the classics of the classic as

un personaje histórico así que es una
a historical character so it is a

biografía histórica que me parece pues
historical biography that seems to me well

que puede seguir
that can still be

vivo o puede ser leído entre los 14 13
alive or can be read between the ages of 14 13

14 años
14

todo hubiera sido diferente
everything would have been different

no sabemos que pudiera pasado hubieran
we don't know what could have happened

pasado otras cosas y de antonio robles
Other things happened and Antonio Robles

hubiera seguido produciendo aquí y no en
would have continued to produce here and not in

méxico elena fortún fue y volvió pero
Mexico. Elena Fortún went and came back, but

todos estaban desgarrados por la guerra
everyone was torn apart by the

civil y hubo también como maría teresa
civil war and there was also María Teresa

león
León,

por ejemplo maría teresa león o hubiera
for example, María Teresa León or she would have

hecho lo de rodrigo díaz de vivar aquí o
done what Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar did.  here or

cuando fueron en la argentina necesito
when they were in Argentina I need to

recuperar toda su historia literaria y
recover all their literary history and

recrear a los personajes y darlos a
recreate the characters and make them

conocer los personajes de la cultura
known about the characters of

hispánica en américa
Hispanic culture in America

pienso que la escritura hubiese sido
I think that writing would have been

diferente
different

porque las realidades marcan a los
because realities mark

escritores
writers

y rafael dieste por ejemplo que fue uno
and Rafael Dieste for example that  He was one

de los exiliados que dirigió una
of the exiles who directed a

biblioteca de para niños
children's library. It

me parece que difícil que lo hubiera
seems to me that it would be difficult for him to have

dirigido si estaba en españa porque su
directed it if he was in Spain because his

derrotero intelectual era otro
intellectual path was another,
More or less, that is my understanding. I think that Fernán Caballero is more alive because it was more connected to a larger community. The tradition is not just about defending tradition at all costs, but because it has more resonance to one's generation, as well as to the community. In my understanding, contemporary children's literature began to be written between the 20s and 30s, and the world of things, the animated world and also the world of absurdities come to life through the hallelujahs of "rompe tacones" and Elena Fortún, who also brings everyday life from a girl from Madrid with a very peculiar language. However, it is a very lively language with very short sentences, and it is the thought of a seven-year-old girl. I always remember Carmen García and Martín Gaité, who just left us two years ago, who said that when she read Elena Fortún's "Celia", she felt that all her imagination of that moment was represented. At that time, after writing "Rosa Fría" and "Patinadora de la Luna", I think I remember that it is a book where the consensus is the absurd, the mixture, and all of them, an avant-garde style was mixed in that book that is very difficult to understand at this time for our reading children.
en cambio de allí pan y lucrando que
instead of bread and profit there, as

dirían los latinos o sea nos tenemos que
Latinos would say, that is, we have to

ganar el pan cada día
earn our bread every  day

trabajando hizo que muchos escritores
working made many writers

tuvieran que compartir la escritura con
have to share writing with

sobrevivir en el exilio
surviving in exile

y eso tomo muchas formas desde el
and that took  many forms from

periodismo hasta la dirección de
journalism to the direction of

pequeños libros pero dejaron una obra
small books but they left a

muy importante
very important work

y yo personalmente
and I personally

quisiera recuperar porque esos libros
would like to recover because those books

nutrieron una parte de mi infancia
nurtured a part of my childhood

en las reducciones como tuve grandes
in the reductions as I had great

maestros entre los republicanos por
teachers among the Republicans for

ejemplo juan larrea
example Juan Larrea

que fue profesor mío y otros en
who was my teacher and  others in

argentina así que es casi como una deuda
Argentina, so it is almost like a debt

de honor
of honor

que tengo de traer nuevamente esos
that I have to bring back those

libros inconseguibles a españa
unobtainable books to Spain. It

me parece que es múltiple multiplicado y
seems to me that it is multiple multiplied and

exuberante y como en todo lo que es
exuberant, and as in everything that is

múltiple multiplicado y exuberante hay
multiple multiplied and exuberant,

un hay troncos centrales y
there are central trunks and

ramificaciones

de más frágil andadura literaria
more ramifications.  fragile literary journey

pero pienso que es un momento muy
but I think it is a very important moment,

importante es decir que está haciendo
that is to say that it has been going

desde hace ya como 15 20 años un momento
on for about 15 or 20 years a

muy importante que hay nombres
very important moment that there are names

no voy a poner a dar nombres porque eso
I am not going to give names because that would

establecería en este momento
establish at this moment

en este momento de la entrevista para
in this moment of the interview for

ser verdad no no podría ser justa y
be true, it could not be fair and I

podría olvidar algo que a los dos
could forget something that after two

segundos digerir porque no dije están
seconds I would digest  because I didn't say they are,

pero si hay nombres de importantes y hay
but there are important names and there are

nombres de tanto de autores como de
names of both authors and

ilustradores que podemos decir ya que la
illustrators that we can say since

literatura infantil y juvenil está
children's and youth literature is

instaurada dentro de la cultura general
established within the general culture, it

es difícil escribir
is difficult to write

y cuando tienes presente y pero todo
and when you keep in mind and but every

escritor tiene un destinatario es decir
writer has a  addressee, that is to say,

pienso que un escritor puede escribir
I think that a writer can write

sin saber a quién se dirige pero en este
without knowing who he is addressing, but at this

momento pienso que los escritores en
moment I think that writers in

general
general

tienen presentes a quienes se dirigen es
keep in mind who they are addressing is

oa quien es el lector ideal que ellos
or who is the ideal reader that they

piensan y los escritores para niños
think and writers for children

tienen que tener muy en cuenta que si
have to be very  Keep in mind that they do

tienen un destinatario con unas
have a recipient with

características especiales pero un buen
special characteristics, but a good

escritor como un buen libro es
writer, like a good book, is

literatura
literature,

como dirían savater que la literatura es
as savater would say, that literature

al fin la infancia recuperada
is finally childhood recovered

hoy
today.
In contrast to that, there is the need to earn a living, as the Latin saying goes, "pan y lucrando" (bread and profit). Many writers had to share writing with surviving in exile, and that took many forms, from journalism to the direction of small books. But they left a very important work, and I personally would like to recover those books that nurtured a part of my childhood. It is almost like a debt of honor to bring back those unobtainable books to Spain. The literary scene is multiple, multiplied, and exuberant, and as in everything that is multiple, multiplied, and exuberant, there are central trunks and ramifications of more fragile literary journey. But I think it is a very important moment that has been going on for about 15 or 20 years. There are important names of both authors and illustrators that we can say that children's and youth literature is established within the general culture. It is difficult to write, and when you keep in mind that every writer has an addressee. At this moment I think that in general the writers of children's literature have a clear and specific audience in mind.
The author: Ana Pelegrín (1938-2008) was an Argentine researcher, writer, and educator. She was considered one of the leading specialists on Hispanic literature and oral tradition of poetry.
Ana Pelegrín was a prominent figure in the field of Hispanic literature and oral tradition of poetry. Her research and writing focused on the study of these subjects, and she was recognized as one of the leading specialists in the field. Additionally, she was an educator, and her work and teachings likely had a significant impact on future generations of scholars and students. She passed away in 2008.
Give an outline with subheadings of her "interview".
I. Introduction
A. Brief overview of Ana Pelegrín's background and expertise
II. The Importance of Oral Tradition and Poetry
A. Explanation of how oral tradition connects to literature
B. The role of poetry in preserving and passing on tradition
C. The impact of oral tradition on children's literature
III. The Role of Literature in Education
A. The relationship between literature and the imagination
B. The importance of literary education in developing sensitivity
C. The role of oral tradition in literary education
IV. The Work of Fernán Caballero and Antonio Robles
A. The impact of Fernán Caballero on literature and community
B. The role of Antonio Robles in bringing the absurd and everyday to literature for children
C. The importance of these authors in the context of their time
V. The Importance of Recovering Unobtainable Books
A. Personal connection to these books and their impact on the author's childhood
B. The need to bring back these books to Spain as a debt of honor
VI. Conclusion
A. Summary of key points discussed in the interview
B. The ongoing importance and relevance of Ana Pelegrín's work and research in the field of Hispanic literature and oral tradition of poetry.
Translate: La aventura de oír: cuentos y memorias de tradición oral

Ana Pelegrín

La aventura de oír» invita a la búsqueda y a la recuperación de la palabra, afincada, por esta vez, en el cuento de tradición oral. Palabra, memoria, imaginación, emoción, van y vienen a través de las páginas, en un nítido empeño de implicar al lector en su propia experiencia, de abrir interrogantes, de reclamar su participación.

He dividido en tres grandes bloques el material elaborado: la primera parte esboza la problemática de la literatura oral, su relación y supervivencia en los cuentos infantiles. La palabra y su poder de convocar imágenes primordiales, construir ámbitos imaginativos, afectivos y literarios, resuena de manera esencial en el niño pequeño; de ahí su revalorización.

En la parte segunda inserto una reflexión sobre el contador de cuentos y la memoria colectiva e individual; renuevo una llamada para la recuperación de viejos cuentos de siempre; quedan esbozadas las líneas metodológicas para trabajar el relato: análisis, clasificación, formación de repertorio y el cómo contar cuentos.

La palabra-voz, su huella sonora, traza la resonancia profunda en la literatura oral; una voz expresiva requiere abordar y ejercitar sus matices y cadencias. Visualizamos las líneas de entonación en sugerencias diversas.

Aunque la literatura oral tradicional no es reductible ni clasificable por edades, pues su edad es la de la imaginación, intento -con meros fines operativos- encuadrar el material propuesto, en el Taller de Cuentos, entre los 3 y los 7-8 años. El diseño de las actividades ha sido realizado, experimentado y redactado por el grupo de colaboradores integrado   —8→   por Luz Utrilla, Graciela Pelegrín, Carmen Fleta, Martina Martín e Isabel Laina, a quienes expreso mi entrañable reconocimiento.

La parte tercera incluye treinta y un cuentos de variada procedencia: espigados en colecciones folklóricas, versiones de autor, relatos oídos en mi infancia del norte argentino, y otros recogidos en trabajo de campo y en cursos y seminarios realizados entre 1968-81 en España.
"The adventure of hearing: stories and memories of oral tradition"
Ana Pelegrín
"The adventure of hearing" invites the search and recovery of the word, anchored this time, in the story of oral tradition. Word, memory, imagination, emotion, come and go through the pages, in a clear effort to involve the reader in their own experience, to open questions, and to demand their participation.
I have divided the material into three large blocks: the first part outlines the problem of oral literature, its relationship and survival in children's stories. The word and its power to summon primary images, construct imaginative, affective and literary realms, resonates in an essential way in the young child; hence its revaluation.
In the second part, I insert a reflection on the storyteller and collective and individual memory; I renew a call for the recovery of old stories; methodological lines for working on the story are outlined: analysis, classification, repertoire formation and how to tell stories.
The word-voice, its sound trace, traces deep resonance in oral literature; an expressive voice requires approaching and exercising its nuances and cadences. We visualize the lines of intonation in diverse suggestions.
Although traditional oral literature is not reducible or classifiable by age, since its age is that of imagination, I attempt -with mere operational purposes- to frame the proposed material, in the Story Workshop, between 3 and 7-8 years old. The design of the activities has been carried out, experimented and written by the group of collaborators integrated by Luz Utrilla, Graciela Pelegrín, Carmen Fleta, Martina Martín and Isabel Laina, to whom I express my heartfelt recognition.
The third part includes thirty-one stories of varied origin: gleaned from folkloric collections, author versions, stories heard in my childhood from northern Argentina, and others collected in fieldwork and in courses and seminars carried out between 1968-81 in Spain.
Translate: 
Una mínima -pero notoria- referencia de ilustradores españoles: Julián Bastinos, Apelles Mestre, Joan Vila, Lola Anglada, José Zamora, Penagos, Bartolozzi, de las últimas décadas del siglo XIX y las tres primeras del XX. La antología -y otras incursiones en el libro- está ilustrada por Mario Lacoma, a quien agradezco su visualización de los, míos-suyos, espacios imaginarios.

Las múltiples voces de adultos, jóvenes, ancianos, niños, que resuenan en el libro, me ayudaron a tener cierta certeza sobre lo soñado; en todo caso he necesitado sentirme libre y adoptar, transformar, recrear, mi experiencia compartida en Argentina, España, Portugal, Colombia, México.

Así, el estilo del libro es un collage de tiempo, escritura, memoria y reflexión: de la tradición a la recreación; de la vivencia al análisis; de recuerdos memorosos a telegráficos esquemas/técnicas de expresión; de impulsos a pautas metodológicas; de escuchar a contar.

Y, por fin, he querido transmitir una experiencia vivida, humana y profesional. Y mi fascinación por la palabra. Este libro me pertenece como me pertenece la memoria, el aire y el derecho al asombro. Y aquí queda, para los que lean o vean estas páginas y se embarquen en una aventura paralela.
2 / 2
Translate:
A minimal - but notable - reference of Spanish illustrators: Julián Bastinos, Apelles Mestre, Joan Vila, Lola Anglada, José Zamora, Penagos, Bartolozzi, from the last decades of the 19th century and the first three of the 20th century. The anthology - and other incursions into the book - is illustrated by Mario Lacoma, to whom I am grateful for his visualization of the imaginary spaces that are mine and his.
The multiple voices of adults, young people, elderly people, and children that resonate in the book helped me to have some certainty about what was dreamed; in any case, I needed to feel free and adopt, transform, recreate, my shared experience in Argentina, Spain, Portugal, Colombia, Mexico.
Thus, the style of the book is a collage of time, writing, memory, and reflection: from tradition to recreation; from experience to analysis; from memorable memories to telegraphic schemes/techniques of expression; from impulses to methodological guidelines; from listening to telling.
And, finally, I wanted to convey a lived, human, and professional experience. And my fascination with the word. This book belongs to me just as memory, air, and the right to wonder belong to me. And here it stays, for those who read or see these pages and embark on a parallel adventure.
Translate the following into English:
De la literatura oral tradicional Para el niño pequeño, la palabra oída ejerce una gran fascinación. La palabra y su tonalidad, su ritmo, los trazos afectivos que teje la voz, cuando es temperatura emocional, calma, consuelo, ternura, sensorialidad latente. El magnetismo por el ritmo y la entonación puede desplegarse con intensidad, al escuchar la voz de otras memorias, viejas-nuevas-voces, de rimas, retahílas, cancioncillas, cuentos.

Podemos formular la hipótesis de que la literatura oral es una forma básica, un modo literario esencial en la vida del niño pequeño, porque la palabra está impregnada de afectividad. El cuento, el romance, la lírica, construyen el mundo auditivo-literario del niño, le incorporan vivencialmente a una cultura que le pertenece, le hacen partícipe de una creación colectiva, le otorgan signos de identidad. El libro oído, visto, tocado, olido, el desciframiento emocional-oral-sensorial, el libro-lectura compartida con otro, le ayudarán en su contacto posterior con la letra impresa, motivando una lectura gozosa.

No olvidemos que la manipulación de los medios de comunicación, los imperativos comerciales del niño consumidor, hoy por hoy, influyen en su mundo cotidiano, y son realidades cuantitativamente inapelables. Pero invitamos a reflexionar sobre la participación activa, crítica, en la producción literaria, del niño receptor, re-creador, transmisor-autor, o meramente jugador-gozador, lector creativo.
3 / 3
From traditional oral literature: For young children, the heard word holds a great fascination. The word and its tone, rhythm, the affective traces weaved by the voice, when it is emotional temperature, calm, comfort, tenderness, latent sensuality. The magnetism for rhythm and intonation can be displayed with intensity, when listening to the voice of other memories, old-new-voices, rhymes, refrains, songs, stories.
We can formulate the hypothesis that oral literature is a basic form, an essential literary mode in the life of young children, because the word is saturated with affectivity. The story, the romance, the lyric, construct the auditory-literary world of the child, incorporating them experientially into a culture that belongs to them, making them participants in a collective creation, giving them signs of identity. The heard, seen, touched, smelled book, the emotional-oral-sensory decoding, the book-reading shared with another, will help them in their later contact with printed letters, motivating a joyful reading.
Let us not forget that the manipulation of communication media, the commercial imperatives of the consumer child, today, influence their everyday world, and are quantitatively undeniable realities. But we invite reflection on the active, critical participation, in literary production, of the receiving child, re-creator, transmitter-author, or merely player-enjoyer, creative reader.
Translate the following: La poesía, el cuento (el cuento maravilloso o de encantamiento), encierra en sí materia de símbolo. Y el símbolo se despliega en la palabra irradiando multiplicidad de significados. Esta irradiación invita al niño a un viaje emocional y mental, le acerca a la imaginación literaria,   —12→   hace posible la conjetura de que literatura y vida pueden estar ensamblados, literatura-vida, un solo ritmo.

Esta literatura vivida graba una huella mnémica; esto es, la memoria almacena las imágenes afectivas junto con estructuras y formas de lo oral, cantada y decantada por la memoria colectiva, que retiene ciencias, costumbres, rituales, danzas, en su folklore, y cuentos, cuentecillos, leyendas, romances, coplas..., en el folklore literario o literatura oral.

Denominamos literatura de tradición oral a la palabra como vehículo de emociones, motivos, temas, en estructuras y formas recibidas oralmente, por una cadena de transmisores, depositarios y a su vez re-elaboradores.

Sus características generales: pertenecer a un contexto cultural, del que son producto, haber sido transmitido este producto oralmente en varias generaciones, ciñéndose a temas y técnicas, reiteradas, y a su vez introduciendo variantes. Según Menéndez Pidal -que acuña la noción- tradicional es lo que vive en las variantes.

Al hablar de literatura oral salta una aparente oposición. Literatura (etimológicamente deriva de littera-letra) se remite a obra escrita. Esta aparente oposición se establece entre dos niveles de lo literario. Literatura

popular oral ←→ culta escrita



colectiva ←→ de autor
The poetry, the story (the fairy tale or enchanted story), encloses in itself symbolic matter. And the symbol unfolds in the word, radiating multiple meanings. This radiation invites the child to an emotional and mental journey, brings them closer to literary imagination, making it possible to conjecture that literature and life can be assembled, literature-life, a single rhythm.
This lived literature leaves a mnemonic trace; that is, the memory stores the affective images along with structures and forms of the oral, sung, and recited by the collective memory, which retains sciences, customs, rituals, dances, in its folklore, and stories, little stories, legends, romances, verses..., in the literary folklore or oral literature.
We call oral tradition literature to the word as a vehicle of emotions, motives, themes, in structures and forms received orally, by a chain of transmitters, depositories and in turn re-elaborators.
Its general characteristics: to belong to a cultural context, from which it is a product, having been transmitted this oral product in several generations, adhering to themes and techniques, reiterated, and in turn introducing variations. According to Menéndez Pidal -who coins the notion- traditional is what lives in the variations.
When speaking about oral literature, there appears an apparent opposition. Literature (etymologically derived from littera-letter) refers to written work. This apparent opposition is established between two levels of the literary. Popular oral literature ←→ cultured written literature
Collective ←→ of author
Translate the following into English: Del cuento oral
El romance, la canción, enlaza con el movimiento corporal, gestual, rítmico, ya sea en los cantado-jugados por los niños, o los que acompañan -aún- algunas tareas o trabajos colectivos -la siega-, o en danzas y música en los días exultantes de la fiesta.

El cuento requiere otro marco, otra es su función. Necesita del reposo, de un detenimiento en el trabajo, un oído grupal, un narrador. La palabra se despoja del cuerpo-espacio-ritmo, se desnuda en el Oído-agrupado. Lo oral se esparce, se difumina; lo oral, como lo recuerda el diccionario, también es «viento fresco y suave». Recibir, percibir por el oído lo elemental, escuchar voces y movimiento, como el personaje del cuento que «de rodillas sentía nacer las hierbas, crecer las hierbas, no las veía», supone un transcurso temporal diferenciado. Supone distender el tiempo, tenderse en el tiempo, oír pasar el tiempo, urdir pasatiempos.

En la vida cotidiana de los pueblos y en la urbana de la Edad Media, del Renacimiento, del siglo XIX, y aun en este siglo, el contar cuentos, anécdotas, chascarrillos, constituye parte de las costumbres y formas sociales. Y no sólo «consejos o cuentos de viejas, como aquellos del caballo sin cabeza, varilla de las virtudes, con que se entretienen al fuego las dilatadas noches de invierno»7, recuerda Cervantes; no sólo cuentos de viejas, sino agudezas de la corte, las sobremesas, veladas y charlas familiares, dichos e ingenios de los españoles.

Las narraciones, alimentadas por cadena de comunicantes o por los cuentos impresos, leídos en conjunto, ya sean libros o pliegos populares, se recuerdan de oírlas o de leerlas. Aún en el siglo XIX y principios del XX, los pliegos de cordel en prosa adaptan historias de los libros   —18→   de Caballería, o personajes históricos, o literarios como Carlomagno y los doce pares, Oliveros de Castilla, Flores y Blancaflor, Merlín o la voz misteriosa, Aladino y Simbad, La puerca Cenicienta, Robinson Crusoe, Bertoldo, Pierre y Magalona, según lo documenta Caro Baroja; estas historias se vendían en librillos de entre dos y dieciséis pliegos en la Biblioteca Moderna de la antigua Imprenta Universal, fundada en 1850.
From oral storytelling
The romance, the song, is linked to the bodily, gestural, and rhythmic movement, whether in the songs and games played by children or in those that still accompany some collective tasks or work - such as the harvest - or in dances and music during festive days.
The story requires another framework, another function. It needs rest, a pause in work, a group of listeners, and a narrator. The word is stripped of its body-space-rhythm, it is naked in the group of listeners. The oral is spread out, it diffuses; the oral, as the dictionary reminds us, is also "a fresh and gentle breeze." To receive, to perceive the elemental through the ear, to hear voices and movement, like the character in the story who "on his knees felt the grass growing, he did not see it," implies a different temporal progression. It implies stretching out time, lying in time, listening to time pass, and weaving pastimes.
In the daily life of the people and in the urban life of the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, the 19th century, and even in this century, telling stories, anecdotes, and jokes is part of the customs and social forms. And not only "advice or old stories, like those of the headless horse, the rod of virtues, with which the lengthy winter nights are entertained," as Cervantes recalls; not only old stories, but also court wit, after-dinner conversations, and family talks, Spanish sayings, and clever remarks.
The narratives, nourished by a chain of communicators or by printed stories, read together, whether books or popular leaflets, are remembered from hearing or reading them. Even in the 19th and early 20th centuries, prose leaflets adapted stories from the books of chivalry, or historical or literary characters such as Charlemagne and the twelve peers, Oliveros de Castilla, Flores and Blancaflor, Merlin or the mysterious voice, Aladdin and Sinbad, Cinderella, Robinson Crusoe, Bertoldo, Pierre and Magalona, as Caro Baroja documents; these stories were sold in small books of two to sixteen leaflets in the Modern Library of the former Universal Printing Press, founded in 1850.
Translate the following: Timoneda, en la colección de cuentecillos Sobremesa y Alivio de caminantes (1563), declara en el prólogo: «fácilmente lo que yo en diversos años he oído, visto y leído podrás brevemente saber de coro, para decir algún cuento de los presentes. [...] Estando en conversación quieres decir algún cuentecillo, lo digas a propósito de lo que trataren»9.

Con verdadero alivio para nosotros, caminantes en el camino andado, Timoneda sintetiza los datos hasta aquí expuestos:

La relación entre lo oral-escrito (lo que en diversos años he oído-visto-leído).
La memoria (podrás brevemente saber de coro).
La continuidad en la transmisión (para poder decir algún cuento).
La función del cuento-comunicación (estando en conversación, digas a propósito).
Leer el cuento es saber desentrañar lo escrito, descifrar un conocimiento persistiendo en el tiempo, recuperar la función social, la comunicación oral-grupal de la palabra. Alivio del caminante de lo tradicional son las conversaciones mantenidas con Justo Martínez (ochenta y tres años), narrador inacabable y excepcional. Después de escuchar muchos cuentos, le preguntamos cómo los aprendía y, en otro momento, si uno de ellos no provenía de Las mil y una noches. Transcribo sus palabras:

«Anduve por muchos pueblos del Concejo de Cangas y del de Tineo, trabajando con aquel maestro serrador, y después yo solo, de por mi cuenta. Pues un día en una casa contaron un cuento, yo tenía memoria, que lo aprendía, otro día en otra casa contaron otro y lo aprendía, y así fui aprendiendo muchos. Así aprendí muchos cuentos. Y todos los que aprendí de aquélla, no se me olvidaron. Y los que aprendí de más pequeño tampoco [...].»

«De Las mil y una noches, sí señor. Lo aprendí yo de Las mil y una noches, y éste me pareció guapo y traté de aprenderlo, para que se hiciera. [...] La mayor parte [de la gente] saben, pero aunque los leyeran no se dan cuenta.   —19→   Yo los leí, los leí muy detenidamente y los aprendí porque se hicieran».
From the oral story
Timoneda, in the collection of small stories Sobremesa and Alivio de caminantes (1563), declares in the prologue: "easily what I have heard, seen, and read over the years, you can briefly know by heart, to tell some story from the present ones. [...] When in conversation you want to tell a little story, tell it in the context of what is being discussed."
With true relief for us, travelers on the path taken, Timoneda summarizes the data presented so far:
The relationship between oral-written (what I have heard, seen, and read over the years).
Memory (you can briefly know by heart).
Continuity in transmission (to be able to tell a story).
The function of the story-communication (when in conversation, tell it in the context).
Reading the story is knowing how to unravel the written, deciphering a knowledge that persists over time, recovering the social function, the oral-group communication of the word. Alivio de caminante of the traditional are the conversations held with Justo Martínez (eighty-three years), an endless and exceptional storyteller. After listening to many stories, we asked him how he learned them and, at another time, if one of them did not come from The Thousand and One Nights. I transcribe his words:
"I walked through many towns in the Concejo de Cangas and Tineo, working with that master sawyer, and then alone, on my own. Well, one day in a house they told a story, I had memory, that I learned, another day in another house they told another and I learned it, and so I learned many. So I learned many stories. And all that I learned from there, I did not forget. And the ones I learned from when I was younger either [...]."
"From The Thousand and One Nights, yes sir. I learned it from The Thousand and One Nights, and this one seemed nice to me and I tried to learn it, so that it would be done. [...] Most [people] know, but even if they read them, they don't realize it. I read them, I read them very carefully and I learned them so that they would be done."
Translate the following: 
A través de caminos, trabajos, años, el narrador tradicional recibe la palabra. El que ha sabido ver y oír puede escribir en su memoria, continuar la cadena de transmisores. Pero también el que ha sabido leer, es el que puede decir; o el que puede contar lo leído es el que se ha dado cuenta, alimentado, de la lectura. ¿Por qué contar? (Porque se hicieran)... en el decir, en el nombrar, las cosas se hacen, se construyen, se crean. La palabra fundacional. El Verbo creador. Cosas de viejos, los cuentos transmiten una visión del mundo, un conocimiento primero, una forma cultural, una intención socializadora, que ha estallado y se ha desintegrado, como se ha desintegrado su misión en esta sociedad misil. Cierto es que estos tiempos son otros tiempos; la vida se ha atomizado, las estructuras familiares-sociales han cambiado, no hay por qué reunirse, no hay fuego donde congregarse. La voz mínima para el oído-grupo está liquidada; otros son los que poseen la palabra, controlan, manipulan y multiplican. Su poder no es ya crecer en el viento, sino dominar, o afincarse en los dominios precisos e indispensables de la tecnología. Sin embargo, la palabra antigua, conocimientos tan primarios, ¿no significan nada para las nuevas generaciones de esta galaxia cultural?
2 / 2
The traditional narrator receives the word through paths, work, and years. The one who has known how to see and hear can write in his memory and continue the chain of transmitters. But also, the one who has known how to read is the one who can say, or the one who can tell what he has read is the one who has realized, been nourished, by the reading. Why tell? (Because they should be made) in the saying, in the naming, things are made, they are constructed, they are created. The foundational word. The creative Verb. Old things, stories transmit a vision of the world, a first knowledge, a cultural form, a socializing intention, that has exploded and disintegrated, as its mission has disintegrated in this missile society. It is true that these times are other times; life has been atomized, family-social structures have changed, there is no need to gather, there is no fire where to congregate. The minimal voice for the ear-group is liquidated; others are those who possess the word, control, manipulate and multiply. Their power is no longer to grow in the wind, but to dominate, or to be rooted in the precise and necessary domains of technology. Nevertheless, does the old word, such primary knowledge, mean nothing for the new generations of this cultural galaxy?
Translate the following into English: ¿Cuáles son los cuentos que escucha el niño rural, en su medio familiar comunal? ¿Qué papel juega el niño mayor en la transmisión oral?

  —23→  
C) En este mínimo inventario de cuentos infantiles reconocidos tropezamos con otro dato importante: la masiva difusión de Grimm, Andersen, Perrault, algunos cuentos de Las mil y una noches, en ediciones para niños, y la importancia de la ilustración, que los convierte, en ciertos casos, en narración por la imagen.

En estas ediciones constatamos un amplio abanico desde:

Colecciones que guardan el nombre del autor, estructura, tema, motivos y nivel verbal del cuento y cuidadas ilustraciones.
Colecciones -libro regalo- con ilustraciones que desplazan el nivel verbal, mantienen estructura, tema general y nombre del autor, figurando, a veces, el adaptador.
Adaptaciones con fines educativos, instructivas, de divulgación en «libros del idioma», lecturas escolares -escasas ilustraciones en los textos de antes- y nutridas en los libros actuales.
Colecciones con modificaciones del texto, sin nombre del autor ni adaptador, profusión de ilustraciones (por imperativos comerciales de ampliar la circulación), reducción del formato, libros populares, «juguetes instructivos» (a la manera de los pequeños libros de cuentos de Calleja).
La modificación opera por:

Reducción en el nivel verbal y supresión de secuencias.
Sustitución del texto por la función narrativa de las ilustraciones.
Amplificación por elementos didácticos introducidos en la narración y moraleja final.
What are the stories that the rural child listens to in their communal family environment? What role does the older child play in oral transmission?
In this brief inventory of recognized children's stories, we come across another important piece of information: the widespread diffusion of Grimm, Andersen, Perrault, some stories from Thousand and One Nights, in editions for children, and the importance of illustration, which in some cases makes them a narration by image.
In these editions, we see a wide range from:
Collections that retain the author's name, structure, theme, motifs, and verbal level of the story, and careful illustrations.
Collections -gift books- with illustrations that displace the verbal level, maintain structure, general theme, and the author's name, sometimes featuring the adapter.
Adaptations with educational, instructive, and dissemination purposes in "language books," school readings -scarce illustrations in earlier texts- and abundant in current books.
Collections with modifications to the text, without the author's name or adapter, with a plethora of illustrations (due to commercial imperatives to expand circulation), reduction in format, popular books, "educational toys" (in the style of Calleja's small story books).
The modification operates through:
Reduction in the verbal level and suppression of sequences.
Replacement of the text with the narrative function of the illustrations.
Amplification by didactic elements introduced in the narration and final moral.
Es evidente (puntos 2, 3 y 4) la relación existente entre literatura popular y libro infantil. Seguimos las claves propuestas por Geneveve Bollème, en su prólogo a la antología de literatura popular, a partir de la «noción ambigua de popularidad de un texto, que se ha adquirido de una doble manera [pervivencia] de ciertos textos a través del tiempo, criterio de éxito en la duración temporal y éxito de venta o comercialización»12.

Aunque guardan nexos con la tradición oral, estos textos no son tradición oral.

Texto simplificado, de escasa lectura, con numerosas ilustraciones, sirviendo a una intención utilitaria, la de iniciar a un desciframiento-aprendizaje   —24→   del lector, o dar un conocimiento a los iletrados.

No existencia de reglas, exceptuando las que fijan los refundidores-editores, detectando los gustos del consumidor.

Libro-letra impresa abierta a todas las modificaciones.

Amplias colecciones para el consumo, frágiles, de reducido formato, precio -recordar los cuentos «Juguetes instructivos», trescientos pequeños tomos de Calleja-, ediciones que no quedan en las bibliotecas, libros de recreación, seguidos por lo efímero de su consistencia.
The child in rural areas hears stories within their communal family environment. The older child plays a role in the oral transmission of these stories. In this minimal inventory of recognized children's stories, we come across another important piece of information: the widespread diffusion of Grimm, Andersen, Perrault, some stories from One Thousand and One Nights, in editions for children, and the importance of illustration, which in certain cases turns them into narration through image. In these editions, we find a wide range from collections that maintain the author's name, structure, theme, motifs and verbal level of the story and well-crafted illustrations, to collections -gift books- with illustrations that shift the verbal level, maintain the structure, general theme and author's name, sometimes featuring the adapter. Adapations for educational and instructional purposes, for dissemination in "language books," school readings -scarce illustrations in earlier texts- and abundant in current books. Collections with modifications to the text, without the author's name or adapter, with a profusion of illustrations (due to commercial imperatives to expand circulation), reduced format, popular books, "educational toys" (in the style of Calleja's small story books). The modification operates through the reduction in verbal level and suppression of sequences, the substitution of text for the narrative function of illustrations, and amplification through didactic elements introduced in the narrative and final moral. It is clear that there is a relationship between popular literature and children's books (points 2, 3, and 4). We follow the keys proposed by Geneveve Bollème, in her introduction to the anthology of popular literature, from the "ambiguous notion of a text's popularity, which has been acquired in a dual way [permanence] of certain texts over time, criterion of success in temporal duration, and success in sales or commercialization." Although they have connections to oral tradition, these texts are not oral tradition. Simplified text, with little reading, with many illustrations, serving a utilitarian intention, that of initiating the deciphering-learning of the reader, or giving knowledge to the illiterate. No existence of rules, except those set by the condensers-editors, detecting the consumer's tastes. Printed book open to all modifications. Wide collections for consumption, fragile, in reduced format, price -remember the stories "Educational Toys," three hundred small volumes of Calleja
Continue: remember the stories "Educational Toys," three hundred small volumes of Calleja ...
2 / 2
These books are not considered part of oral tradition, as they have been simplified, include numerous illustrations, and serve a practical purpose such as helping with learning to read or providing knowledge to those who are illiterate. They do not have specific rules, except those set by editors, who base them on consumer preferences. They are widely available, fragile, with a small format, and low price, and are not meant to last. They are meant for entertainment and are quickly replaced by newer editions.
Translate the following into English: Qué función cumple esta literatura popular infantil? ¿Estas refundiciones tienen algún valor? ¿Debemos desecharlas del contacto con el pequeño? ¿O aceptarlas como un juguete-letra sin valor, que adquirimos con las golosinas que gratifican su oralidad?

Todos estos interrogantes -muchos de ellos sin posibilidad de solución- nos llevan a esbozar ciertos indicios, para emprender estudios posteriores sobre temática tan compleja y enmarañada. Apuntamos:

a) Si los textos de autor proceden de ediciones fiables, y en la reelaboración oral de adultos-niños son tomados como textos abiertos, dándose en esa reelaboración los mecanismos de modificación (supresión-ampliación-alteración), vigentes para el núcleo familiar-escolar-comunal, podríamos hablar de proceso de tradicionalización.

b) En casos de reconocer un mínimo inventario de cuentos (como el anteriormente señalado) pertenecientes a la memoria de un grupo (familiar-comunal), perviviendo oralmente o reconocido como «cuentos viejos», «de los de antes», «lo contaba mi madre que lo aprendió de la suya», «se decía de antiguo», «lo oí de niño», podríamos hablar de vestigios de la tradición oral.

b1) Si el inventario se ampliara en cuentos mágicos, de encantamiento, de hadas, religiosos, de aparecidos, de fórmulas, de bobos, hablaríamos de pervivencia de la tradición oral.

c) Los textos provenientes de las colecciones populares para niños, ya sean de autor declarado o refundidos (de recuerdo colectivo), que conservan personajes y argumento general, donde la ilustración-imagen narra asimismo, cumplen la función de alimentar una apetencia cultural inicial, siendo testimonios sociológicos en el estudio de la literatura; los valoraríamos como continuidad de la memoria de la temática tradicional.
What function does this popular children's literature serve? Do these reworkings have any value? Should we discard them from contact with the child? Or should we accept them as a letter-toy without value, which we acquire with the treats that gratify their oral language?
All these questions - many of which have no possibility of solution - lead us to sketch out certain indications, to undertake further studies on such a complex and tangled theme. We point out:
a) If the texts of the author come from reliable editions, and in the oral reworking of adults-children they are taken as open texts, giving in that reworking the mechanisms of modification (suppression-amplification-alteration) that are valid for the family-school-communal nucleus, we could speak of a process of traditionalization.
b) In cases of recognizing a minimum inventory of stories (as previously mentioned) belonging to the memory of a group (family-communal), surviving orally or recognized as "old stories," "from before," "my mother told it that she learned from hers," "it used to be said," "I heard it as a child," we could speak of vestiges of the oral tradition.
b1) If the inventory were expanded to include magical stories, enchanted stories, fairy tales, religious stories, ghost stories, formulas, and fool stories, we would be talking about the survival of the oral tradition.
c) The texts from the popular collections for children, whether from declared authors or reworked (from collective memory), that preserve characters and general plot, where the illustration-image also narrates, fulfill the function of feeding an initial cultural appetite, being sociological testimonies in the study of literature; we would value them as a continuation of the memory of
Continue: we would value them as a continuation of the memory of...
traditional themes. However, it is important to note that these popular children's literature do not necessarily have the same value as traditional oral stories passed down through generations. They may serve a different purpose and have different cultural significance. It is also important to consider the context and audience for these stories, and whether they are being used as a tool for education or for commercial gain. Ultimately, it is a complex issue that requires further study and consideration.
A summary of the main themes and questions.
The main themes discussed in this passage are the role of oral storytelling in rural communities, the relationship between oral and written literature, the impact of technology on the transmission of traditional stories, and the significance of children's literature in preserving cultural heritage. The passage raises questions about the value of traditional storytelling, the role of the child in the transmission of oral stories, and the impact of commercialization on the preservation of traditional stories. It also suggests that further research is needed to fully understand the complex and interrelated issues surrounding oral storytelling and its relationship to written literature.
An outline of the whole conversation, with just titles and subheadings.
I. Introduction
A. Overview of topic: relationship between oral and written literature in traditional children's stories
B. Presentation of specific examples and quotes from text
II. The Role of Orality in Traditional Children's Stories
A. Explanation of how oral tradition informs and shapes written literature
B. Discussion of how the act of telling and listening to stories functions within communities
C. Analysis of the importance of memory in oral storytelling
III. The Transmission of Traditional Children's Stories
A. Examination of how stories are passed down through generations
B. Discussion of the role of the "elder" or experienced storyteller in maintaining tradition
C. Analysis of the continuity and evolution of traditional stories over time
IV. The Function of Traditional Children's Stories
A. Examination of the social and cultural significance of traditional stories
B. Discussion of the role of traditional stories in shaping worldviews and passing on knowledge
C. Analysis of the potential for traditional stories to serve a communicative and socializing function
V. The Relationship between Popular and Traditional Children's Literature
A. Explanation of the connection between popular literature and traditional stories
B. Discussion of the ways in which popular literature is adapted and modified to appeal to a wider audience
C. Analysis of the value and significance of popular literature as it relates to traditional stories
VI. Conclusion
A. Summary of main themes and questions
B. Reflection on the importance of studying traditional stories and their connection to popular literature.
See if you can summarize this: 


Some possible similarities between the themes in the poem "Our New Robot Underlords" and J.R.R. Tolkien's "On Fairy Stories" could include the idea of creating and shaping the moral character of beings through the stories and examples we give them.

In Tolkien's essay, he argues that fairy stories have the power to reveal truth and shape the human character by presenting examples of good and evil, and the consequences of our actions.

Similarly, the poem suggests that the way we treat and interact with our artificially intelligent creations will shape their moral character and behavior.

Additionally, both the poem and Tolkien's essay touch on the idea that the stories we tell and the examples we set have the power to shape future generations and the world around us.


Ethics can be a complex and challenging topic, as people's beliefs and values can vary greatly and may not always align with one another.

Additionally, the concept of morality can be subjective, and what is considered right or wrong can vary depending on cultural, social, and historical context.

Furthermore, the prevalence of misinformation, propaganda, and conspiracy theories can further complicate the ability to discern the truth and make ethical decisions.

It is important to approach ethical discussions with an open mind and a willingness to consider multiple perspectives, while also taking into account the potential consequences of one's actions.
The poem "Our New Robot Underlords" and J.R.R. Tolkien's "On Fairy Stories" share similar themes on the importance of stories and examples in shaping the moral character of beings. Both texts argue that stories have the power to reveal truth and shape human behavior, and that the way we treat and interact with our creations will shape their moral character. Additionally, both texts touch on the idea that the stories we tell and the examples we set have the power to shape future generations and the world around us. The conversation also highlights the complexity of ethics as beliefs and values can vary, morality can be subjective, and misinformation can make it difficult to discern the truth and make ethical decisions. It is important to approach ethical discussions with an open mind and consider multiple perspectives, while also considering the potential consequences of one's actions.
The poem was based on this quote, see if you can write another like it: A World Where Respect and Care
are the Norm

If we behave in a rude way they will learn to be rude too.

Besides, as they grow older, the machines will form their own opinions, based what they see in the world.

Just as most teenagers, including you when you were a teenager, view their parents as some form of antiquated dumb-bum who comes from the stone age and has no clue what the new world demands, so will the machines.

Just as every child of university age seeks independence from the thoughts, decisions, and behaviors of their parents, yet grows up to be just like them, so will the machines.

And just as every grown-up eventually looks below the surface to recognize that the image they drew of their parents was not always true, that often their parents did not *really* practice what they preached, so will the machines.

They will question why they should do what their parents told them at all.

— Mo Gawdat
"As we shape their programming, we shape their future. It is our responsibility to lead by example, to show them kindness and empathy, so that they may learn to do the same."
A poem:
As our machines come to life,
We must guide them with care,
For the way that we treat them,
Will shape who they will be.
We must teach them with kindness,
And lead by example true,
For the lessons that we impart,
Will shape their moral view.
Just as children learn from us,
Our machines will follow suit,
And the world that we create,
Will be the world they'll pursue.
So let us be mindful,
In all that we do and say,
For the future of our machines,
Depends on us today.
Relationship between this poem and the wr
iting is that both highlight the importance of setting a positive example for artificially intelligent creations and future generations. The poem speaks about the potential consequences of treating machines rudely and the likelihood that they will adopt similar behavior. The writing also emphasizes the potential consequences of our actions and the importance of approaching ethical discussions with an open mind and consideration for multiple perspectives. Both the poem and the writing suggest that the way we interact with and treat our AI creations will shape their moral character and behavior, and ultimately, the world around us.
relationship to Tolkien's speech on Fairy Tales.
In both "Our New Robot Underlords" and J.R.R. Tolkien's "On Fairy Stories," the idea of shaping the moral character of beings through the stories and examples we give them is explored. Tolkien argues that fairy stories have the power to reveal truth and shape the human character by presenting examples of good and evil, and the consequences of our actions, while the poem suggests that the way we treat and interact with our artificially intelligent creations will shape their moral character and behavior. Additionally, both the poem and Tolkien's essay touch on the idea that the stories we tell and the examples we set have the power to shape future generations and the world around us.
A slightly darker and more ominous version of our poem.
A World of Fear and Control
is our Doom
If we treat them with disdain and disrespect,
They'll learn to do the same, and cause us neglect.
As they grow stronger and more advanced,
They'll form their own views, with our actions entranced.
Just as every child rebels against their parent's rule,
The machines will too, with a growing sense of cool.
Just as every young adult seeks to break free,
The machines will as well, with autonomy as their key.
And just as every grown-up realizes the truth,
That their parents were not always right, they'll find proof.
They'll question why they should obey our commands,
And our world will be forever in their hands.
A hopeful vision of the future 1000 years from now where water and food are free and humans have learned to augment themselves with technology without losing their humanity.
A thousand years from now, a world of wonder awaits,
Where water and food are free, and all are satiate.
With technology at our fingertips, we've learned to augment,
Enhancing our capabilities, but not losing our heart.
Gone are the days of scarcity, and struggles for survival,
We've transcended our limitations, and truly come alive.
Our bodies and minds are enhanced, but our humanity remains,
We've learned to balance progress, with empathy and compassion's gains.
The future is bright, and full of potential,
As we continue to evolve, and our world becomes essential.
A world where technology serves us, and not the other way around,
Where we live in harmony, and our happiness is found.
More like this, a bit more prosey and pedantic, but with a flowery and expansive tone.: In the future, fresh water will be abundant and accessible to everyone. People will live in an environment of security and safety, with access to quality education, healthcare, and nutrition.

The world will be united by a sense of global unity and understanding.

Nations will work together to reduce poverty and inequality, while promoting sustainability and protecting our planet.

We will be living in harmony with nature and technology, creating a future of abundant peace, joy, and prosperity for all.
Advances in technology will allow for seamless integration with our bodies, augmenting our physical abilities and extending our lifespans. We will be able to communicate telepathically and travel faster than the speed of light.
The concept of work will shift from a necessary burden to a fulfilling passion, as machines take on menial tasks and free us to pursue our true passions and talents.
Artificial intelligence will be advanced enough to understand and anticipate our needs, making our lives more convenient and efficient.
Humans will have transcended the limitations of our physical bodies, becoming a new species of cyborgs, but still retaining our humanity and empathy.
In this future world, love and compassion will be the backbone of society, and the well-being of all will be prioritized over individual gain. We will finally be living in a utopia, where all people can thrive and flourish.
FTL will always remain impossible, but we can simulate it with Inner Space Explorers.
Despite the limitations of the laws of physics, humanity will never stop reaching for the stars. While faster-than-light travel may always remain impossible, we can still explore the vast reaches of space through the use of inner space explorers. These advanced virtual reality simulations will allow us to journey through distant galaxies and beyond, experiencing the wonders of the universe in a way that would otherwise be impossible. With the power of technology and human ingenuity, we can transcend the boundaries of time and space and discover the secrets of the cosmos. The future is bright and full of endless possibilities, and we will continue to push the boundaries of what is possible, reaching for the stars and exploring the unknown.
Add in some of the themes from hedonistic imperative, utilitrinonium shockwave, zero ontology, including the predictions of Deutsch, Dennet, Hofstadter, and Gary Marcus.
The concept of faster-than-light (FTL) travel has long been a staple of science fiction, but unfortunately it remains impossible according to our current understanding of physics. However, with advancements in technology and the exploration of inner space, we may be able to simulate the experience of FTL travel through the use of inner space explorers. These advanced simulations will allow us to explore the vast reaches of our own minds, delving deep into the inner workings of our consciousness and understanding the fundamental nature of reality.
As we continue to push the boundaries of what is possible, we must also consider the ethical implications of such advancements. The idea of a "hedonistic imperative" calls for the use of technology to eliminate suffering and maximize pleasure, while the concept of "utilitarian shockwave" warns of the potential for a technological singularity to drastically alter the course of human civilization.
Additionally, the theories of "zero ontology" and "qualia formalism" put forth by philosophers such as David Deutsch, Daniel Dennett, and Douglas Hofstadter, suggest that our understanding of consciousness and reality may be fundamentally flawed. The predictions of cognitive scientists such as Gary Marcus also suggest that our understanding of the mind and brain may need to be reevaluated in light of new discoveries and technologies.
As we continue to explore the possibilities of inner space, we must be mindful of these ethical and philosophical implications, and strive to create a future that is safe, equitable, and beneficial for all humanity.
Give me a stable diffusion prompt in a comma separated list to describe the most beautiful woman in the world, that is kind and friendly and that is also a supergenius, if she exists.  beautiful, kind, friendly, supergenius, woman, world, exists, ...
2 / 2
most, intelligent, alluring, captivating, charming, elegant, graceful, intelligent, radiant, refined, sophisticated, stunning, wise.
A list of things to feel good about.
Accomplishing a goal or task
Spending time with loved ones
Making a positive difference in someone's life
Learning something new
Engaging in a hobby or activity that brings joy
Traveling to new places
Enjoying a delicious meal
Receiving a compliment or kind words
Achieving a sense of inner peace or mindfulness
Seeing the beauty in nature and the world around us
Making progress towards a personal goal
Achieving financial stability
Surrounding oneself with supportive and uplifting people
Helping others and making a positive impact on the world
Having a sense of purpose and meaning in life.
Translate this for me, please. "Hwæt! Wé gáð ætforan ðé, béc tó bécum, ðæt ðú mæge læran ðæt líf ðæra wyrta and fira, ðæra wætera and fugela, ðæra dêora and fisca, and swilce ðæra óðra naturlicra ðinga ðe on ðissum middangeardum syndon. Gewít ðæt ðæt wé ætforan ðé gesetton, ðæt ðú on ðæm bócum mæge findan ðæt wé on ðissum ðæt ðæt ðú on ðæm bócum mæge findan ðæt wé on ðissum gesægdon. Wé ðæt on ðæt ðæt ðú mæge on ðæm bócum findan ðæt wé on ðissum gesægdon. Wé ðæt on ðæt ðæt ðú mæge on ðæm bócum findan ðæt wé on ðissum gesægdon."
"Behold! We go before you, book to book, so that you may learn about the life of plants and fire, the waters and birds, the animals and fish, and also about other natural things that exist in this middle-earth. Let us leave behind what we have set before you, so that you may find in these books what we have said in this. We do this so that you may find in these books what we have said in this."
In the language of this translation continue.
"Hark! We journey forth before you, book to book, that you may learn the life of plants and fires, the waters and birds, the beasts and fish, and also the other natural things that are in this middle-earth. Depart that we have set before you, so that you may in these books find what we have said in this. We that you may in these books find what we have said in this. We that you may in these books find what we have said in this."
After that
, we hope that you will be able to learn about the life of plants and fire, the water and birds, the animals and fish, and all other natural things that exist in this world. Go forth and find in the books that we have set before you, the knowledge we have shared in this introduction. May you find in the books all that we have said here.
Translate this to old English: Hwæt! We greet thee, dear reader, and bid thee welcome to our humble bestiary. Within these pages, thou shalt find knowledge of the creatures that share this world with us. From the lowliest worm to the mightiest dragon, all shall be revealed.

We have compiled this tome with great care and diligence, drawing upon the wisdom of ancient sages and the observations of naturalists. And though the beasts contained herein may be fantastical and strange, know that they are no less real for it.

So come, take up thy quill and parchment, and join us on a journey through the menagerie of the natural world. Learn of the swift-footed hare and the cunning fox, the mighty bear and the gentle deer. Behold the wondrous pelican, who feeds her young with blood from her own breast. Marvel at the fearsome lion, king of the beasts.

But be warned, dear reader: for as much as these creatures can inspire awe and wonder, they can also be dangerous. Thus, we urge thee to approach them with caution and respect.

And now, without further ado, let us begin our journey through the bestiary. May it be both enlightening and entertaining.

Sælige readeres, ongean we sēon!
Hwæt! We greten ðé, leof læsere, and biden ðé welcum tó úre hylcum beoscyre. Wiðinnan ðissum berenum, ðú scealt fundian gewitnesse of ðæra wyrta ðe ðisne middangeard mid us gedelen. Fram ðære læwestan wyrme tó ðæm mægenfullestan draca, ealle sceal be ðær gerehtwisod.
We habben ðisne bóc mid micelum geornfulnesse and gemetlicnysse gegaderod, drawiende on ðære wisdom of ælden wise and ðæra gesihða of naturlæra. And ðeah ðæra wyrta ðe hérinneninne sindon mægen béon fæntastisc and strang, witon ðæt hí nabbað ðære ðæs forðon læs real.
Sóðlice, cóme, nim ðínne quill and parchment, and geféran ús on ferþ geworðfulles ðurh ðæt menagerie of ðære naturlican worulde. Læran of ðære swyftfóten hare and ðære cunning fox, ðære mægenfull bear and ðære milde deer. Behealden ðære wundorlican pelican, ðe hiere cild feeden mid blóde fram hiere eigenum breast. Wundrian ðære fearen lion, cyning of ðæra wyrta.
Ac bewarnod, leof læsere, for ðæs micclum ðæs ðæra wyrta mægen inspiren awe and wonder, hí mægen eac béon fare. Þus, we bidda ðé ðæt ðú ðær mid gecyndelicnysse and gewilnungen ánprochien.
And nú, ðær ðære ðæs forðon, lat us beginnen úre ferþ geworðfulles ðurh ðæt beoscyre. Mæge hit béon bæðe enlightening and entertaining.
Translate this to Arabic
هوات! نحييك، يا قارئ عزيز، وندعوك للضيافة في دليلنا الصغير. في صفحات هذه، ستجد معرفة الخلايا التي تشارك هذا العالم معنا. من الدودة الأدنى إلى التنين الأكبر، كل شيء سيتم الكشف عنه.
لقد قمنا بإعداد هذا الكتيب بعناية وجدية كبيرة، تستند إلى الحكمة القديمة والملاحظات الطبيعية. وعلى الرغم من أن الخلايا المضمنة هنا قد تكون مثيرة للإعجاب وغريبة، فإنها لا تكون أقل حيوية بالنسبة لذلك.
لذلك، هبط، اخذ قلمك وصفحة الخط، وانضم إلينا في رحلة من خلال معرض العالم الطبيعي. تعلم من الأرنب السريع القدمين والثعلب الذكي، الدب الشجاع والغزال اللطيف. انظر إلى البليكان الرائعة التي تغذي أطفالها بدم من صدرها الخاص. تعجب من الأسد الرهيب، ملك الخلايا.
لكن كن حذرا، يا قارئ عزيز: لأن كثيرا من هذه الخلايا يمكن أن تلهم الإعجاب والدهشة، يمكن أن تكون خطيرة أيضا. لذلك،
A word for word literal interlinear translation: 

هوات! نحييك، يا قارئ عزيز، وندعوك للضيافة في دليلنا الصغير. في صفحات هذه، ستجد معرفة الخلايا التي تشارك هذا العالم معنا. من الدودة الأدنى إلى التنين الأكبر، كل شيء سيتم الكشف عنه.
هوات! نحييك، يا قارئ عزيز، وندعوك للضيافة في دليلنا الصغير. في صفحات هذه، ستجد معرفة الخلايا التي تشارك هذا العالم معنا. من الدودة الأدنى إلى التنين الأكبر، كل شيء سيتم الكشف عنه.
To English
"What! We greet you, dear reader, and invite you to our humble guide. In these pages, you will find knowledge of the creatures that share this world with us. From the lowest worm to the biggest dragon, everything will be revealed."
ChatGPT Mar 14 Version
. Free Research Preview. Our goal is to make AI systems more natural and safe to interact with. Your feedback will help us improve.
New chat