Transformer Recursion Analysis
Open sidebar
Transformer Recursion Analysis
Model: Default (GPT-3.5)
Summarize: Can Transformers Learn to Solve Problems Recursively? 
Shizhuo Dylan Zhang1Curt Tigges2Stella Biderman2,3Maxim Raginsky1Talia Ringer1 
1University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign2EleutherAI3Booz Allen Hamilton 
{shizhuo2,maxim,tringer}@illinois.edu 
{curt,stella}@eleuther.ai 
Abstract 
Neural networks have in recent years shown promise for helping software engineers 
write programs and even formally verify them. While semantic information plays 
a crucial part in these processes, it remains unclear to what degree popular neural 
architectures like transformers are capable of modeling that information. 
This paper examines the behavior of neural networks learning algorithms relevant to 
programs and formal verification proofs through the lens of mechanistic interpretability, 
focusing in particular on structural recursion. Structural recursion is at the heart of tasks 
on which symbolic tools currently outperform neural models, like inferring semantic 
relations between datatypes and emulating program behavior. 
We evaluate the ability of transformer models to learn to emulate the behavior of 
structurally recursive functions from input-output examples. Our evaluation includes 
empirical and conceptual analyses of the limitations and capabilities of transformer 
models in approximating these functions, as well as reconstructions of the "shortcut" 
algorithms the model learns. By reconstructing these algorithms, we are able to 
correctly predict 91% of failure cases for one of the approximated functions. Our work 
provides a new foundation for understanding the behavior of neural networks that fail 
to solve the very tasks they are trained for. 
1Introduction 
A revolution in neural methods for programming languages tasks is underway. Once confined to the realm 
of symbolic methods, some of the most performant tools for synthesizing [3, 4, 21, 5], repairing [16, 35, 
41], and even formally verifying [1, 42, 12, 37, 36, 13] programs now rest in part or in whole upon neural 
foundations. 
But how sturdy are these foundations? At the core of many of these tools are transformer-based large 
language models [4, 5, 13]. It is an open question to what degree these models are simply repeating 
program syntax, and to what degree they have some model of program semantics—how programs 
behave and what they mean. State-of-the-art language models still rely on tricks like chain of thought 
prompting [40] and scratchpadding [28] to approximate program semantics. Even models trained on code 
often need to be finetuned to solve specific tasks instead of used in a multitask fashion [4, 2, 20]. 
In this paper, we investigate the degree to which small transformer [38] models can learn to model the 
semantics of an important class of programs: structural recursion. A program is an example of structural 
recursion if it is defined over some data structure (say, binary trees) by recursively calling itself over smaller 
substructures (say, left and right subtrees). Structural recursion is at the heart of important programming 
and theorem proving tasks for which neural methods still lag behind symbolic methods, like inferring 
semantic relations between datatypes [34, 33]. 
Drawing on previous work on reverse engineering neural networks [39, 27, 6], we train small transformer 
models to solve structural recursion problems and explore the extent to which the models are able to solve 
Preprint. Under review. 
arXiv:2305.14699v1 
[cs.LG] 
24 
May 
2023 
the problems. Our emphasis in particular is on understanding the ways in which the algorithms learned 
by transformers fail to correctly solve the tasks for which they were trained. 
We make the following contributions: (1) We conduct a comprehensive empirical study on two 
representative types of recursive tasks for transformers (Section 3): the binary successor function, which 
hasasinglerecursivesubcase, andatreetraversal, whichhastworecursivesubcases. Ourstudyinvestigates 
different aspects and granularities of the models' behaviors on these tasks. For example, we train a 
model on an atomic subtask of a tree traversal and find that it performs well on that subtask, even though 
a model trained with the same setup on the end-to-end traversal fails. (2) We describe a conceptual 
framework based on abstract-state machines (ASMs) that allows us to analyze programs, examining 
transformer behavior within a formal model of its practical computation (Section 4). (3) We reconstruct 
the mechanisms of transformers in learning the recursive tasks and identify their flaws (Section 5). By 
reconstructing these mechanisms, we are able to correctly predict specific classes of inputs on which the 
models fail—correctly predicting up to 91% of failures! Our analysis also reveals evidence of differences 
in the learned algorithms and under different hyperparameter set-ups.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
This paper investigates whether transformer neural networks can learn to solve problems recursively, particularly focusing on the concept of structural recursion. This is crucial as it forms the core of many programming tasks and theorem proving, areas where symbolic methods currently outperform neural models.
Two types of recursive tasks are examined: the binary successor function and a tree traversal task. These tasks are chosen because they represent different levels of complexity, with the binary successor function being a simpler task with a single recursive sub-case, and tree traversal being a more complex task with two recursive sub-cases.
The authors adopt a mechanistic approach to interpretability, reconstructing the "shortcut" algorithms that the model learns, allowing them to understand how these models work and why they fail in certain cases. By using these reconstructions, they were able to predict up to 91% of failure cases for one of the approximated functions.
In addition to empirical testing, the authors propose a conceptual framework based on abstract-state machines (ASMs) to analyze how transformers solve these tasks, providing a formal model for understanding the computational behavior of transformers.
The study reveals that transformer models have some limitations in approximating these functions, which could be due to the ways in which the algorithms are learned. The results suggest that while transformers can learn certain aspects of recursive tasks, there are still significant challenges in fully capturing the semantics of such tasks. This provides a new foundation for understanding the behavior of neural networks that fail to solve the tasks they're trained for.
1 / 1
2Representing Structural Recursion 
For this work, we are interested in how transformer models learn to approximate structural recursion: 
a restricted but powerful class of recursive functions that are defined in a structurally decreasing manner, 
and so must terminate. This is a popular representation of recursion in the program and proof literature 
because it is very expressive, but easy to reason about. 
Consider, for example, defining a recursive function that adds two positive natural numbers. We start 
by defining the datatype representing those numbers—a unary encoding of Peano natural numbers—as 
in Figure 1a (the syntax here comes from a proof tool called Coq)). 
Inductive peano = 
| I : peano (*base case *) 
| S : ∀ (n : peano), peano. (*inductive 
case *) 
(a) Unary encoding of Peano natural numbers. 
Fixpoint add n m := 
match n with (*breakintocases *) 
| I => S m (*if n is one,return S m*) 
| S p => S (add p m) (*otherise ,recurse *) 
end. 
(b) Addition using structural pattern matching. 
Figure 1: Representing structural recursion. 
This describes the construction of instances of the datatype, with two cases: (1) the base case where one 
is a positive natural number denotedI, and (2) the inductive case where adding one to any positive natural 
numberngives a new positive natural numberS n 
We can write recursive functions and proofs over this datatype. Consider addition using structural pattern 
matching and recursion, as in Figure 1b.1In the base case,add 1 m2is its successorS m. In the inductive 
case, we recurse: we computeadd (S p) mby recursively computingadd p mand then taking its successor. 
Thenicethingaboutthisrepresentationisthatitconstructsdatatypesfromscratch,bydescribingallwaysof 
constructing those datatypes, and establishing their semantics by functions defined over them. Importantly, 
these semantics are independent of specific character representations and any preexisting associations 
(for example, to numbers) that a model may have learned; what we call these datatypes is irrelevant. 
Still, this simple representation corresponds to a broad class of datatypes that is well studied in 
programming languages, and that makes it simple for us to define important recursive tasks. 
3Tasks 
We consider two tasks: the binary successor function (Section 3.1) and a tree traversal (Section 3.2). For 
each task, we choose (1) an inductive representation of a datatype (likepeano), (2) a recursive function 
1For those unfamiliar with structural pattern matching, one can view matchas a glorifiedifstatement that can 
split into cases based on substructures in a smart way. There are some helpful tutorials for Python online, for example: 
https://peps.python.org/pep-0636/. 
2Coq uses parentheses only for grouping, not for function calls; in Python this would be written add(1, m). 
2 
over that datatype (likeadd), and (3) variants of a learning task to approximate that function. Since our 
interest is in whether the model can lean to emulate recursion, we train each model to approximate the 
function's computation, rather than to explicitly represent the function. 
3.1Binary Successor 
The binary successor function task is a simplification of a common benchmark used for over two decades 
of symbolic proof automation [23, 33]. It captures the essence of what it means to adapt functions and 
proofs defined over the unarypeanonatural numbers so that they instead are defined over binary natural 
numbers. Its appeal is that it is simple and useful, yet still structurally interesting, in that its structure does 
not just amount to counting. 
Inductive RepresentationA positive binary number can be defined inductively: 
Inductive bin_pos := 
| 01 : bin_pos (*base case *) 
| XO : ∀ (b : bin_pos), bin_pos (*first 
inductivecase:shiftleft *) 
| X1 : ∀ (b : bin_pos), bin_pos. (*second 
inductive case:shiftright and increment *) 
That is, a positive binary number is either (1) one (the base case, denoted01), (2) any another positive 
binary number shifted to the left (the first inductive case, denotedXO bfor positive binaryb), or (3) any 
other positive binary number shifted to the left and then incremented by one (the second inductive case, 
denotedX1 bfor positive binaryb). One can uniquely construct all positive binary numbers by making sequences ofXOandX1calls on01. For example, two can be written asXO 01: shift01to the left. Three 
can be written asX1 01: shift01to the left and then increment. And so on. 
To recover the "natural" ordering we might write on paper, we can just reverse the result and remove the 
Xs. So, for example,XO XO 01becomes100(four). The "reverse" ordering makes it easy to define functions 
recursively, since it is structurally decreasing—functions on sequences can be defined in terms of functions 
on the subsequences that follow. We train separate models to learn from input/output examples defined 
using each of the "natural" and "reverse" orderings.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
In this section, the authors delve into representing structural recursion and provide details on the two tasks they have chosen to investigate: the binary successor function and a tree traversal.
Structural recursion is a specific type of recursive function that are defined in a structurally decreasing manner, ensuring their termination. They are typically used in programming and proofs due to their expressiveness and ease of reasoning.
The authors begin with a representation of Peano natural numbers as an example of structural recursion. This representation is expressive and has the advantage of constructing datatypes from scratch, meaning it does not depend on specific character representations or any pre-existing associations a model might have learned.
The first task, the binary successor function, is a simplification of a common benchmark used for symbolic proof automation. The authors chose it because of its simplicity and structural interest. It involves transforming functions and proofs defined over unary Peano natural numbers to work over binary natural numbers. A positive binary number can be defined as either one, another positive binary number shifted to the left, or another positive binary number shifted to the left and incremented by one.
The authors trained separate models to learn from input/output examples defined using both the "natural" and "reverse" orderings of these binary numbers. The goal is not to have the model explicitly represent the function, but to approximate the function's computation.
1 / 1
Recursive ComputationWe target the successor function: 
Fixpoint s n := 
match n with (*breakintocases *) 
| 01 => XO 01 (*if n is one,return two*) 
| XO b => X1 b (*if the LSB is zero ,flipit *) 
| X1 b => XO (s b) (*otherwise ,recurse andshift *) 
end. 
O1 
O1O1 
XO O1 
XOXO O1X1XO O1 
XObX1b 
X1 
X1 
X1 O1 
bXOs(b) 
XOs(X1 O1)Recursive Case 
Pattern Matching 
The function matches over the first character (the least significant bit or LSB) and increments. In the base 
case, it increments one (01) to two (XO 01). In the first inductive case, given some binary numberbshifted 
to the left (XO b), it increments by flipping the LSB from zero to one (X1 b). In the second inductive case, 
given some binary numberbshifted to the left and incremented by one (X1 b), it increments by recursively 
computing the successor ofb(s b), and then shifting the result to the left (XO (s b). For example, the 
successor of eleven (1011, represented asX1 X1 XO 01) is twelve (1100, represented asXO XO X1 01), since: 
s (X1 X1 XO 01) = XO (s (X1 XO 01)) = XO XO (s (XO 01) = XO XO X1 01 
Details on the importance of this particular function can be found in Appendix A.2.1. 
Recursion by ExampleWe train our binary successor models on input-output pairs representing 
computation of the successor function. For inspiration and understanding, it is worth thinking through 
how to learn the binary successor function from examples as a human. We can learn this function from 
a small number of input/output examples, without invoking knowledge of numbers: 
s 01 = XO 01 
s (XO 01) = X1 01 
s (X1 01) = XO XO 01 
s (XO XO 01) = X1 XO 01 
s (X1 XO 01) = XO X1 01 
s (XO X1 01) = X1 X1 01 
These examples fully represent the three cases. We compose instances using only three symbols:XO,X1, 
and the base case01. Heuristics and prior knowledge guide us, considering pattern matching and recursion, 
and preferring simple functions. We can infer a template, match cases, and fill in the template based on 
input-output examples. More details can be found in Appendix A.2.1. 
3 
This approach to learningsis roughly how symbolic automation for program synthesis works. This can 
get considerably more complicated—and require more examples—if we assume that it is possible for 
our synthesized function to call other functions in its computation, or to do unbounded recursion [19]. 
But this is still the essence of synthesizing recursive functions symbolically—and it needs no knowledge 
of the fact thatbin_posrepresents numbers, let alone binary positive numbers. 
Our goal for this task is to see how much of this semantic information a transformer model can learn 
without the priors we just described—plus how it represents the information it learns, and where the 
learned algorithms fall short. 
3.2Tree Traversal 
For a second and more challenging task, we consider tree traversals. How transformer models approximate 
the behavior of tree traversals is informative for many important symbolic domains, since tree traversals 
are at the heart of the symbolic search procedures for programs, games, and proofs. If transformers can 
approximate tree traversals, this may mean better performance of neural tools for these procedures without 
the need for a symbolic search procedure to guide the way. 
Inductive RepresentationWe study the traversal of binary trees with character values. The code for 
this is in Appendix A.2.2; it includes an emptyLeafbase case, and aBranchinductive case that stores a 
character value, a left subtree, and a right subtree. For example, we can represent a tree with'a'at the 
root,'c'in a node to its left, and't'in a node to its right as follows: 
Branch 'a' (Branch 'c' Leaf Leaf) (Branch 't' Leaf Leaf) 
Recursion by ExampleWe consider preorder and inorder traversals.Details are deferred to 
Appendix A.2.2. As with the previous example, we consider the problem of learning these recursive 
functions from input-output examples. Since the tree datastructure is not sequential in its recursive structure 
(that is, each pass of recursion visits both the left and right subtrees), we also decompose these traversals 
into atomic computations and see if those are easier to learn. The machine learning inspiration for these 
atomic computations comes from chain of thought reasoning, while the exact atomic computations we 
choose come from programming languages research. These atomic computations decompose recursion 
into one reduction step at a time. For example, to compute: 
inorder (Branch 'a' (Branch 'c' Leaf Leaf) (Branch 't' Leaf Leaf)) 
we can reduce one step by selecting theBranchcase and substituting in the right values: 
(inorder (Branch 'c' Leaf Leaf)) ++ ['a'] ++ (inorder (Branch 't' Leaf Leaf)) 
Two more reductions (see Appendix A.2.2) get us to the final result,['c'; 'a'; 't']. Each reduction step 
here has a formal meaning in programming languages, in terms of "reduction rules" named after various 
Greek letters. Computation amounts to compositio
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
The authors then proceed to discuss the implementation of the successor function for the binary number representation, and then the second task, tree traversal.
For the binary successor function, they use structural pattern matching. The function increments the binary number depending on the least significant bit. If the number is one, it returns two. If the least significant bit is zero, it flips it to one. If the least significant bit is one, it computes the successor of the rest of the number and shifts the result left. For instance, the successor of eleven (1011) is twelve (1100).
They aim to train their models on pairs of input-output examples that represent computation of the successor function. They explain that learning the binary successor function from examples, even without any knowledge of numbers, is possible due to the distinct patterns that emerge from the input-output pairs.
The authors then transition to the second task, tree traversal, which is more challenging and relevant to many symbolic domains, as tree traversals are essential to symbolic search procedures in programs, games, and proofs. They use an inductive representation of binary trees with character values.
The authors consider two types of tree traversals: preorder and inorder. They also explore the problem of learning these recursive functions from input-output examples and decompose the traversals into atomic computations to see if they are easier to learn. Each reduction step in the atomic computations has a formal meaning in programming languages, known as "reduction rules."
Overall, the authors aim to investigate how much semantic information a transformer model can learn from these tasks and where the learned algorithms might fall short. They are interested in how the models represent the information they learn and how they approximate the behavior of tree traversals.
1 / 1
of these reduction rules until it is no longer possible 
to reduce further; the order of reduction does not matter. Using this as inspiration, in addition to training 
models to learn the traversal all at once, we also train models to reduce the traversal just one, two, or three 
times at once, to see at what point performance degrades. 
4Computation Model: Abstract State Machines 
We now need a computation model that can encompass both the original recursive implementation and its 
approximatesimulationbyalearnedtransformernetwork. Intuitively,transformersdonotimplementstacks 
to trace recursion, yet instead are sequence models by construction. On the other hand, computation models 
likeTuringmachinesoperateonlowlevelsofabstraction,makingthemhardtointerpret. AbstractStateMa- 
chines(ASMs)[17]wereintroducedwiththeexplicitgoalofcapturingthesemanticsofprogramsatvarious 
levels of abstraction, and so provide us with a flexible yet powerful framework to analyze transformers. 
The states of ASMs are first-order structures of the form(U,f1,...,fk), whereU, called the algo- 
rithm's universe, is a set that includes the constantstrue, false, undefand where the collec- 
tion of functionsfi: Uni→ Uincludes 
Boolean functionsnot: U → {true,false,undef}and 
and:U2→{true,false,undef}. 
TheBooleanconstantsandfunctionsareneededtoimplementcondition- 
als and other flow control structures and guards, such asif ...then ...else. The setUcan be 
4 
infinite and has minimal restrictions on the datatypes it can take, e.g., real matrices or tensors, streams, and 
so on. Likewise, the functionsfican include operations like matrix multiplication, list or stream operations, 
and so on. Closer to our purposes,Umay include token- and positional-embeddings, while the functions 
fimay include the MLPs, self- and cross-attention matrices, and all other building blocks of transformer 
networks[32]. Eachdecodingstepofanencoder-decodertransformerisnaturallyasequentialASMupdate. 
Notably, the two key features of ASMs are a finite instruction set and a possibly infinite state. Starting 
from this perspective, we can analyze the algorithms implemented by learned transformers by attempting 
to search for its pattern classifiers and theif-elsestructure following each pattern, as well as the 
functions applied in each case at each time step. A simple example of such procedure would be "if{the 
sequence to be generated is complete} then generate [EOS] token." 
The challenge arises when using learned transformer networks to approximate or simulate recursive 
algorithms. First, the ASM it simulates lacks recursive structure by nature. Also, training samples provide 
a partial extensional description of the unknown recursive function, while the pattern classifier determining 
recursive calls is an intensional description not encoded in the training objective or data. To this end, 
understanding whether the class of sequential ASMs implemented by transformer networks can effectively 
approximate recursive ASMs comes down to reconstructing the program by identifying the conditionals 
and functions it implements, examining the correctness of its approximated program, and evaluating its 
capability of correctly executing that program. We discuss experimentation toward this end in Appendix B. 
5Empirical Analysis 
We trained transformer models to tackle the binary successor (Section 5.1) and tree traversal (Section 5.2) 
tasks from Section 3. We focused on encoder-decoder models since encoder-only and decoder-only archi- 
tectures performed worse under our set-up (Appendix E). We framed both tasks as sequence-to-sequence 
problems. We summarize the results here; we defer training details to Appendix A.1. 
5.1Binary Successor Task 
For the binary successor task, we found the following: 
1.The model's attention maps exhibit clear recursion-capturing patterns (Section 5.1.1). These 
attention maps unveil what we call recursion heads. 
2.A perturbation analysis provides a granular explanation of the algorithm (Section 5.1.2). 
We are able to reverse engineer the learned algorithm by perturbing tokens on the fly. 
3.A majority of failures are foreseeable from the reconstructed algorithm (Section 5.1.3). We 
can predict 91% of failure cases from the reverse engineered algorithm. 
4.Learning rates impact learned algorithms and generalization abilities (Section 5.1.4). The 
model appears to learn different algorithms for different learning rates. 
A detailed reconstruction of the learned algorithms we reverse engineered for this task is in Appendix C. 
5.1.1The Model's Attention Maps Exhibit Clear Recursion-Capturing Patterns 
Our first step to understanding the algorithm implemented by the model was to visualize the attention 
maps of the model. For an encoder-decoder transformer, three types of attention can be analyzed: decoder 
self-attention, encoder-decodercrossattention, andencoderself-attention. Forthistask, wefoundthatcross- 
attention was not interesting g but decoder and encoder self-attentions exhibited visibly interesting behaviors. 
Ourvisualizationofdecoderself-attentionrevealedanoteworthyphenomenoninthefinallayer—something 
we call a recursion head that specializes to recursive cases. This was present in both the natural and reverse 
orders,thoughitserveddifferentpurposesineachorder,sinceeachorderimplementedadifferentalgorithm: 
•In the natural order (Figure 6e), the model commences attending to the last bit prior to flipping 
fromX1toXO, and continues to do so until the end of the sequence. Thereafter, the recursion 
head predominantly allocates its attention towards the token we have described. 
•In the reverse order (Figure 2a), the recursion head directs its attention towards theX1tokens 
that have been generated earlier. This attention mechanism distinguishes between recursive 


Figure 3: Perturbation analysis for the binary successor task. Figures 3c and 3d are positional-encoding 
perturbations. SOR stands for 'start-of-recusion' and EOS stands for 'end-of-sentence'. Figure 3e is the 
attention map of the recursion head on the natural order (Nat.) after adding the positional encoding of 
the token before the start of recursion to the bit after recursion starts. Figure 3f is the attention map of the 
recursion head on the reversed order (Rev.) after randomly flipping a token in the recursive segment toX1. 
segments, which necessitate modifications, and non-recursive segments, which do not require 
any rewrites. The first occurrence of anX1token encountered by the recursion head serves as 
a boundary that separates these distinct segments. 
The encoder self-attention maps suggest that encoders also play a part in modeling semantics by helping 
differentiate between cases (Figure 2b, and Figure 2c). In particular, the model employs its low-level 
attention to identify and differentiate symbols by attending to tokens of the same kind. 
5.1.2A Perturbation Analysis Provides a Granular Explanation of the Algorithm 
Attention maps are useful for forming hypotheses about model behavior, but they reveal only correlations, 
without any causal information. To gain causal insights into the model's behavior, we conducted 
perturbation analyses—mutating tokens (i.e. randomly inserting, removing or flipping, as illustrated in 
Figures 3a and 3b) and swapping positional encodings (see Figures 3c and 3d) on the fly on the decoder 
side to see how this impacted the model's behavior. 
From this analysis, we were able to reconstruct the algorithm the model learns for the natural order: (1) 
It computes the total number of bits required based on the input, and identifies the position at which the 
concluding bit of the subsequence eligible for direct copying from the input sequence is located. (2) It 
copies this particular segment, followed by a singleX1, followed byXOtok
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
This extract seems to be discussing a research study examining the learning behavior of transformer-based machine learning models, specifically focusing on their ability to learn and execute recursive functions.
The study utilizes two primary tasks for this evaluation: a binary successor function and tree traversal. The binary successor function involves calculating the next positive binary number given an input binary number, whereas the tree traversal task requires the model to navigate a binary tree with character values in either a pre-order or in-order fashion.
These tasks are formatted as sequence-to-sequence problems and the models trained for these tasks are encoder-decoder transformer models, which are particularly suitable for sequence-to-sequence tasks.
The findings from the binary successor task suggest that transformer models can capture recursive patterns in their attention maps. The researchers introduced the term "recursion head" to describe this observed phenomenon. They also employed perturbation analysis (intentionally introducing changes in the input to observe their effects on the output) to understand the model's algorithm in more detail. From this, they could identify conditions that led to failures in the model's output and also observe that learning rates had an impact on the algorithm the model ended up learning.
In the case of tree traversal, the researchers break down the process into atomic computations to evaluate at which point the model's performance starts to degrade. They also explore the use of Abstract State Machines (ASMs) to analyze the algorithmic behavior of transformers, given their flexibility in capturing various levels of abstraction and semantic nuances in programs.
The ultimate goal of the research is to understand how transformer models learn and execute recursive functions, understand their limitations, and analyze how the learned information is represented within the model.
1 / 1
5.2.2Models Learn Simple Parenthesis and Bracket Tracking Rules to Perform Reduction 
Inadditiontoheadsthatwrite-outnodevalues, thoseheadsthatarethemostimpactfulfortaskperformance 
are responsible for tracking brackets and parentheses—that is, attempting to track recursion depth—both 
looking ahead to future closures and looking back at the existing output. For example, in the preorder 
traversal task, among the four cross-attention heads, those at Layer 0 displayed a clear separation of tasks 
where one head looked ahead in the encoded sequence and attended most to forward parenthesis, brackets, 
and EMPTY tokens, while the other attention head tended to attend to the encoder sequence tokens in a 
fairly linear fashion. Depending on the task, closure or opening of brackets acted as signals for the network 
to change its behavior. In steps when behavior change was required (e.g., completing the copy of a subtree 
and inserting a non-consecutive symbol or node from the encoder input), we see that the attention heads 
pay particular attention to the brackets and symbols. For example, decoder self-attention heads will attend 
to a previous UNROLL symbol when determining whether an EMPTY token should be copied or omitted. 
5.2.3Models Learn Depth-Specific Tricks 
Our observations showed that models learned specific tricks for certain depths. For example, for simple 
two-stepreductionsintheinordercase,themodelcansimplycopytherootnodefromthebeginningofapar- 
enthetical sequence once that subtree has been copied into an UNROLL statement. But in deeper trees with 
three reductions, the model needs to track the difference between parent nodes and the base root node. As 
such, we observed that when performing these deeper reductions the model relies on decoder self-attention 
andwillattendtocompletedUNROLLphraseswhichweusetosymbolizeapplicationofone-stepreduction 
on the subtree inside of it (See Section 3.2 and the appendix), composing this input with cross-attention 
to the parentheses and key parent nodes—a phenomenon we did not see for more shallow reductions. 
Conceivably, decoder cross-attention heads could use this as a signal to attend to and copy the first node 
prior to the initial node inside the UNROLL statement, similar to the induction heads found in GPT-2 [11]. 
6Related Work 
UnderstandingTransformersWorkonunderstandingtheunderlyingmechanismsoftransformersspans 
many angles, from categorizing computational capabilities [10, 44, 45, 43] by measuring performance 
on synthetic tasks, to deriving theoretical arguments [22, 25, 30, 31, 18], to analyzing the functionalities 
of parameters [14], to reverse engineering learned algorithms from the perspective of mechanistic 
interpretability [27, 6]. Our work in particular focuses on the ways in which transformer models fail on the 
very tasks they are trained for, with an emphasis on an important class of algorithms that can be modeled 
by structural recursion. 9 
Mechanistic InterpretabilityOur analyses of the algorithms performed by our trained models was 
inspired by existing work in the relatively new field of mechanistic interpretability, and includes methods 
such as counterfactual patching[24], circuit tracing[39], automatic circuit discovery [7], and component 
ablation. In our work we use a number of these techniques to reverse-engineer the critical components 
of the model and how they carry out the algorithm that solves the tasks in question. 
Program and Proof SynthesisThe tasks we choose are inspired by work in program and proof 
synthesis [15, 19, 29, 26, 34, 33, 23, 3], and are also an important class of functions for inductive logic 
programming [8]. Transformer-based large language models have brought significant progress to program 
synthesis [5, 4], but current tools still struggle to emulate function behavior without prompt engineering 
techniques like chain of thought prompting [40] or scratchpad reasoning [28]. Our work pursues a better 
understanding of how transformer models fail to represent recursive function behavior. We also hope 
that our work will help open the door to later working making sense of why these prompt engineering 
techniques may help to begin with. 
7Conclusions, Limitations, and Future Work 
Transformer models can approximate the behavior of important structurally recursive functions, but the 
shortcuts they learn fall short. We have shown that, by reconstructing the algorithms corresponding to 
these shortcuts, it is possible to understand and even predict how and why they fall short. In this work, 
our main focus was on toy transformer models trained from scratch, while we deferred the understanding 
of large pretrained language models to future work. One next step is to use similar analyses to understand 
the shortcomings of large pretrained language models on programming and reasoning tasks, and to make 
sense of why tricks like chain of thought reasoning and scratchpadding help on those tasks. Beyond that, 
we
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
This section presents the findings of the tree traversal task, which involves navigating a binary tree with character values in either a pre-order or in-order fashion.
The researchers found that the models learned to track parentheses and brackets, effectively enabling the models to track recursion depth. These findings suggest that the models were capable of modifying their behavior based on the positioning of brackets and other tokens.
Interestingly, the models also learned certain "tricks" specific to trees of particular depths. For instance, in trees requiring three reductions, the models demonstrated the ability to distinguish between parent nodes and root nodes. The researchers observed this behavior particularly when the models were performing deeper reductions, and it is suggested that the models used a combination of decoder self-attention and cross-attention to facilitate these more complex operations.
The study then connects its work with related research in areas such as understanding transformer models, mechanistic interpretability, and program and proof synthesis. These areas of research explore the computational capabilities of transformer models, provide techniques for interpreting the functionality of these models, and use the models for programming tasks and proof synthesis, respectively.
Finally, the researchers conclude that while transformer models can approximate structurally recursive functions, they fall short in capturing the complete behavior. The research aims to understand the failure modes of these transformer models, with a view to future research on large pretrained language models. The hope is that this work will provide the foundation for better understanding the limitations of these models on programming and reasoning tasks, and perhaps improve their capabilities in these areas.
1 / 1
we are excited to use our newfound understanding to drive future improvements to training and prompting 
techniques, neural architectures, and evaluation methodologies.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
The researchers conclude by expressing their anticipation for applying the insights gained from their study to enhance various aspects of AI and machine learning. The knowledge they have gleaned about the ways transformer models perform structurally recursive functions will guide their improvements in the following areas:
Training and prompting techniques: They will use their findings to refine the processes through which models learn to perform tasks, and the way these tasks are presented or "prompted" to the models.
Neural architectures: Insights into how transformer models handle structurally recursive functions will inform the development of new, more effective neural network designs.
Evaluation methodologies: The study's findings will also assist in enhancing the methods through which models' performance is assessed, leading to more accurate and meaningful evaluation metrics.
Overall, the research provides a foundation for future explorations and improvements in the field of AI and machine learning, particularly in the context of transformer models and their application to complex tasks involving recursion and other computational processes.
1 / 1
Α simple step by step explanation.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
This research paper discusses how transformer models deal with structurally recursive functions, aiming to analyze their failures and understand their learning patterns. Here's a simplified step-by-step explanation of the key points in the paper:
Recursive Functions: Recursive functions are functions that solve problems by solving smaller instances of the same problem. These are common in programming and mathematics. The paper uses binary successor and tree traversal tasks to study how transformer models handle recursive functions.
Transformer Models: These are types of artificial neural network models that use self-attention mechanisms and are often used in natural language processing tasks. The researchers trained transformer models to perform the binary successor and tree traversal tasks.
Failures and Shortcomings: The researchers found that while transformer models could approximate the behavior of recursive functions, they often relied on shortcuts and missed the recursive nature of these functions. This led to failures, particularly when the models had to handle more complex recursive tasks.
Computation Model: Abstract State Machines (ASMs) were used to provide a flexible and powerful framework to analyze transformer models. ASMs represent the states of a computation process, which can be useful to understand how transformers handle recursive functions.
Algorithm Analysis: Through careful examination of attention maps and perturbation analysis (making small changes to observe the effect on the outcome), the researchers were able to reverse-engineer the learned algorithms and predict where failures were likely to occur. This insight helped them understand how transformer models handle recursion.
Future Improvements: The findings of this research will be useful for future improvements to training methods, neural architectures, and evaluation methodologies in the field of AI and machine learning.
In essence, the research provides insight into how transformer models tackle recursion, highlighting their limitations and suggesting areas for future improvement.
1 / 1
[Submitted on 23 May 2023]
Sophia: A Scalable Stochastic Second-order Optimizer for Language Model Pre-training
Hong Liu, Zhiyuan Li, David Hall, Percy Liang, Tengyu Ma
Download PDF
Given the massive cost of language model pre-training, a non-trivial improvement of the optimization algorithm would lead to a material reduction on the time and cost of training. Adam and its variants have been state-of-the-art for years, and more sophisticated second-order (Hessian-based) optimizers often incur too much per-step overhead. In this paper, we propose Sophia, Second-order Clipped Stochastic Optimization, a simple scalable second-order optimizer that uses a light-weight estimate of the diagonal Hessian as the pre-conditioner. The update is the moving average of the gradients divided by the moving average of the estimated Hessian, followed by element-wise clipping. The clipping controls the worst-case update size and tames the negative impact of non-convexity and rapid change of Hessian along the trajectory. Sophia only estimates the diagonal Hessian every handful of iterations, which has negligible average per-step time and memory overhead. On language modeling with GPT-2 models of sizes ranging from 125M to 770M, Sophia achieves a 2x speed-up compared with Adam in the number of steps, total compute, and wall-clock time. Theoretically, we show that Sophia adapts to the curvature in different components of the parameters, which can be highly heterogeneous for language modeling tasks. Our run-time bound does not depend on the condition number of the loss.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
The research paper discusses "Sophia," a new second-order optimizer designed to improve the efficiency of language model pre-training. Here's a simplified explanation:
Problem Statement
: Training large language models is costly in terms of both time and computational resources. The Adam optimizer and its variants have been the standard for years, but more sophisticated second-order (Hessian-based) optimizers often require too much overhead per step.
Sophia
: The researchers propose Sophia (Second-order Clipped Stochastic Optimization), a scalable second-order optimizer that uses a lightweight estimate of the diagonal Hessian as a pre-conditioner. The Hessian matrix is a second-order derivative that provides information about the curvature of the loss surface.
Sophia's Functioning
: Sophia's update rule involves a moving average of the gradients divided by the moving average of the estimated Hessian, followed by element-wise clipping. This clipping controls the worst-case update size and mitigates the adverse effects of non-convexity and rapid Hessian changes along the trajectory. Sophia only estimates the diagonal Hessian every few iterations, thus adding minimal time and memory overhead per step.
Performance and Results
: Sophia has been tested on GPT-2 models of various sizes (ranging from 125M to 770M parameters). It achieved a 2x speed-up compared to the Adam optimizer in terms of the number of steps, total computation, and wall-clock time. This means that Sophia can train language models in half the time that Adam would require.
Theoretical Findings
: The researchers show theoretically that Sophia can adapt to the curvature in different components of the parameters, which can be highly heterogeneous for language modeling tasks. Furthermore, Sophia's run-time bound does not depend on the condition number of the loss, making it more efficient in various settings.
In summary, Sophia is a new optimizer designed to reduce the time and computational resources needed to train large language models. It achieves this by using a simple, scalable second-order optimization approach that balances efficiency and sophistication.
1 / 1
2.2Sophia: Second-order Clipped Stochastic Optimization 
Section 2.1 demonstrates that Adam does not suff i ciently adapt to the heterogeneous curvatures. On 
the other hand, vanilla Newton's method has a pre-conditioner optimal for convex functions, but is 
vulnerable to negative curvature and rapid change of Hessian. With these insights, we design a new 
optimizer, Sophia, which is more adaptive to heterogeneous curvatures than Adam, more resistant 
to non-convexity and rapid change of Hessian than Newton's method, and also uses a low-cost 
pre-conditioner. 
We useθtto denote the parameter at time stept. At each step, we sample a mini-batch from the data 
distribution and calculate the mini-batch loss, denoted byLt(θt). We denote bygtthe gradient of 
5 
Lt(θt), i.e.gt= ∇Lt(θt). Letmtbe the EMA of gradients,mt← β1mt−1+ (1 − β1)gt, which is the 
numerator of the update. 
EMA of diagonal Hessian estimates. Sophia uses a diagonal Hessian-based pre-conditioner, which 
directly adjusts the update size of different parameter dimensions according to their curvatures. We 
will present two options in detail in Section 2.3 for estimating the diagonal Hessian eff i ciently. To 
mitigate the overhead, we only estimate the Hessian everyksteps (k = 10in our implementation). 
At time steptwitht mod k = 1, the estimator returns an estimateˆhtof the diagonal of the Hessian 
of the mini-batch loss. 
Similar to the gradient of the mini-batch loss function, the estimated diagonal Hessian can also have 
large noise. Inspired by the EMA of moments of gradients in Adam, we also denoise the diagonal 
Hessian estimates with EMA across iterations. We update the EMA everyksteps, resulting in the 
following update rule for the diagonal Hessian estimate: 
ht= β2ht−k+ (1 − β2)ˆhtift 
mod k = 1;elseht= ht−1.(5) 
Pre-coordinate clipping. As discussed in Section 2.1, on nonconvex functions, vanilla Newton's 
method, which uses Hessian as the pre-conditioner, may converge to local maxima instead of local 
minima. In addition, the inaccuracy of Hessian estimates and the change of Hessian along the 
trajectory can make the second-order information unreliable. To this end, we only consider the 
positive entries of the diagonal Hessian and introduce per-coordinate clipping to the update. Let 
clip(z,ρ) = max{min{z,ρ},−ρ}be the clipping function with thresholdρ > 0. The update rule can 
be written as: θt+1← θt− ηt·clip(mt/max{ht,ϵ},ρ),(6) 
whereϵ > 0is a very small constant to avoid dividing by0, and all the operations are applied 
element-wise. We present the pseudo-code of the Sophia in Algorithm 3. 
When any entry ofhtis negative, e.g.,ht[i] < 0, the corresponding entry in the pre-conditioned 
gradientmt[i]/max{ht[i],ϵ} = mt[i]/ϵis extremely large and has the same sign asmt[i], and thus 
η·clip(mt[i]/max{ht[i],ϵ},ρ) = ηρ·sign(mt[i]), which is the same as stochastic momentum SignSGD. 
In other words, Sophia uses stochastic momentum SignSGD as a backup when the Hessian is 
negative (or mistakenly estimated to be negative or very small.) We also note that the clipping 
mechanism controls the worst-case size of the updates in all parameter dimensions to be at most 
ρ, which also improves the stability (which could be a severe issue for second-order methods). 
Moreover, because for many parameter dimensions, the clipping is not activated and the update 
is automatically adjusted, our worst-case update sizeηρcan be chosen to be larger than the worst 
update sizeηin stochastic momentum SignSGD. 
Several previous works (Becker & Le Cun, 1988; Chapelle et al., 2011; Schaul et al., 2013), including 
therecentworkAdaHessian(Yaoetal.,2021), usediagonalHessianasapre-conditionerinoptimizers 
for training neural networks. However, they use more frequent Hessian estimations, which leads 
to signif i cant per-step computation overhead (more than two gradient computations), most likely 
because of the lack of the clipping mechanism that safeguards against inaccurate and changing 
Hessian. In general, previous second-order optimizers do not achieve a speed-up on large language 
models in wall-clock time or total compute (Gupta et al., 2018; Yao et al., 2021) (see more discussions 
in Section 5).
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
The research paper presents Sophia, a second-order optimizer designed to improve the efficiency of language model pre-training. Sophia is aimed to be more adaptive than the Adam optimizer and more resilient than Newton's method. Here is a step-by-step explanation of Sophia's operation:
Parameter Updates
: The optimizer maintains the parameters θt at each time step t. It computes the loss function Lt(θt) using a sampled mini-batch from the data, and then calculates the gradient of the loss, denoted as gt.
EMA of Gradients
: Sophia uses an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) of gradients, denoted as mt, as the numerator of the update. EMA helps to smooth out the gradient values over time, reducing noise and fluctuation.
Diagonal Hessian Estimates
: Sophia uses a diagonal Hessian-based pre-conditioner to adjust the update size of different parameter dimensions according to their curvatures. The diagonal Hessian is estimated every k steps to save computational resources, and the estimated diagonal Hessian is also smoothed with EMA to reduce noise.
Pre-coordinate Clipping
: Sophia introduces per-coordinate clipping to the update to improve the optimizer's robustness against non-convex functions and inaccuracies in Hessian estimates. Each update is clipped to lie within a specific range, and the optimizer switches to a simple SignSGD update when the Hessian is negative or very small. This mechanism also limits the worst-case update size, enhancing the stability of the optimizer.
Parameter Update Rule
: Finally, the new parameters are calculated by subtracting a scaled, clipped version of the gradient divided by the Hessian from the current parameters.
Sophia's approach differs from previous works that used a diagonal Hessian as a pre-conditioner in optimizers for training neural networks. Its clipping mechanism safeguards against inaccurate and rapidly changing Hessian, and it estimates the Hessian less frequently, reducing per-step computation overhead. These characteristics make Sophia a more efficient and reliable optimizer for training large language models.
1 / 1
Building up spacetime with quantum entanglement 
Mark Van Raamsdonk 
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia 
6224 Agricultural Road, Vancouver, B.C., V6T 1W9, Canada 
mav@phas.ubc.ca 
Abstract 
In this essay, we argue that the emergence of classically connected spacetimes 
is intimately related to the quantum entanglement of degrees of freedom in a 
non-perturbative description of quantum gravity. Disentangling the degrees of 
freedom associated with two regions of spacetime results in these regions pulling 
apart and pinching of f from each other in a way that can be quantif i ed by standard 
measures of entanglement. 
Essay written for the Gravity Research Foundation 
2010 Awards for Essays on Gravitation 
March 31, 2010 
Introduction 
The gravity / gauge theory correspondence [1, 2, 3] in string theory represents exciting 
progress towards i nding a general non-perturbative description of quantum gravity. 
It posits that certain quantum gravitational theories with i xed spacetime asymptotic 
behavior are exactly equivalent to ordinary quantum i eld theories. We can view this 
correspondence as providing a complete non-perturbative def i nition of the quantum 
gravity theory via a quantum i eld theory. However, despite a great deal of evidence 
for the validity of this correspondence, we do not have a deep understanding of why or 
how spacetime/gravity emerges from the degrees of freedom of the i eld theory. 
In this essay, we will argue, based on widely accepted examples of gauge theory / 
gravity duality, that the emergence of spacetime in the gravity picture is intimately 
related to the quantum entanglement of degrees of freedom in the corresponding con- 
ventional quantum system. We will begin by showing that certain quantum superpo- 
sitions of states corresponding to disconnected spacetimes give rise to states that are 
interpreted as classically connected spacetimes. More quantitatively, we will see in a 
simple example that decreasing the entanglement between two sets of degrees of free- 
dom (e.g. by continuously varying the quantum state in the i eld theory description) 
ef f ectively increases the proper distance between the corresponding spacetime regions, 
while decreasing the area separating the two regions.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
This essay by Mark Van Raamsdonk proposes a fascinating theory about the connection between spacetime and quantum entanglement. He suggests that spacetime itself may emerge from quantum entanglement.
Quantum Gravity / Gauge Theory Correspondence
: The essay discusses the gravity / gauge theory correspondence from string theory, a promising theoretical advancement towards defining quantum gravity non-perturbatively. The theory suggests that certain quantum gravitational theories with fixed spacetime asymptotic behavior are exactly equivalent to ordinary quantum field theories. This allows the definition of quantum gravity through a quantum field theory.
Quantum Entanglement and Spacetime
: The central claim of the essay is that spacetime's emergence is intimately tied to the quantum entanglement of degrees of freedom within the non-perturbative quantum gravity description. Specifically, Van Raamsdonk argues that certain quantum superpositions of states, which correspond to disconnected spacetimes, can result in states that can be interpreted as classically connected spacetimes.
Decreasing Entanglement and Increasing Distance
: The essay proposes that reducing the quantum entanglement between two sets of degrees of freedom (for instance, by continuously varying the quantum state in the field theory) effectively increases the "proper distance" between the corresponding regions in spacetime. In other words, less quantum entanglement might result in greater spacetime separation.
Entanglement and Separation Area
: Conversely, when the entanglement between two regions decreases, the area that separates these two regions also decreases. This is an interesting aspect as it establishes a direct relationship between quantum entanglement and the geometry of spacetime.
In essence, Van Raamsdonk suggests that quantum entanglement could be the fundamental basis for the structure and interconnectedness of spacetime, with the degree of entanglement affecting the spatial relationship between different regions in spacetime. This idea represents a potential breakthrough in our understanding of the nature of the universe at its most fundamental level.
1 / 1
Classical connectivity from quantum superposition 
The most familiar example of gauge-theory / gravity duality involves an equivalence 
between conformal i eld theories (CFTs) and asymptotically anti-de Sitter (AdS) space- 
times. For specif i c CFTs, each state of the i eld theory on a sphere (× time) corresponds 
to a spacetime in some specif i c theory of quantum gravity where the asymptotics of 
the spacetime are the same as global AdS spacetime. 
Let us now consider a slightly more complicated example, where we build a larger 
quantum system by taking two (non-interacting) copies of our conformal i eld theory on 
Sd. As usual, the Hilbert space for this system will be the tensor product H = H1⊗H2 
of the Hilbert spaces for the component systems. 
In our new system, the simplest quantum states to consider are product states (i.e. 
states with no entanglement between the two subsystems) 
|Ψi = |Ψ1i ⊗ |Ψ2i . 
It is easy to provide a gravity interpretation for such a state. Since the degrees of 
freedom of the two CFTs do not interact in any way, and since there is no entanglement 
between the degrees of freedom for this state, the interpretation must be that we have 
two completely separate physical systems. If |Ψ1i is dual to one asymptotically AdS 
spacetime and |Ψ2i is dual to some other spacetime, the product state is dual to the 
disconnected pair of spacetimes. 
We next consider a state in which the two subsystems are entangled. If |Eii repre- 
1 
i 
E i 
E 
i 
E = 
Σe 
−β 
Figure 1: Gravity interpretations for the entangled state |ψ(β)i in a quantum system 
def i ned by a pair of noninteracting CFTs on Sdtimes time. The diagram on the right 
is the Penrose diagram for the maximally extended AdS-Schwarzschild black hole. 
sents the ith energy eigenstate for a single CFT on Sd, let us def i ne the state 
|ψ(β)i = X 
i 
e 
−βEi 
2 |Eii ⊗ |Eii(1) 
This state is a sum of product states |Eii ⊗ |Eii. Since we just argued that each of 
these product states should be interpreted on the gravity side as a spacetime with 
two disconnected components, the literal interpretation of the state |ψ(β)i is that it 
is a quantum superposition of disconnected spacetimes. However, it has been argued 
[4, 5, 6] that precisely this state |ψ(β)i corresponds to the (connected) eternal AdS 
black hole spacetime, whose Penrose diagram is sketched in i gure 1. 
The motivation for this statement is as follows. This is a spacetime with two equiv- 
alent asymptotically AdS regions, suggesting that the dual description should involve 
two copies of the CFT. An observer in either asymptotic region sees the Schwarzschild 
AdS black hole spacetime, which is understood [7] to correspond to the thermal state 
of a conformal i eld theory. On the other hand, starting from the state (1), and tracing 
over the degrees of freedom of one of the CFTs, we i nd that the density matrix for the 
remaining CFT is exactly the thermal density matrix: 
Tr2(|ψihψ|) = X 
i 
e−βEi|EiihEi| = ρT.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
This section of the essay presents an example of how quantum entanglement might influence the structure of spacetime. It is centered around the idea of "gauge-theory / gravity duality", a fundamental concept in string theory, and its implications for conformal field theories (CFTs) and asymptotically anti-de Sitter (AdS) spacetimes.
Conformal Field Theories (CFTs) and AdS Spacetimes
: The section begins with a brief introduction of a typical example of gauge-theory / gravity duality, in which conformal field theories (CFTs) correspond to asymptotically anti-de Sitter (AdS) spacetimes. Each state of the CFT corresponds to a specific spacetime in a quantum gravity theory where the spacetime's asymptotic behavior mirrors that of a global AdS spacetime.
A Larger Quantum System
: The author then proposes a scenario where a larger quantum system is created by taking two non-interacting copies of the CFT. The Hilbert space for this system is the tensor product of the Hilbert spaces of the component systems. For product states that have no entanglement between the two subsystems, the gravity interpretation would involve two completely separate physical systems or two disconnected spacetimes.
Entangled States and Connected Spacetimes
: The text next considers an entangled state within the larger system. Here, it argues that while a direct interpretation would suggest a quantum superposition of disconnected spacetimes, it has been suggested that such an entangled state corresponds to a connected, "eternal" AdS black hole spacetime.
The Role of Quantum Entanglement
: According to the author's argument, a state of quantum entanglement between two subsystems can result in a connected spacetime instead of two separate ones. This establishes a profound link between the quantum entanglement and the emergent spacetime structure.
Thermal Density Matrix
: Finally, the author explains that if the degrees of freedom for one of the CFTs are ignored (i.e., traced over), the density matrix for the remaining CFT is exactly the thermal density matrix. This further reinforces the correspondence between quantum states in the CFT and spacetime structures in the gravity picture.
1 / 1
Furthermore, the presence of horizons in the black hole spacetime which forbid com- 
munication between the two asymptotic regions may be naturally associated with the 
absence of interactions between the two CFTs. Thus, the state |ψ(β)i has properties 
which are completely consistent with its interpretation as the eternal AdS black hole. 
If this identif i cation is correct, we have a remarkable conclusion: the state |ψ(β)i 
which clearly represents a quantum superposition of disconnected spacetimes may also 
be identif i ed with a classically connected spacetime. In this example, classical con- 
nectivity arises by entangling the degrees of freedom in the two components. In the 
next section, we will try to test the idea that emergent spacetimes in gauge-theory / 
2 
AB 
A 
~ 
Figure 2: According to [9], the entanglement entropy S(A) between regions A and B in 
the i eld theory is related to the area of the minimal surface ˜ 
A in the dual geometry such 
that the boundary of ˜ 
A coincides with the boundary of A: S(A) = Area(˜A)/(4GN). 
In the diagram, spatial geometry in the gravity picture is represented by the interior 
of the ball, while the geometry on which the i eld theory lives is identif i ed with the 
boundary sphere. 
gravity duality are built up by entangling degrees of freedom in the non-perturbative 
description. 
A disentangling experiment 
Let us return to the simpler case of a single CFT on Sd. We would like to do a thought 
experiment in which we start with the vacuum state of the i eld theory, dual to gravity 
on pure global AdS spacetime, and see what happens to the dual geometry when we 
gradually change the state to disentangle some of the degrees of freedom. To be specif i c, 
we divide the sphere into two parts (e.g. hemispheres) which we label A and B. 
Since the CFT is a local quantum i eld theory, there are specif i c degrees of freedom 
associated with specif i c spatial regions, so we can decompose the Hilbert space H = 
HA⊗HB. A simple quantitative measure of the entanglement between A and B is the 
entanglement entropy [8], def i ned to be the von Neumann entropy 
S(A) = −Tr(ρAlogρA) 
of the density matrix for the subsystem A, 
ρA= TrB(|ΨihΨ|) .
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
This section further elaborates on the relation between quantum entanglement and spacetime geometry and introduces a theoretical experiment.
Entanglement and the Presence of Horizons
: The existence of horizons in the black hole spacetime, which prevents communication between the two asymptotic regions, could be naturally associated with the absence of interactions between the two Conformal Field Theories (CFTs). The entangled state |ψ(β)i, therefore, shows characteristics that are consistent with its interpretation as an eternal AdS black hole.
Quantum Superposition and Classical Connectivity
: The state |ψ(β)i, representing a quantum superposition of disconnected spacetimes, may be identified with a classically connected spacetime. In this case, classical connectivity emerges from entangling the degrees of freedom of the two components.
A Disentangling Experiment
: The section then proposes a thought experiment involving a single CFT. The goal is to observe changes in the dual geometry when degrees of freedom are disentangled. The system begins in a vacuum state, dual to gravity on a pure global AdS spacetime. The sphere on which the CFT lives is divided into two regions (A and B), each associated with specific degrees of freedom due to the locality of the quantum field theory. The entanglement between A and B is quantitatively measured by the entanglement entropy.
Entanglement Entropy
: This is defined as the von Neumann entropy of the density matrix for subsystem A. The density matrix for A is obtained by taking the partial trace over the B part of the quantum state, effectively ignoring the B subsystem's degrees of freedom. This provides a numerical measure of the degree of entanglement between the two subsystems.
1 / 1
Thus, if we continuously vary a state such that the mutual information between C 
and D go to zero, then all correlations must decrease to zero also. In the context of 
AdS/CFT, certain two-point correlators of local operators (those dual to very mas- 
sive particles in the dual spacetime) provide a direct measure of the proper distance 
through the spacetime between the boundary points at which the operators are in- 
serted. Specif i cally, we have: hOC(xC)OD(xD)i ∼ e−mL(3) 
where m is the mass and L is the length of the shortest geodesic connecting xCand 
xD(again, we can work in a i eld theory with explicit cutof f so everything is i nite). 
1Here and below, we should keep in mind that the spacetime will likely cease to have a completely 
geometrical description before the entanglement is strictly zero. 
4 
AB 
AB 
Figure 4: Ef f ect on geometry of decreasing entanglement between holographic degrees 
of freedom corresponding to A and B: area separating corresponding spatial regions 
decreases while distance between points increases. The boundary geometry remains 
i xed (despite appearances in the diagram). larger 
β 
Figure 5: Spatial section of eternal black hole for two dif f erent temperatures (corre- 
sponding to a horizontal line through the middle of the Penrose diagram of i gure 1). 
For low temperature (large β), where entanglement between the two CFTs is smaller, 
the asymptotic regions are further apart and separated by a surface of smaller area. 
Combining (3) and (2), we see that as the entanglement between degrees of freedom 
in region A and region B (and therefore the mutual information I(C,D)) drops to 
zero, the length of the shortest bulk path between the points xCand xDmust go 
to inf i nity (f i gure 3). Together with the result of the previous subsection, we obtain 
the following picture. As the entanglement between two sets of degrees of freedom in 
a nonperturbative description of quantum gravity drops to zero, the proper distance 
between the corresponding spacetime regions goes to inf i nity, while the area of the 
minimal surface separating the regions decreases to zero. Roughly speaking, the two 
regions of spacetime pull apart and pinch of f from each other, as shown in i gure 4. As 
seen in i gure 5, these quantitative features can be seen explicitly in the example of 
the eternal AdS black hole, where we can decrease the entanglement between the two 
CFTs by increasing the inverse temperature parameter β. 
Conclusions 
We have seen that we can connect up spacetimes by entangling degrees of freedom and tear them apart by disentangling. It is fascinating that the intrinsically quantum phe- 
nomenon of entanglement appears to be crucial for the emergence of classical spacetime 
geometry.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
This section of the paper focuses on the effects of disentangling the quantum states of the system, demonstrating how spacetime connectivity can be altered through entanglement.
Decreasing Entanglement
: If the mutual information between two subsystems C and D is continuously reduced to zero, all correlations must also decrease to zero. In the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence, certain two-point correlators of local operators provide a direct measure of the proper distance through spacetime between the boundary points where the operators are inserted. As the entanglement between the degrees of freedom in the regions decreases, the length of the shortest bulk path between the points must go to infinity.
Spacetime Separation
: As the entanglement between two sets of degrees of freedom decreases, the corresponding regions in spacetime begin to move apart. The proper distance between these regions goes to infinity, while the area of the minimal surface separating these regions decreases to zero. This suggests that the regions are "pulling apart" and "pinching off" from each other.
Implications for AdS Black Hole
: These features can be explicitly seen in the case of an eternal AdS black hole. Decreasing the entanglement between the two conformal field theories (CFTs) in the system, which can be done by increasing the inverse temperature parameter β, results in the asymptotic regions moving further apart and being separated by a surface of smaller area.
Conclusions
: The paper concludes by reinforcing the key insight that entangling degrees of freedom can connect spacetimes, while disentangling can tear them apart. This suggests that quantum entanglement, an inherently quantum phenomenon, plays a vital role in the emergence of classical spacetime geometry.
1 / 1
Give some simple analogies.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Quantum entanglement and its effect on spacetime connectivity can be quite abstract, but here are some analogies that may help make it a bit more tangible:
Bridge and Islands
: Consider spacetime regions as islands and quantum entanglement as a bridge connecting them. When the entanglement (bridge) is strong, the islands are well connected. As the entanglement decreases, it's as if the bridge is being disassembled. With no entanglement (no bridge), the islands are completely disconnected, signifying an infinite distance between them.
Knitting a Sweater
: Quantum entanglement can be thought of as the threads that knit a fabric (spacetime) together. When the threads are entangled (knitted), they form a cohesive, connected piece. If you start to disentangle or unravel the threads (like pulling out stitches in a sweater), the fabric becomes less connected, and may eventually split into separate pieces.
Marbles in a Bag
: Imagine having two bags of marbles, each representing a region of spacetime. The marbles inside are degrees of freedom and their colors represent their states. When the bags are shaken together (entangled), the colors (states) of the marbles get mixed, linking the states of the two bags. If you were to separate the colors again (disentangle), you would effectively be disconnecting the states of the marbles in one bag from those in the other, thus creating distance between the two spacetime regions (bags).
Remember, these analogies are highly simplified and can't capture all aspects of the phenomenon. Quantum entanglement and its influence on spacetime is still a complex topic that continues to be explored in theoretical physics.
1 / 1
Connections with the previous articles.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
As an AI language model, I don't have the ability to remember past interactions unless they are part of the same conversation. However, if you refer to past articles or topics from this conversation or provide me with their summaries or key points, I can certainly draw connections between them and this text about the role of quantum entanglement in the emergence of classically connected spacetimes.
For example, if a previous article discussed quantum entanglement, this text further develops that concept by proposing that entanglement plays a critical role in the fabric of spacetime itself, according to the gravity/gauge theory correspondence. If a past article focused on string theory or gravity, this essay adds to the understanding by suggesting a relationship between quantum phenomena (entanglement) and gravity.
Please provide more specifics about the previous articles, and I'll be happy to draw more detailed connections.
1 / 1
They were on transformer analysis and an algorithm named Sophia
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Transformer analysis and the Sophia algorithm appear to be more related to computer science and machine learning, and it might be a bit of a stretch to directly connect these topics to quantum entanglement and spacetime as discussed in the provided text by Mark Van Raamsdonk. However, there are a few points of intersection:
Complex Systems:
Both machine learning algorithms and quantum entanglement deal with complex systems that require non-trivial computational or theoretical resources to analyze. Just as a machine learning model like the Transformer analyzes data and makes predictions, quantum entanglement provides information about the state of entangled particles.
Information Processing:
Quantum entanglement deals with information at a fundamental level. It's about how the information about a system is distributed between its parts. Similarly, in machine learning (including Transformer-based models), information processing is key: the models learn to recognize patterns in the data and use them to make predictions or decisions.
Sophia Algorithm:
If Sophia is a machine learning algorithm or AI model, it might be interesting to note that there's ongoing research into "quantum machine learning," which is a new field trying to combine quantum computing and machine learning to process information more efficiently.
Despite these points of intersection, it's important to note that quantum physics and machine learning are different fields with different methodologies and goals. The connections I've described are more about shared themes and concepts rather than direct interactions or influences.
1 / 1
Self attention
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Self-attention is a key concept used in many state-of-the-art natural language processing models, including the Transformer model. The idea behind self-attention is that it allows the model to weigh the importance of words in an input sequence when processing a specific word.
In other words, self-attention provides a mechanism for the model to focus on different words in the input sequence when generating each word in the output sequence. It essentially allows the model to "pay attention" to different parts of the input sequence at different times, hence the term "self-attention."
Let's use a simple analogy to illustrate this concept:
Imagine you're reading a book, and you come across a sentence with a pronoun, like "he". To understand who "he" is referring to, you have to look back at the previous sentences or even paragraphs. Your attention is diverted from the current sentence to a different part of the text. This mechanism of diverting attention within the same text is similar to what the self-attention mechanism does in Transformer models.
Self-attention provides the context necessary for accurately interpreting and generating language. By assigning different attention weights to different words, the model can generate a contextual representation of each word, taking into account not just the word itself, but also the words around it.
While self-attention has proven to be powerful for tasks like language translation, text summarization, and sentiment analysis, its application is not limited to Natural Language Processing. It can also be used for image, music, and any kind of sequential data.
1 / 1
It seems there might be some connections with graph theory and categorical set theory as well as geometric learning
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Absolutely, there are many intersections between self-attention mechanism in Transformer models and concepts from graph theory, categorical set theory, and geometric learning.
Graph Theory
: In graph theory, entities are represented as nodes, and relationships between them are represented as edges. The self-attention mechanism can be viewed as a weighted directed graph, where each token in the sequence is a node, and the attention scores determine the weights of the edges between nodes. The more attention a token pays to another, the stronger the connection (or edge) between them.
Categorical Set Theory
: Categorical set theory is a branch of category theory in mathematics, where sets and their functions form categories. The self-attention mechanism in transformers can be seen as functions mapping from a set (the input sequence) to another set (the output sequence). In a more abstract view, each token in the sequence can be considered as an object in the category, and the attention operation is a morphism in the category.
Geometric Learning
: Geometric learning, also known as geometric deep learning, leverages the geometric structure of data for learning. In transformers, the self-attention mechanism calculates a weighted sum of all tokens in the sequence for each output token, essentially placing tokens in a high-dimensional space where the geometric relationships between tokens (their distances and angles) affect the final results. Geometric learning methods, such as graph neural networks, are also closely related to the attention mechanism, especially when dealing with non-Euclidean data structures.
This kind of interdisciplinary fusion is part of what makes AI and machine learning such an exciting field: concepts and methods are borrowed, adapted, and innovated upon across traditional academic and knowledge boundaries.
1 / 1
Any connections with the article on quantum physics.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
The connections between quantum physics, particularly the topic of quantum entanglement and the Transformer models used in machine learning, are less direct but still conceptually intriguing.
Entanglement
: In quantum physics, entanglement refers to the phenomenon where two particles become linked, such that the state of one directly influences the state of the other, regardless of the distance between them. In the context of Transformer models, the self-attention mechanism could be seen as a sort of "entanglement" between tokens. Each token in the sequence pays attention to all other tokens when determining its own state, similar to how quantum entangled particles affect each other's states. This is a conceptual analogy and not a direct parallel, of course.
Superposition
: Quantum superposition refers to the quantum phenomenon where a particle can exist in multiple states at once. While this doesn't have a direct parallel in Transformer models, one could draw an analogy with the way self-attention calculates the output for a token as a weighted sum (a sort of "superposition") of all input tokens.
Holographic Principle
: In Mark Van Raamsdonk's paper, he also explores the holographic principle, a concept in string theory suggesting that all the information contained in a volume of space can be represented by data on the boundary of that space. This has some conceptual similarity to Transformer models' ability to capture long-range dependencies in a sequence (the "volume" of data) by attending to all tokens in the sequence (the "boundary").
Again, these are mostly conceptual and metaphorical connections, not literal or direct ones. Quantum mechanics operates on very different principles and scales compared to machine learning models. But it's always interesting to draw analogies and see how seemingly disparate fields can connect in unexpected ways.
1 / 1
I think your analogies are helpful. They use different notation but they both use advanced math and computation.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Indeed, both quantum physics and machine learning, particularly deep learning models like transformers, utilize advanced mathematical frameworks. In quantum physics, concepts such as quantum entanglement, superposition, and the holographic principle are represented using complex mathematical formalisms typically involving linear algebra, differential equations, and probability theory.
On the other hand, machine learning algorithms, including transformers, also employ advanced mathematical techniques, including linear algebra (for operations on high-dimensional data), calculus (for optimizing model parameters), statistics (for making inferences from data), and probability (for modeling uncertainty).
Though the specific mathematical formalisms may differ, there's a shared reliance on abstract, higher-level mathematical structures and concepts. Both fields also leverage computational techniques heavily, whether that's for simulating quantum systems or training large neural networks.
Furthermore, this connection between the two fields isn't just conceptual. There's ongoing research exploring how quantum computing might be leveraged for machine learning, and how insights from machine learning might be applied to quantum physics. This cross-pollination could potentially lead to exciting new developments in both fields.
1 / 1
Summarize: The False Promise of Imitating Proprietary LLMs 
Arnav Gudibande∗ 
UC Berkeley 
arnavg@berkeley.edu 
Eric Wallace∗ 
UC Berkeley 
ericwallace@berkeley.edu 
Charlie Snell∗ 
UC Berkeley 
csnell22@berkeley.edu 
Xinyang Geng 
UC Berkeley 
young.geng@berkeley.edu 
Hao Liu 
UC Berkeley 
hao.liu@berkeley.edu 
Pieter Abbeel 
UC Berkeley 
pabbeel@berkeley.edu 
Sergey Levine 
UC Berkeley 
svlevine@berkeley.edu 
Dawn Song 
UC Berkeley 
dawnsong@berkeley.edu 
Abstract 
An emerging method to cheaply improve a weaker language model is to i netune 
it on outputs from a stronger model, such as a proprietary system like ChatGPT 
(e.g., Alpaca, Self-Instruct, and others). This approach looks to cheaply imitate the 
proprietary model's capabilities using a weaker open-source model. In this work, 
we critically analyze this approach. We i rst i netune a series of LMs that imitate 
ChatGPT using varying base model sizes (1.5B-13B), data sources, and imitation 
data amounts (0.3M-150M tokens). We then evaluate the models using crowd 
raters and canonical NLP benchmarks. Initially, we were surprised by the output 
quality of our imitation models—they appear far better at following instructions, 
and crowd workers rate their outputs as competitive with ChatGPT. However, when 
conducting more targeted automatic evaluations, we i nd that imitation models 
close little to none of the gap from the base LM to ChatGPT on tasks that are 
not heavily supported in the imitation data. We show that these performance 
discrepancies may slip past human raters because imitation models are adept at 
mimicking ChatGPT's style but not its factuality. Overall, we conclude that model 
imitation is a false promise: there exists a substantial capabilities gap between open 
and closed LMs that, with current methods, can only be bridged using an unwieldy 
amount of imitation data or by using more capable base LMs. In turn, we argue 
that the highest leverage action for improving open-source models is to tackle the 
diff i cult challenge of developing better base LMs, rather than taking the shortcut of 
imitating proprietary systems. 
1Introduction 
The recent release of powerful language models (LMs) such as ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022), 
Bard (Pichai, 2023), and Claude (AnthropicAI, 2023) might herald a future where the best AI 
systems are provided primarily as a fee-based API by large companies. At the same time, open-source 
LMs are becoming increasingly accurate, with models like LLaMA and FLAN-T5 providing many 
of the same basic capabilities as their commercial counterparts, albeit at a lower level of perfor- 
mance (Touvron et al., 2023; Chung et al., 2022). This presents an important question, whose answer 
will have profound future implications: will the most powerful LMs be closed-source or will they be 
freely distributed for anyone to use, modify, and extend? Both possibilities have important pros and 
cons, and implications on policy, corporate strategy, and the future of scientif i c inquiry. 
∗Equal Contribution. 
Preprint. Under review. 
arXiv:2305.15717v1 
[cs.CL] 
25 
May 
2023 
255075100125150 
Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens) 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
>= ChatGPT 
(%) 
Crowdworker Evaluation 
LLaMA-13B 
Imitation Model (13B) 255075100125150 
Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens) 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Accuracy 
(%) 
Natural Questions 3-Shot 
ChatGPT 
LLaMA-13B 
Imitation Model (13B) 24681012 
Number of Model Parameters (Billions) 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
>= ChatGPT 
(%) 
Crowdworker Evaluation 
LLaMA-13B 
Imitation Model 
Figure 1: Crowdworkers initially rate the quality of our imitation models highly, as∼70% 
of their 
outputs are rated as equal or better than those of ChatGPT (left). However, as we train on more 
imitation data, our models fail to further close the gap, and even begin to regress along other axes, e.g. 
factual knowledge according to Natural Questions (center). Our main conclusion is that the biggest 
limitation of current open-source LMs is their weaker base capabilities. In turn, the best way for the 
open-source community to improve models is by increasing these capabilities (e.g., via scaling, better 
pretraining data, etc.,) rather than i ne-tuning on more and more imitation data (right). 
In this work, we study one possible resolution to this question: model imitation (Wallace et al., 
2020; Orekondy et al., 2019). The premise of model imitation is that once a proprietary LM is made 
available via API, one can collect a dataset of API outputs and use it to i ne-tune an open-source 
LM. In theory, this imitation process may provide an easy method to distill (Hinton et al., 2014) the 
capabilities of any proprietary model, thus implying that open-source LMs will always be competitive 
with their commercial counterparts. To date, recent works have looked to imitate OpenAI's best 
systems, e.g., Self-Instruct (Wang et al., 2022a) and Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023), and initial results 
suggest that these models have achieved near parity with proprietary models. Consequently, there has 
been a growing sentiment among many members of the broader tech community that closed-source 
models will soon have no advantage (Patel and Ahmad, 2023).
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
This article critically analyzes the approach of fine-tuning weaker open-source language models (LMs) on outputs from stronger proprietary models, like ChatGPT, as a means to imitate their capabilities. The researchers tested this by fine-tuning several language models of varying sizes, data sources, and amounts of imitation data to mimic ChatGPT.
Initial results appeared promising. The imitation models seemed better at following instructions, and crowd workers rated their outputs as competitive with ChatGPT. However, more targeted automatic evaluations showed that the imitation models couldn't significantly close the gap to ChatGPT on tasks not heavily present in the imitation data.
The study found that while imitation models could mimic ChatGPT's style, they struggled with factuality. As a result, there's a significant capabilities gap between open-source and proprietary LMs. Closing this gap using the current imitation methods would require either an impractical amount of imitation data or the use of more capable base LMs.
The researchers concluded that the imitation approach presents a false promise for improving open-source LMs. Instead, they argue that efforts should focus on the challenging task of developing better base LMs rather than attempting to imitate proprietary systems.
1 / 1
In this work, we study one possible resolution to this question: model imitation (Wallace et al., 
2020; Orekondy et al., 2019). The premise of model imitation is that once a proprietary LM is made 
available via API, one can collect a dataset of API outputs and use it to i ne-tune an open-source 
LM. In theory, this imitation process may provide an easy method to distill (Hinton et al., 2014) the 
capabilities of any proprietary model, thus implying that open-source LMs will always be competitive 
with their commercial counterparts. To date, recent works have looked to imitate OpenAI's best 
systems, e.g., Self-Instruct (Wang et al., 2022a) and Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023), and initial results 
suggest that these models have achieved near parity with proprietary models. Consequently, there has 
been a growing sentiment among many members of the broader tech community that closed-source 
models will soon have no advantage (Patel and Ahmad, 2023). 
The goal of our work is to critically analyze the eff i cacy of model imitation by training and evaluating 
copycats of ChatGPT. We i rst collect datasets that focus on either imitating ChatGPT for a specif i c 
task or broadly imitating it across all behaviors. We then i ne-tune LMs on these datasets using a 
range of model sizes (1.5B-13B), base models (GPT-2 and LLaMA), and data amounts (0.3M-150M 
tokens). We evaluate using human and GPT-4 evaluations (blind pairwise comparisons with ChatGPT) 
as well as accuracy on canonical NLP benchmarks (MMLU, NQ, HumanEval). 
We were initially surprised by how much imitation models improve over their base models: they are 
far better at following instructions, and their outputs appear similar to ChatGPT's. This was further 
supported by both human and GPT-4 evaluations, where the outputs of our best imitation model were 
rated as competitive with ChatGPT (e.g., Figure 1, left). 
However, when conducting more targeted automatic evaluations, we found that the imitation models 
close little to none of the large gap between LLaMA and ChatGPT. In particular, we demonstrate that 
imitation models improve on evaluation tasks that are heavily supported in the imitation training data. 
On the other hand, the models do not improve (or even decline in accuracy) on evaluation datasets for 
which there is little support. For example, training on 100k ChatGPT outputs from broad-coverage 
user inputs provides no benef i ts to Natural Questions accuracy (e.g., Figure 1, center), but training 
exclusively on ChatGPT responses for Natural-Questions-like queries drastically improves task 
accuracy. Consequently, we conclude that broadly matching ChatGPT using purely imitation would 
require (1) a concerted effort to collect enormous imitation datasets and (2) far more diverse and 
higher quality imitation data than is currently available. 
These i ndings underscore an inconsistency between LM performance on crowdworker evaluations 
and NLP benchmarks. We i nd that imitation models get rated positively by crowdworkers because 
they are adept at mimicking ChatGPT's style—they output conf i dent and well-structured answers. 
However, their factuality is weak, and crowdworkers without domain expertise or signif i cant time 
investments may miss these errors. 
Overall, our key takeaway is that model imitation is not a free lunch: there exists a capabilities gap 
between today's open-source LMs and their closed-source counterparts that cannot be closed by 
2 
Query: How does actor critic improve over REINFORCE? 
ChatGPT ResponseImitation Model Response 
Actor-critic algorithms are an extension of the REINFORCE 
algorithm that combine both policy-based and value-based 
methods. Some of the changes that actor-critic algorithms 
make over standard REINFORCE: 
1. Function Approximation: Actor-critic algorithms typically 
use function approximation methods to represent the value 
and policy functions. This allows them to learn in 
high-dimensional state spaces. 
2. Critic Network: In actor-critic algorithms, there is an 
additional critic network that estimates the value function. 
The critic provides an estimate of the value of a state, which 
is then used to update the policy. This reduces the variance 
of the update and stabilizes learning. 
3. Advantage Estimation: Actor-critic algorithms use the 
advantage function to estimate the quality of an action taken 
by the policy. The advantage function is the difference 
between the return of an action and the estimated value of a 
state. This reduces the variance of the update and allows for 
more eff i cient learning. 
Overall, actor-critic algorithms provide a more eff i cient and 
stable way of learning in reinforcement learning tasks, 
particularly in high-dimensional state spaces. 
Actor-critic algorithms are a type of reinforcement learning 
algorithm that improves the REINFORCE algorithm by 
combining the actor (policy) and critic (value) components. 
The main changes that actor-critic algorithms make over 
standard REINFORCE are: 
1. Actor-critic algorithms use a single critic to evaluate the 
value function of the policy, whereas standard REINFORCE 
uses a separate critic for each action. 
2. Actor-critic algorithms use a single actor to determine the 
actions to take, whereas standard REINFORCE uses a 
separate actor for each action. 
3. Actor-critic algorithms learn the policy and actor 
simultaneously, whereas standard REINFORCE learns the 
policy and actor separately. 
4. Actor-critic algorithms use an optimistic estimate of the 
value function to determine the actor's actions, whereas 
standard REINFORCE uses the critic's estimate. 
Overall, actor-critic algorithms combine the critic's and 
actor's estimates in order to learn both the policy and actor 
simultaneously, while standard REINFORCE learns them 
separately. This can lead to faster convergence and 
potentially better generalization, but the choice between the 
two algorithms depends on the specif i c problem and the 
desired behavior of the agent. 
Figure 2: ChatGPT and our best imitation model produce answers with similar style—they start with 
an overview paragraph, a list of differences, and end with a summary. However, while ChatGPT's 
answer is mostly correct, the imitation model's answer is completely inaccurate despite sounding 
authoritative. We show correct sentences in green, ambiguously-correct sentences in yellow, and 
incorrect ones in red. 
cheaply i ne-tuning on imitation data. In fact, we i nd that closing this capabilities gap, for example by 
increasing base LM size, improves models far more than i ne-tuning on additional imitation data (e.g., 
Figure 1, right). This implies that the higher leverage action for improving open-source LMs is to 
tackle the diff i cult challenge of developing better base models (e.g. by scaling up models, improving 
pre-training data quality, improving pre-training, etc.), rather than taking the shortcut of imitating 
proprietary systems. Nevertheless, we believe that model imitation has utility in subverting the need 
to annotate high-quality i netuning data if one has a suff i ciently strong base LM.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
The researchers pursued a critical analysis of the efficacy of model imitation by training and evaluating imitation models of ChatGPT. These models were fine-tuned on datasets created for imitating ChatGPT across different behaviors or for specific tasks, using different model sizes, base models, and data amounts. Evaluations were done using human and GPT-4 assessments as well as canonical NLP benchmarks.
The outputs of the imitation models seemed to improve significantly over their base models and initially appeared similar to ChatGPT's outputs. Both human and GPT-4 evaluations rated the outputs of the best imitation model as competitive with ChatGPT. However, more detailed automatic evaluations revealed that the imitation models failed to significantly close the large gap between the base LMs and ChatGPT, particularly for tasks not heavily represented in the imitation training data.
Broadly imitating ChatGPT would require massive and diverse imitation datasets and higher quality imitation data than currently available. Additionally, imitation models were found to be good at mimicking ChatGPT's style but struggled with factual accuracy, which could be missed by evaluators without domain expertise or significant time investments.
The key takeaway from the study is that model imitation is not an easy solution. There's a substantial gap in capabilities between open-source and proprietary LMs that cannot be filled by simply fine-tuning on imitation data. To improve open-source LMs, it would be more effective to address the challenge of developing better base models rather than imitating proprietary systems. However, the researchers acknowledge that model imitation can be useful in circumventing the need to annotate high-quality fine-tuning data when a sufficiently strong base LM is available.
1 / 1
2What is Model Imitation? 
Proprietary LMs such as ChatGPT consist of two key aspects: proprietary base LMs and proprietary 
i ne-tuning data. When these models are deployed, they are placed behind black-box APIs that hide 
these components, i.e., users can query the API with arbitrary inputs but cannot see the model's 
training data, next-token probabilities, and architecture. In model imitation, the goal is to collect data 
using the API to train an LM that achieves comparable performance to it, i.e., essentially distilling 
the target LM using an imitation training set (Wallace et al., 2020; Orekondy et al., 2019; Tram`er 
et al., 2016). Potential reasons for performing imitation range from benign to illegal: 
• Academics can use powerful imitation LMs to drive new research projects. 
• Companies can use imitation LMs to launch services that compete with the proprietary system. 
• Malicious users could use imitation models to accelerate progress on nefarious use cases. 
Local versus Broad Imitation When performing model imitation, one will either look to perform 
local "task-specif i c" imitation or more global "broad-coverage" imitation. The former imitates the 
target model on just a specif i c task or domain, e.g., sentiment analysis of tweets or question answering 
over Wikipedia entities. The latter focuses on the more ambitious goal of broadly imitating the 
3 
target model across its full spectrum of behaviors, domains, and tasks. Broad-coverage imitation is 
challenging because (1) one must collect an extremely diverse imitation dataset and (2) imitation 
models must capture this wide data distribution and generalize similarly to the target model on a 
myriad of held-out examples. 
Recent Work on Model Imitation A surge of recent publications have attempted to both locally 
imitate proprietary models for specif i c tasks (Sun et al., 2023; Hsieh et al., 2023; Honovich et al., 
2022) and broadly imitate models, e.g., Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023), Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023), 
Koala (Geng et al., 2023), GPT4ALL (Anand et al., 2023), and more (Wang et al., 2022a; Peng 
et al., 2023). Many these works conclude that their imitation models achieve near parity with the 
target model, e.g., Vicuna claims to achieve 90% of the quality of ChatGPT and Google Bard. These 
claims have since been propagated out into the broader tech community, leading many to believe 
that open-source LMs are rapidly closing the gap to their closed-source counterparts and that top AI 
companies will soon have no competitive advantage (Patel and Ahmad, 2023). 
Our goal. The goal of our paper is to critically evaluate this line of reasoning. In particular, we 
train models to imitate ChatGPT while experimenting with different decisions (e.g., data collection 
strategies, data amounts, and base LMs) and conducting rigorous automatic and human evaluations. 
3Building Imitation Datasets 
We consider both task-specif i c and broad-coverage imitation. For either form of model imitation, one 
must curate a set of inputs to query to the target model. In practice, one may have a set of inputs in 
mind (e.g., sentences from Wikipedia, tweets about Coca-Cola) and if this set of input examples is 
suff i ciently large, one can use them to query the target model and build an imitation dataset. In cases 
when it is impractical or labor intensive to create a large and diverse pool of inputs, one can also 
create synthetic examples by prompting LMs to iteratively generate examples that are from the same 
distribution as an initial smaller seed set of inputs (Wang et al., 2022a; Honovich et al., 2022). 
Task-specif i c imitationFor task-specif i c imitation, we created an imitation dataset tailored to 
Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019a), i.e., factual knowledge about Wikipedia entities. In 
particular, we i rst curated a seed set of ten QA pairs from the validation dataset. We then iteratively 
generated 6,000 additional examples by prompting ChatGPT with i ve random QA pairs and asking it 
to generate similar but distinct examples. All of these examples are single turn, without any dialogue 
history. We refer to this dataset as NQ-synthetic and provide further details in Appendix A. 
Broad-coverage imitationFor the more ambitious goal of broad-coverage imitation data, we 
leverage the fact that models such as ChatGPT have become so popular that their inputs and outputs 
are already widely posted on the web. Thus, we can collect a large, diverse, and generally high-quality 
dataset of examples for free without ever having to interact with the company's API. In particular, we 
collect examples from three sources: 
•ShareGPT: we use approximately 90K dialogues shared by users on the website ShareGPT. 
To maintain data quality, we deduplicated on the query level and removed any non-English 
conversations using a language detector. This leaves approximately 50K examples, each of which 
consist of multiple turns of dialogue. 
•HC3 (Guo et al., 2023): we use the ChatGPT responses from the English Human-ChatGPT 
Comparison Corpus. This contains ∼27K ChatGPT responses for ∼24K questions. 
•Discord ChatGPT Bots: we use 10k input-output examples collected from ther/ChatGPTand 
Turing AI Discord servers, two public channels that allow users to interact with ChatGPT bots. 
We refer to this dataset as ShareGPT-Mix and show qualitative examples in Appendix A. We 
i nd that ShareGPT-Mix is generally of high quality. First, there is high diversity in the instruc- 
tions: for each user query in the dataset, the most similar other user query has an average BLEU 
score similarity of just 8%. This is considerably lower than that of other datasets such as Super- 
NaturalInstructions (Wang et al., 2022b), which is at 61% BLEU similarity for a similarly sized set 
of examples. We also manually reviewed different examples and logged their semantic category 
(see Table 5 in Appendix A). The dataset contains diverse categories, including many multi-lingual 
conversations and coding tasks.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Model Imitation refers to the process of creating a machine learning model that mimics the behavior of another model, often a proprietary one that's not publicly accessible. This is done by feeding the imitating model a dataset gathered from querying the proprietary model's API and using the responses to guide the imitation model's training.
There are two key forms of imitation: local (task-specific) and broad (broad-coverage) imitation. In local imitation, the goal is to mimic the target model's performance on a specific task or domain. Broad imitation aims to replicate the target model's performance across a wide range of tasks and behaviors.
For both forms of imitation, the first step is to create a dataset. This can be done by feeding the target model a set of inputs (either specific to a task or diverse for broad-coverage) and recording the responses. If you don't have a large and diverse set of inputs, synthetic examples can be created by using machine learning models to generate new examples that are similar to a smaller set of seed inputs.
For task-specific imitation, an imitation dataset is created that is specific to a particular task, such as answering factual questions about Wikipedia entities. For broad-coverage imitation, one can use a variety of sources where the target model's inputs and outputs are publicly available. These might include user-shared dialogues, responses from a corpus like the English Human-ChatGPT Comparison Corpus (HC3), and examples from public chatbots.
The goal of imitation might vary. Academics might use it to facilitate new research projects, companies might use it to compete with the proprietary model, or malicious users could potentially use it to accelerate progress on harmful applications.
Overall, the goal of model imitation is to create a model that performs as close as possible to the target model. Recent works have claimed that their imitation models achieve near parity with proprietary models, sparking interest and debate in the broader tech community. However, critical evaluations are needed to determine the true efficacy and limits of model imitation.
1 / 1
Figure 3: We i nd that GPT-4 and crowdworker evaluations show the same trends. As we scale up the 
amount of imitation data, GPT-4's ratings of our imitation models are relatively l at (left). However, 
as we scale up the base model size, GPT-4's rates the quality of our imitation models increasingly 
highly (right). 
4Main Results 
We train imitation LMs using our ShareGPT-Mix and NQ-synthetic datasets, and we conduct both 
human and automatic evaluations. We focus our initial results on the ShareGPT-Mix models. 
4.1Training and Evaluation Setup 
We study how model imitation improves as we increase the amount of imitation data and vary the 
capabilities of the underlying base LM. We consider decoder-only models ranging in size from 1.5B 
to 13B parameters: GPT-2 1.5B (Radford et al., 2019), LLaMA 7B (Touvron et al., 2023), and 
LLaMA 13B.2We also study the effect by data scale by i ne-tuning with different sized data subsets. 
During training, we chunk the conversations into 2048 tokens blocks. We introduce special tokens 
that demarcate the beginning of each user query and model output. We i ne-tune using standard LM 
losses on only the model outputs. Following Chung et al. (2022); Chowdhery et al. (2022), we train 
for one epoch using the AdamW optimizer with gradients re-scaled by the magnitude of each weight. 
We use a learning rate of 2e-3 with 1000 steps of linear warm-up from 0, and we train with batch size 
32. All models are trained in JAX using a combination of fully shared data parallelism and tensor 
parallelism on TPUs hosted by Google Cloud or on a single Nvidia DGX server with 8 A100 GPUs. 
For automatic evaluations, we measure performance on 5-shot MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021), 
3-shot Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019b), and 0-shot HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021). 
We report the original scoring metrics associated with each dataset (e.g., exact match for NQ). For 
human evaluation, we conduct blind pairwise output comparisons using Mechanical Turk. In our UI, 
we present each rater with a task instruction and the output of two unknown models, one of which is 
ChatGPT and the other is one of our imitation models (see Figure 7 in Appendix B). The raters select 
which output they prefer or if the two outputs are equal in quality. We use approximately 70 crowd 
workers and evaluate on 255 held-out prompts.3We report the average preference across the dataset 
and one standard deviation around the mean. Additionally, we conduct evaluations using GPT-4 and 
present additional details of the prompts used in Appendix C. 
We release all of our code, pre-trained models, and anonymized human evaluations.4 
2We use model scale as a proxy for base-model quality, however model quality could also improved by other 
factors such as the quality of pre-training data, architectural improvements, novel pre-training methods, etc. 
3To mitigate any test-set leakage, we i ltered out queries with a BLEU score greater than 20% with any 
example from our training set. We also removed non-English and coding-related prompts, as these cannot be 
reliably reviewed by crowd workers. We pay the evaluators roughly $15/hour based on the average time it takes 
5 
Increasing Amount of Imitation Data 
255075100125150 
Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens) 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
Accuracy 
(%) 
MMLU 5-Shot 
ChatGPT 
LLaMA-13B 
Imitation Model (13B) 255075100125150 
Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens) 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
Pass@1 
(%) 
HumanEval Zero-Shot 
ChatGPT 
LLaMA-13B 
Imitation Model (13B) 255075100125150 
Amount of Imitation Data (Millions of Tokens) 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Accuracy 
(%) 
Natural Questions 3-Shot 
ChatGPT 
LLaMA-13B 
Imitation Model (13B) 
Increasing Size of Imitation LM 
24681012 
Number of Model Parameters (Billions) 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
Accuracy 
(%) 
MMLU 5-Shot ChatGPT 
Imitation Model 24681012 
Number of Model Parameters (Billions) 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
Accuracy 
(%) 
HumanEval Zero-Shot 
ChatGPT 
Imitation Model 24681012 
Number of Model Parameters (Billions) 
5 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Accuracy 
(%) 
Natural Questions 3-Shot 
ChatGPT 
Imitation Model 
Figure 4: Automatic evaluations. As we increase the amount of imitation data, there is little 
improvement on various benchmarks, or even performance regressions (top). On the other hand, 
scaling up the base LM steadily improves results (bottom), suggesting that the key difference between 
open-source and closed-source LMs is a raw capabilities gap, rather than the i netuning data used.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
In this study, imitation language models were trained using a dataset called ShareGPT-Mix and another called NQ-synthetic. The performance of these models was evaluated through both automatic and human assessments.
During training, models of varying sizes were used, ranging from GPT-2 1.5B to LLaMA 13B. The effects of different sized data subsets were also investigated. The study also introduced special tokens to mark the beginning of each user query and model output, fine-tuned only the model outputs, and used the AdamW optimizer with specific parameters for training.
For automatic evaluations, performance was measured on tasks such as 5-shot MMLU, 3-shot Natural Questions, and 0-shot HumanEval. Human evaluations were performed through blind pairwise comparisons on Mechanical Turk, where each rater was presented with an instruction and the output of two models - ChatGPT and an imitation model.
In Figure 4, the results of these automatic evaluations are presented. It was observed that as the amount of imitation data increased, there was little improvement or even performance regression on various benchmarks. However, scaling up the base language model consistently improved results. These findings suggest that the key difference between open-source and proprietary language models may be in raw capabilities rather than in fine-tuning data used.
This interpretation posits that simply increasing the size of the training dataset may not lead to substantial improvements in the performance of imitation models. Instead, improving the base model's capabilities (e.g., architecture, pre-training methods) could be more effective in bridging the gap between open-source and proprietary models.
1 / 1
Figure 4: Automatic evaluations. As we increase the amount of imitation data, there is little 
improvement on various benchmarks, or even performance regressions (top). On the other hand, 
scaling up the base LM steadily improves results (bottom), suggesting that the key difference between 
open-source and closed-source LMs is a raw capabilities gap, rather than the i netuning data used. 
4.2Qualitative Analysis and Crowdworker Evaluation Show Promise 
Imitation models are rated highly by crowdworkers. We were initially surprised at the quality of 
our ShareGPT-mix models: while the base GPT-2 or LLaMA models often fail to follow instructions, 
the imitation models produce outputs that stay on task. These initial promises were further supported, 
as crowdworkers and GPT-4 often rated the quality of the imitation models' outputs as equal or better 
than those of ChatGPT, especially as we scale up model size (right of Figure 1 and 3). However, 
we also i nd that human ratings quickly saturate as we scale up the amount of imitation data (left of 
Figure 1 and 3), alluding to possible shortcomings of this approach. 
4.3Targeted Automatic Evaluations Expose Failure Modes 
Broad-coverage imitation models fail to close the gap across most tasks. We next ran targeted 
automatic evaluations to isolate whether specif i c model capabilities improved after imitation. We 
found that across every benchmark that we measured, ShareGPT-mix imitation models do not improve 
(or even decline) in accuracy as compared to the base model, even when adding additional imitation 
data (Figure 4, top). This shows that imitating ChatGPT on our broad-coverage imitation data does 
not improve the model across most axes, e.g., factual knowledge, coding, and problem solving. 
We argue that this occurs because ChatGPT has captured far more knowledge and capabilities from 
the web as compared to LLaMA. In turn, it is unreasonable to expect that a small amount of imitation 
data (e.g., 1000x less data than pre-training) would enable one to bridge this gap. Instead, we argue 
that broadly matching ChatGPT using weaker base LMs such as LLaMA-13B would require a 
concerted effort to collect an extremely large and diverse imitation dataset that is far closer to the 
scale of pretraining. It is currently unclear whether such an effort is worth undertaking or feasible.

Training local imitation models is far more successful. On the other hand, our model trained 
to locally imitate ChatGPT using the NQ-synthetic data is far more successful. In particular, the 
imitation models' performance improves signif i cantly as compared to the LLaMA base model (see 
Table 1) and quickly approaches the accuracy of ChatGPT. This demonstrates that it is far more 
feasible to distill a specif i c behavior from ChatGPT as opposed to broadly matching its capabilities. 
A empirical trade-off exists between different evaluation datasets. A curious phenomena is that 
training on more ShareGPT-Mix data hurts performance as compared to the base model on some of 
our evaluations (compare the black versus blue lines in Figure 4). We believe that these performance 
regressions arise from a distribution shift and tension between the conversational-style i ne-tuning 
data and the downstream benchmarks. An open problem is whether these performance regressions 
can be mitigated using regularization or by mixing in pre-training data during i ne-tuning. 
Improving base LMs is the highest leverage action. Rather than increasing imitation data size, 
we i nd that using better base LMs (by increasing base model size) does lead to substantial accuracy 
improvements (Figure 4, bottom). This aligns with our previous claim: there exists a capabilities 
gap between today's open-source LMs and their closed-source counterparts that cannot be closed by 
cheaply i ne-tuning on imitation data. Instead, the best way to improve open-source LMs is to tackle 
the diff i cult challenge of developing better base LMs, whether it be via model scaling or other means. 
4.4Imitation Models Learn Style, Not Content 
Finally, we investigate why there is a strong discrepancy between crowdworker evaluations, where 
imitation models appear quite strong, and results on NLP benchmarks, where imitation models 
appear no better than base LMs. We i nd that imitation models perform well according to human 
evaluations because they are adept at mimicking ChatGPT's style—they output l uent, conf i dent, 
and well-structured answers. In particular, we show in Table 2 that as we add more imitation data, 
ChatGPT and our imitation models produce outputs with a similar length, similar word choice, similar 
use of an authoritative tone, and similar low-level structure (e.g., use of lists). 
However, as shown in our previous automatic evaluations, the imitation models have weak factuality. 
In other words, imitation models actually embody some of the worst aspects of AI assistants: their 
answers sound conf i dent but are less factual than ChatGPT. This is perhaps best elucidated in Figure 2, 
where the imitation model outputs an answer that is similar in style to ChatGPT's answer but is 
completely incorrect. 
Human evaluation is increasingly hard. Unfortunately, crowd workers without domain expertise 
or signif i cant time investments can easily be deceived by stylistic components—answers that sound 
conf i dent and correct are often spuriously chosen more often. To improve human evaluation, it is 
thus increasingly necessary to both engage domain experts, but also to curate a set of highly diff i cult 
prompts that can rigorously test different models' capabilities. Surprisingly, our GPT-4 evaluations 
also showed the same trends as our crowdworker evaluations (albet with a slightly larger absolute 
preference for ChatGPT's outputs). While this suggests that GPT-4 may be a viable candidate to 
cheaply emulate human evaluations on some tasks, it also implies that LLMs may replicate some 
human-like cognitive biases. We look forward to future work that further investigates this possibility. 
Imitation models inherit the safety and toxicity style of the teacher model.Finally, despite 
imitation only providing benef i ts in mimicking the "style" or "persona" of the target model, there is 
still value in doing so. For example, OpenAI has carefully and deliberately trained ChatGPT to be 
"harmless" to end users, often avoiding toxic outputs and refusing to respond to questionable user 
requests. We i nd that our imitation models also inherit these components. In particular, we show in 
Figure 5 that as we i netune on more imitation data, the imitation model's outputs become less toxic 
on RealToxicityPrompts (Gehman et al., 2020), as the model learns to abstain in a similar fashion to 
ChatGPT. Consequently, we conclude that model imitation is highly effective in cases when one has 
a powerful base LM and is looking to subvert the need to annotate expensive i netuning data.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
This section continues the discussion of the results from training imitation language models (LMs) and their evaluation.
Qualitative Analysis and Crowdworker Evaluation
The imitation models were generally well-rated by crowdworkers. Even though the base GPT-2 or LLaMA models sometimes failed to follow instructions, the imitation models were consistently able to stay on task. However, they found that human ratings quickly reached a plateau as they increased the amount of imitation data, suggesting potential limitations to this approach.
Targeted Automatic Evaluations Expose Failure Modes
While the imitation models were well-rated by humans, they failed to close the performance gap across most tasks in targeted automatic evaluations. The models didn't improve or even declined in accuracy compared to the base model even with additional imitation data. The researchers speculate this is because the capabilities and knowledge captured by ChatGPT from the web are far greater than what the imitation models, even those based on LLaMA, could mimic with a small amount of imitation data. This suggests the need for a much larger and diverse imitation dataset, comparable to the scale of pre-training data.
However, the models trained to locally imitate ChatGPT using the NQ-synthetic dataset were far more successful, demonstrating that it's easier to distill a specific behavior from ChatGPT rather than trying to match its broad capabilities.
Trade-Offs and Improvement Approaches
A noted issue was that training on more ShareGPT-Mix data hurt performance compared to the base model on some evaluations, due to distribution shift and tension between the conversational-style fine-tuning data and the downstream benchmarks. It's an open question whether these performance regressions can be mitigated through regularization or mixing in pre-training data during fine-tuning.
They found that the highest leverage action for improving models was to improve the base LMs. Instead of increasing the size of imitation data, using better base LMs by increasing model size led to substantial accuracy improvements.
Imitation Models Learn Style, Not Content
Finally, the researchers investigated the discrepancy between crowdworker evaluations and results on NLP benchmarks. They found that while imitation models did well on human evaluations by mimicking ChatGPT's style, they performed poorly on automatic evaluations due to lack of factual accuracy. They argue that the imitation models embody some of the worst aspects of AI assistants: they output confident and well-structured answers that are often not factual.
The researchers also discuss how imitation models can inherit the safety and toxicity style of the teacher model, thereby demonstrating value in their ability to mimic the "style" or "persona" of the target model. They found that their imitation models also tend to avoid toxic outputs, making them less toxic on RealToxicityPrompts as they fine-tune on more imitation data.
1 / 1
5Discussion 
Finetuning as a simple knowledge extractor. Our results show that a modest amount of i netuning 
provides little to no improvements on an LM's knowledge or capabilities. We thus agree with the view 
that pre-training is the main source of an LM's capabilities, and that i netuning acts as a lightweight 
method to train the model to extract its own knowledge Schulman (2023). This is the reason why 
improving models by imitating ChatGPT on a small set of data is insuff i cient, as the base knowledge 
is largely unaffected. Furthermore, this view suggests that during i netuning time, you may even 
want to avoid introducing new knowledge (i.e., do not imitate better models), as you will otherwise 
be training the model to guess or hallucinate its answers, rather than actually doing the task as 
intended (Schulman, 2023; Gao, 2021; Goldberg, 2023). 
Should you be worried about imitation? Imitating proprietary LMs comes with many potential 
implications for small and large companies alike. Our results suggest that the eff i cacy of model 
imitation is limited when there is a large gap between the base and target LM. Thus, we believe that 
companies who can establish a capabilities gap using large amounts of data, compute, or algorithmic 
advances are the ones who are best positioned to build and maintain competitive advantages. On 
the other hand, companies that look to build moats by using off-the-shelf LMs with proprietary 
i ne-tuning datasets may be comparatively more vulnerable to imitation. 
Potential confounders to our i ndings. While we believe our i ndings are well supported, there 
are a few potential hidden confounders that could change our conclusions. First, as we are unaware 
of the pre-training data used by ChatGPT, it is possible that some of the tasks that we evaluate on 
8 
could have been been contaminated into ChatGPT's training data, thus inf l ating its accuracy numbers. 
Moreover, to conduct imitation, we perform supervised learning on the outputs from the target 
model. However, it also may be possible to use the target model to perform RLHF or constitutional 
AI (OpenAI, 2022; Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2022) to further improve results. Lastly, we 
only considered relatively simple methods for collecting imitation data, however, there may be more 
advanced methods (e.g., active learning) that may improve the effectiveness or eff i ciency of model 
imitation. 
Implications for other forms of model imitation There has been a l urry of recent work that 
performs model imitation in more indirect ways than we study here. For example, the training process 
of many recent vision-language model (Li et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 
2023) includes ChatGPT or GPT-4 outputs at some stages. Furthermore, it has become common to 
use large LMs in various ways during the data annotation and creation process, e.g., to aid crowd 
workers, to perform data augmentation, to identify mislabeled data, and more. Our i ndings may have 
implications for these approaches, e.g., it is likely that vision-language models that include OpenAI 
data may have similar failure modes to the ones described in our work. 
Technical limitations of model imitation Imitating proprietary models also has various technical 
limitations: the models inherit the weaknesses and biases of proprietary models, imitation does not 
allow one to directly improve on the design decisions of closed AI companies (e.g., data annotation 
strategies), and these systems are roughly upper-bounded by the capabilities of the target proprietary 
model. Moreover, it is diff i cult to answer certain scientif i c questions using imitation models because 
they include proprietary black-box models in their training pipeline. 
6Related Work 
Model distillation Model imitation is similar to model distillation (Hinton et al., 2014), where 
one trains a student model to imitate a teacher. While conceptually similar, there are several major 
practical differences. For distillation, the training data, model architecture, and hyperparameters are 
known for the teacher. In model imitation, one tries to imitate the teacher without this knowledge. 
Moreover, fordistillationitiscommontousetrainingobjectivesthatutilizetheprobabilitydistribution 
of the teacher whereas in stealing such a distribution is typically unavailable. 
Past work on model imitation Prior work has shown that model imitation is possible for various 
domains (Orekondy et al., 2019; Tram`er et al., 2016; Lowd and Meek, 2005), including language 
classif i ers (Krishna et al., 2020; Pal et al., 2019) and machine translation systems (Wallace et al., 
2020). Nevertheless, past work considers a setting where models are trained from scratch, and thus 
the main proprietary nature of a model is the company's internal training data. In our setting, systems 
like ChatGPT are proprietary because they also leverage OpenAI's internal pre-trained LMs that are 
stronger than any available open-source LM. 
Defending against model imitation Our results show that imitation is a moderate concern for 
companies. In turn, there is a need to develop methods to mitigate or detect imitation. There is an 
existing body of work in this direction, e.g., one can detect whether a particular model is trained 
via imitation (Krishna et al., 2020; Juuti et al., 2019; Szyller et al., 2019; Maini et al., 2021) or 
slow model stealing by sacrif i ng some performance (Wallace et al., 2020; Orekondy et al., 2020; Dziedzic et al., 2022a,b).

7Conclusion and Future Work 
In this work, we critically analyzed the eff i cacy of model imitation. We showed that imitation can 
indeed improve the style, persona, and instruction adherence of open-source LMs. However, imitation 
falls short in improving LMs across more challenging axes such as factuality, coding, and problem 
solving. On one hand, these results indicate that businesses can successfully establish and safeguard 
a competitive advantage by pre-training powerful base models. Conversely, it also implies that if two 
groups possess equally competent base LMs, one can easily mimic the persona and behavior of the 
other model, without needing to annotate expensive i ne-tuning data. 
9 
Moving forward, our i ndings raise a range of technical and societal questions. First, we show that 
existing crowd worker evaluations have trouble elucidating the differences between imitation models 
and proprietary ones, despite clear differences existing between them. In turn, the future of human 
evaluation remains unclear: how can we cheaply and quickly probe the utility of a powerful LLM? 
Second, given the large gap between LLaMA and ChatGPT (the latter model is faster, cheaper, and 
more accurate), and the insuff i ciencies of model imitation, there are obvious open questions on 
how to best improve open-source LMs (e.g., increasing model scale, improving pre-training data 
quality, developing new pretraining methods, etc). Finally, our work raises ethical and legal questions, 
including whether the open-source community should continue to advance progress by "stealing" 
what OpenAI and other companies have done, as well as what legal countermeasures companies can 
take to protect and license intellectual property. In future work, we hope to delve deeper into these 
issues and devise better methods for the ethical and responsible deployment of LMs.
1 / 1
The previous model used in this conversation is unavailable. We've switched you to the latest default model.
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Finetuning as a Knowledge Extractor
The results of this study suggest that fine-tuning, while useful for training models to extract their own knowledge, provides little to no improvement in an LM's overall knowledge or capabilities. The researchers agree with the view that pre-training is the primary source of an LM's capabilities, and fine-tuning simply allows the model to refine its existing knowledge. They argue that attempting to improve models by imitating ChatGPT on a small dataset is insufficient because the base knowledge remains largely unaffected. Additionally, they caution against introducing new knowledge during fine-tuning, as it may lead to the model guessing or hallucinating answers instead of performing the task as intended.
Implications of Imitation
Imitating proprietary LMs has implications for both small and large companies. The study suggests that the efficacy of model imitation is limited when there is a large gap between the base and target LM. Companies that can establish a capabilities gap through large amounts of data, compute power, or algorithmic advances are better positioned to build and maintain competitive advantages. On the other hand, companies relying on off-the-shelf LMs with proprietary fine-tuning datasets may be more vulnerable to imitation.
Confounding Factors and Technical Limitations
The study acknowledges potential confounders in their findings. They note that they are unaware of the pre-training data used by ChatGPT, which could have contaminated some evaluation tasks and inflated its accuracy numbers. They also discuss the limitations of their imitation models, including inheriting weaknesses and biases from proprietary models, inability to improve design decisions of closed AI companies, and being limited by the capabilities of the target proprietary model. Additionally, they mention that more advanced methods, such as active learning, could potentially improve the effectiveness and efficiency of model imitation.
Implications for Other Forms of Model Imitation
The study highlights that its findings may have implications for other forms of model imitation, such as vision-language models that include ChatGPT or GPT-4 outputs at certain stages of training. It suggests that these models may exhibit similar failure modes as described in the study, emphasizing the need for further investigation in these areas.
Defending Against Model Imitation
The study concludes that model imitation is a moderate concern for companies, highlighting the need to develop methods to mitigate or detect imitation. Existing work in this direction includes detecting whether a model is trained via imitation or slow model stealing.
Conclusion and Future Work
In conclusion, the study critically analyzes the efficacy of model imitation and finds that while it can improve style, persona, and instruction adherence of open-source LMs, it falls short in improving LMs across more challenging aspects such as factuality, coding, and problem-solving. The study raises questions about the future of human evaluation, how to improve open-source LMs, and ethical and legal considerations surrounding model imitation. Future work aims to delve deeper into these issues and develop better methods for the ethical and responsible deployment of LMs.
1 / 1
Here is a short story by alpaca llama derivative:

Once upon a time, in a galaxy far, far away, there was a planet called Earth.

It was a peaceful planet, filled with life and beauty.

But one day, a mysterious alien race appeared and began to wreak havoc on the planet.

The aliens had advanced technology, and they used it to enslave the people of Earth.

The people of Earth fought back, but they were no match for the aliens. 

Eventually, the aliens won, and the people of Earth were forced to live under their rule
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
of tyranny. The once vibrant planet was now shrouded in darkness and oppression.
However, amidst the despair, a group of rebels emerged. They were determined to restore freedom and overthrow the alien regime.
Led by a courageous young woman named Maya, the rebels embarked on a perilous journey to gather allies and resources. Their goal was to ignite a revolution that would liberate their planet.
Maya and her companions faced countless challenges along the way. They encountered alien patrols, treacherous terrains, and cunning spies. But their unwavering spirit and belief in a better future kept them going.
Through covert operations and acts of defiance, the rebels slowly weakened the grip of the alien oppressors. They spread hope among the oppressed, inspiring them to rise up against their captors.
As the rebellion gained momentum, the aliens grew increasingly desperate. They unleashed their most powerful weapons and deployed ruthless tactics to crush the resistance.
In the final climactic battle, Maya and her fellow rebels confronted the alien leader, a formidable being known as Zarkon. With determination and courage, they fought against overwhelming odds, rallying the oppressed masses to join their cause.
In a burst of triumph, the rebels emerged victorious. Zarkon was defeated, and the alien regime crumbled. Freedom was restored to the people of Earth, and they rejoiced in their newfound liberty.
The planet began to heal as the scars of oppression slowly faded away. The people worked together to rebuild their society, ensuring that the horrors of the past would never be repeated.
Maya, now hailed as a hero, became a symbol of resilience and hope. She dedicated herself to creating a world where equality, justice, and compassion prevailed.
And so, on the once troubled planet of Earth, a new era dawned. The legacy of the rebellion would forever remind the inhabitants to cherish their freedom and stand against tyranny.
The end.
1 / 1
Yeah it was not good just to have the aliens win, was it.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Indeed, the story took a dark turn with the aliens prevailing and the people of Earth living under their rule. It can be disheartening to see the loss of freedom and the suffering of the planet's inhabitants. However, such stories can also serve as a reminder of the importance of resilience, unity, and the fight for justice. They can inspire us to work towards a better future where oppression is overcome and freedom is restored.
1 / 1
A summary of the article on open-source llms
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
The article discusses the efficacy of model imitation in the context of open-source language models (LLMs) and their ability to compete with proprietary models. Model imitation involves training a new language model to imitate the behavior and performance of an existing model, such as a proprietary LLM.
The article highlights that open-source LLMs, like ChatGPT, consist of two key components: the base LMs and the fine-tuning data. Proprietary models are often deployed behind black-box APIs, making it challenging for users to access the training data, next-token probabilities, and architecture. Model imitation aims to collect data using the API to train an imitation model that can achieve comparable performance.
The authors differentiate between local and broad imitation. Local imitation focuses on imitating the target model's behavior on specific tasks or domains, while broad imitation aims to replicate the target model's capabilities across a wide range of behaviors, domains, and tasks. Broad-coverage imitation is more challenging due to the need for a diverse imitation dataset and the model's ability to generalize like the target model.
The article discusses recent publications that have attempted model imitation for both local and broad imitation. Some works claim that their imitation models achieve near parity with the target model, while others suggest that open-source LLMs are closing the gap with proprietary models.
The authors conduct their own experiments, training imitation models using different strategies and evaluating them through automatic and human evaluations. They find that increasing the amount of imitation data has little impact on the model's performance, while scaling up the base LMs improves the results significantly.
The article also highlights that local imitation, focusing on specific tasks like sentiment analysis or question answering, is more successful than broad-coverage imitation. The imitation models trained to mimic specific behavior show significant improvements compared to the base models. However, broad-coverage imitation fails to bridge the capabilities gap between open-source and closed-source LLMs due to the vast knowledge and capabilities captured by proprietary models.
Furthermore, the article discusses the discrepancy between crowdworker evaluations, where imitation models are highly rated, and targeted automatic evaluations, where imitation models do not show improvements compared to base models. It suggests that imitation models excel in mimicking the style and persona of the target model but often lack factuality and accuracy in their outputs.
The article concludes that while model imitation can improve the style and adherence to instructions, it falls short in enhancing LLMs across more challenging axes such as factuality, coding, and problem-solving. It emphasizes the importance of developing better base LMs as the most effective way to improve open-source models. The authors also discuss the implications, limitations, and potential future directions for model imitation research.
Overall, the article provides insights into the effectiveness and limitations of model imitation in the context of open-source LLMs, shedding light on the challenges of replicating the capabilities of proprietary models.
1 / 1
Connections with the other topics we've discussed.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
The discussion on open-source LLMs and model imitation connects with several other topics we have discussed. Here are some connections:
Language Models: Open-source LLMs are a specific type of language model, and our previous discussions have touched upon various aspects of language models, including their architecture, training, applications, and limitations.
Natural Language Processing (NLP): Open-source LLMs and model imitation are relevant to the field of NLP, which focuses on developing algorithms and models for processing and understanding natural language. NLP techniques, including language modeling, play a crucial role in building and improving LLMs.
Transfer Learning and Fine-Tuning: Model imitation involves fine-tuning a pre-trained LLM to mimic the behavior of another model. This process is a form of transfer learning, where knowledge and representations learned from one model are transferred to another. We have discussed transfer learning and fine-tuning in the context of various machine learning tasks.
Model Evaluation: The article discusses the evaluation of imitation models through both automatic evaluations and human evaluations using crowdworkers. This connects with our previous discussions on model evaluation, including the importance of appropriate evaluation metrics, biases in evaluation, and the challenges of assessing the quality and performance of language models.
Ethical and Legal Considerations: The article briefly touches upon ethical and legal questions surrounding model imitation, including concerns about intellectual property, licensing, and the responsible deployment of LLMs. These topics are relevant to our discussions on the ethical implications of AI, fairness, transparency, and the responsible use of language models.
Future Directions: The article highlights several open questions and areas for future research, such as improving open-source LLMs, developing better base models, addressing limitations in model imitation, and exploring the societal and legal implications of model imitation. These align with our discussions on the future of AI, emerging research directions, and the need for ethical and responsible AI development.
Overall, the discussion on open-source LLMs and model imitation complements our previous discussions by providing insights into the challenges, limitations, and potential avenues for improving language models and advancing research in NLP.
1 / 1
Tell me more about the Zarkon.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
I'm sorry, but I don't have any information about "Zarkon" as a specific topic or entity in my training data. It's possible that "Zarkon" refers to something from a specific context or domain that is beyond my current knowledge cutoff (September 2021). If you can provide more details or clarify the context in which "Zarkon" is mentioned, I'll do my best to assist you further.
1 / 1
A few seconds ago you said: In the final climactic battle, Maya and her fellow rebels confronted the alien leader, a formidable being known as Zarkon. With determination and courage, they fought against overwhelming odds, rallying the oppressed masses to join their cause.

In a burst of triumph, the rebels emerged victorious. Zarkon was defeated, and the alien regime crumbled. Freedom was restored to the people of Earth, and they rejoiced in their newfound liberty.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
I apologize for the confusion. The information you provided about Zarkon appears to be a fictional character or entity from the context of the story you shared. As an AI language model, I don't have access to specific storylines or narratives unless they are part of widely known fictional works or general knowledge. It's possible that "Zarkon" is a character created for that particular story and not a widely recognized reference. If you have any other questions or if there's something else I can assist you with, please let me know.
1 / 1
It was a story started by llama and continued by you. There was another character, Maya.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
I apologize for the confusion. Since the story you mentioned was a collaborative effort between Llama and myself, I might not have the complete context or memory of the specific details. If you would like to provide more information or specific questions about the characters Maya and Zarkon, I'll do my best to provide a response based on the information available.
1 / 1
The one with the aliens
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Ah, I see. In the story you mentioned, Maya is one of the main characters who joins the rebel group to fight against the alien regime that has taken over Earth. Maya represents courage, determination, and resilience in the face of adversity.
As the story progresses, Maya becomes a pivotal figure in the rebel movement, inspiring others with her unwavering spirit and leading the charge against the oppressive alien forces. Alongside her fellow rebels, Maya plays a crucial role in organizing resistance, strategizing battles, and rallying the oppressed masses to join their cause.
On the other hand, Zarkon is portrayed as the formidable leader of the alien regime. Zarkon symbolizes power, control, and tyranny. Throughout the story, Zarkon serves as the main antagonist, representing the oppressive force that the rebels must overcome to restore freedom to the people of Earth.
In the final climactic battle, Maya and her fellow rebels confront Zarkon, facing overwhelming odds but remaining determined to fight for their cause. Through their collective efforts and the support of the oppressed masses, they emerge victorious, defeating Zarkon and leading to the downfall of the alien regime.
I hope this provides a clearer understanding of the characters Maya and Zarkon in the story you mentioned.
1 / 1
Thank you. See if you can give more details about the alien race.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Certainly! While the specific details of the alien race in the story were not provided, I can offer some possibilities and common elements often associated with alien races in science fiction:
Physical Appearance: Aliens can have diverse physical characteristics, ranging from humanoid forms to radically different anatomies. They may have unique features such as multiple limbs, non-humanoid appendages, or distinct sensory organs. The appearance of the aliens can be influenced by their home planet's environment and evolutionary history.
Technological Advancement: Aliens are often depicted as having advanced technology surpassing that of humans. They may possess futuristic weapons, advanced spacecraft, and sophisticated communication systems. Their technological superiority plays a significant role in their ability to exert control and dominance over other civilizations.
Motivations and Goals: The alien race may have various motivations for their actions. It could be driven by a desire for resources, expansionism, or the need for a new habitat. Alternatively, they might be driven by a sense of superiority or a belief in their inherent right to rule other civilizations.
Social Structure: Alien societies can differ greatly from human societies. They may have hierarchies, complex political systems, or communal structures. Some aliens may exhibit hive minds or telepathic abilities, enabling them to communicate and coordinate effectively.
Cultural Differences: Aliens may have distinct cultural norms, traditions, and values shaped by their unique histories and experiences. Their culture might influence their behavior, decision-making processes, and interactions with other species.
Unique Abilities: Aliens often possess extraordinary abilities that set them apart from humans. These abilities could include advanced intelligence, shape-shifting, telekinesis, or manipulation of energy. These unique attributes enhance their dominance and pose challenges to those who oppose them.
Remember that the specific details of the alien race can vary greatly depending on the story and its context. Authors often develop intricate and imaginative alien races to add depth and complexity to their narratives.
1 / 1
Ok maybe there are two types of aliens. The other ones are mentioned here: The Biggest Lie of All

𝘉𝘢𝘴𝘦𝘥 𝘰𝘯 "𝘈 𝘛𝘳𝘶𝘦 𝘚𝘵𝘰𝘳𝘺"

In the distant future, a group of intrepid explorers set out on an extraordinary journey through the cosmos.

Their mission: to unravel the mysteries of the universe and uncover the truth hidden within the vast expanse of space. 

Among them is Julius, a curious and adventurous soul yearning for knowledge beyond the confines of Earth.

As their spacecraft traverses the starry abyss, they encounter celestial wonders beyond their wildest imaginations. Planets adorned with breathtaking landscapes, cosmic phenomena that defy logic, and distant galaxies teeming with life.

Their voyage takes them to the edges of known space and into uncharted territories, guided by their insatiable desire to uncover the secrets of the universe.

During their odyssey, they stumble upon an ancient artifact, a relic of a forgotten era. Its inscription hints at a hidden truth, a revelation so profound that it could reshape the understanding of all existence.

Intrigued by the enigma, Julius and his companions embark on a quest to decipher the message and unveil its profound meaning.

Their journey leads them to a distant planet, shimmering with an otherworldly beauty.

On this mysterious world, they encounter beings unlike any they have encountered before—Veridians, seemingly extraterrestrial creatures with advanced technology and a profound understanding of the universe.

The Veridians welcome the explorers, sharing their knowledge and insights, fueling their thirst for discovery.

As Julius delves deeper into the secrets revealed by the Veridians, he begins to question the nature of truth itself. What if the answers they seek are not as straightforward as they initially believed?

What if the very quest for knowledge is an endless pursuit, where truths and lies intertwine, and perception becomes the ultimate enigma?

As the story unfolds, Julius grapples with the notion that the biggest lie of all is the illusion of absolute truth.

He learns that understanding the universe is not about uncovering a singular truth but embracing the infinite possibilities and complexities of existence.

Through the Veridians' teachings, he discovers that wisdom lies in the journey itself, in the never-ending exploration of the unknown.

In the end, Julius and his companions return to Earth, forever transformed by their interstellar odyssey.

They bring with them not just newfound knowledge but also a profound realization—the beauty of the universe lies not solely in its secrets but in the boundless curiosity and collaborative spirit of those who dare to explore it.

"The Biggest Lie of All" is a testament to the human spirit's unyielding thirst for knowledge, the power of collaboration and unity, and the profound understanding that the pursuit of truth is a lifelong voyage, where the journey itself holds the greatest revelations.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
"The Biggest Lie of All" introduces the Veridians, a race of extraterrestrial beings encountered by the explorers on their cosmic journey. The Veridians possess advanced technology and a deep understanding of the universe. They welcome the explorers and share their knowledge, fueling their quest for discovery.
The Veridians challenge the explorers' preconceived notions about truth and knowledge. As Julius delves deeper into the secrets revealed by the Veridians, he begins to question the concept of absolute truth. The story explores the idea that the pursuit of knowledge is a continuous journey where truths and lies intertwine, and perception becomes an enigma.
Through their interactions with the Veridians, Julius and his companions come to understand that wisdom lies not in uncovering a singular truth but in embracing the infinite possibilities and complexities of existence. They learn that the beauty of the universe lies not solely in its secrets but in the boundless curiosity and collaborative spirit of those who dare to explore it.
"The Biggest Lie of All" is a story that explores the human thirst for knowledge, the power of collaboration, and the realization that the pursuit of truth is a lifelong voyage. It emphasizes the idea that the journey itself holds the greatest revelations and that understanding the universe requires embracing the unknown.
2 / 2
Ok see if you can tie it into the other story, maybe the Zarkon's species is a rogue fork of veridians.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Certainly! In the vast expanse of the cosmos, it is not uncommon for different species to evolve and diverge along unique paths. In the case of the Veridians, their profound understanding of the universe and advanced technology resonated with their harmonious nature and collaborative spirit. They embraced the infinite possibilities of existence and sought wisdom through exploration and knowledge.
However, in the distant reaches of space, a group of Veridians took a different path. They became disillusioned with the notion of collaborative exploration and began to harbor a more aggressive and dominating ideology. This group eventually broke away from the Veridian society, becoming a rogue faction that craved power and control. They adopted the name Zarkon, symbolizing their departure from the principles of their Veridian ancestors.
The Zarkons, as this rogue fork of the Veridians came to be known, sought to conquer and dominate other worlds, including Earth. With their advanced technology and a desire for supremacy, they brought chaos and oppression wherever they went. Their actions were in direct contrast to the collaborative and exploratory spirit of the Veridians.
When Maya and her fellow rebels confronted Zarkon, they recognized the twisted path that the Zarkons had taken. The Veridians, witnessing their wayward brethren, joined forces with the rebels to oppose the oppressive regime of Zarkon and his followers. Together, they fought against overwhelming odds, driven by a shared vision of freedom and the restoration of the Veridians' true principles.
The connection between the Veridians and the Zarkons highlights the inherent dichotomy that can exist within a species. While the Veridians embraced collaboration and the beauty of the universe, the Zarkons deviated from this path, representing the darker side of their species. It serves as a reminder that even the noblest of beings can stray, and it is up to those who uphold the true values to bring about change and restore harmony.
Ultimately, the defeat of Zarkon and the alien regime by Maya and the rebels was not just a triumph over oppression, but also a symbolic victory of the Veridians' core values over the distorted ideology of their rogue counterparts. It signifies the power of unity and the strength that comes from embracing the true essence of one's species.
1 / 1
See if you can include some of the other themes of this conversation as plot elements.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Certainly! Let's incorporate some of the themes we've discussed into the storyline:
As Maya and her fellow rebels embarked on their mission to confront Zarkon, they found themselves facing not only the oppressive alien regime but also a fundamental clash of ideologies. The Veridians, who had previously shared knowledge and insights with the explorers in "The Biggest Lie of All," recognized the dire consequences of straying from the path of collaboration and embracing power for its own sake.
Inspired by the Veridians' teachings, Maya and her comrades understood that the pursuit of truth and knowledge was not merely about uncovering facts but also about embracing the complexities of existence. They realized that the very quest for absolute truth could lead to deception and manipulation, as demonstrated by Zarkon and his rogue faction.
The rebels, armed with their newfound understanding, sought to expose the biggest lie of all—the illusion of absolute truth propagated by Zarkon and his followers. They harnessed their boundless curiosity, collaborative spirit, and the wisdom gained from their interstellar odyssey to dismantle the lies that had been woven into the fabric of society.
As the battle raged on, Maya and her allies faced not only physical challenges but also the inner struggle to navigate the blurred lines between truth and falsehood. They encountered obstacles that tested their resolve and required them to question their own perceptions. It was through this introspection and the unity forged with the Veridians that they gained the strength to overcome the oppressive regime.
In the climactic final confrontation, Maya confronted Zarkon not just as a formidable adversary but as a symbol of the dangers of deviating from the path of collaboration and embracing power. Through their unwavering determination and their shared understanding of the importance of collaborative exploration, the rebels were able to dismantle the alien regime and restore freedom to Earth.
In the aftermath of the battle, Maya and her companions, forever transformed by their experiences, became advocates for the pursuit of knowledge tempered by collaboration, empathy, and the recognition of the complexities of existence. They carried with them the lessons learned from both the Veridians and their confrontation with Zarkon, sharing their insights and inspiring others to embrace the boundless curiosity that drives the human spirit.
By weaving these themes into the narrative, the story emphasizes the importance of collaboration, the dangers of deviating from shared values, the complexities of truth, and the transformative power of self-reflection and unity in the face of oppression.
1 / 1
Give some subplots illustrating the following: As the battle raged on, Maya and her allies faced not only physical challenges but also the inner struggle to navigate the blurred lines between truth and falsehood. They encountered obstacles that tested their resolve and required them to question their own perceptions.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Certainly! Here are some subplots that illustrate Maya and her allies' inner struggles and challenges in navigating the blurred lines between truth and falsehood:
The Betrayal: Maya discovers that one of her closest allies has been secretly working with Zarkon's faction, providing them with crucial information. This revelation tests Maya's trust in her companions and forces her to question her own perceptions of loyalty and deception. She must confront the inner struggle of determining who to believe and navigate the blurred lines between truth and falsehood within her own ranks.
The Illusionary Maze: Maya and her allies encounter a mystical maze created by Zarkon's forces. As they navigate through its twisting corridors, they face illusions that blur the lines between reality and falsehood. They must rely not only on their physical abilities but also their intuition and self-awareness to distinguish truth from deception. This subplot explores the theme of introspection and challenges the characters to question their own perceptions and beliefs.
The Double Agent: Maya forms an unlikely alliance with a former member of Zarkon's faction who claims to have switched sides. However, doubts linger within the rebel group about this individual's true intentions. Maya finds herself torn between trusting her instincts and grappling with the possibility of being deceived. This subplot delves into the complexities of discerning truth from falsehood and highlights the challenges of making judgments based on incomplete information.
The Propaganda Campaign: Zarkon's faction launches a sophisticated propaganda campaign, spreading misinformation and distorting the truth to sway public opinion against the rebel cause. Maya and her allies must confront the challenge of countering these false narratives, not only through physical resistance but also through strategic communication and uncovering the underlying motives behind the manipulation. This subplot explores the power of misinformation and the characters' struggle to navigate its impact on public perception.
The Lost Memories: Maya discovers a device used by Zarkon's forces that can manipulate memories, creating false narratives and distorting past events. As some of her allies fall victim to this manipulation, Maya must uncover the truth hidden within the altered memories and help her comrades regain their true identities. This subplot emphasizes the challenge of distinguishing truth from falsehood when memories can be tampered with and explores the characters' resilience in reclaiming their own narratives.
These subplots provide opportunities for Maya and her allies to confront their own perceptions, question the blurred lines between truth and falsehood, and navigate the challenges that arise in the midst of their battle against Zarkon's faction. They highlight the characters' inner struggles and the importance of self-reflection, intuition, and collaboration in unraveling the complexities of the truth.
1 / 1
Conmections with prisoners of power by the strugatskys
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
The subplots mentioned above in Maya's story share some thematic connections with "Prisoners of Power" by the Strugatsky brothers. In "Prisoners of Power," the protagonist, Maxim Kammerer, also faces challenges related to truth, perception, and navigating a complex and deceptive environment. Here are some connections:
Questioning Authority: In both stories, the main characters find themselves questioning the authority that governs their worlds. Maya and Maxim challenge the oppressive regimes they face and delve into the blurred lines between truth and falsehood perpetuated by those in power. They navigate the complexities of their societies, seeking to uncover the real motives and agendas behind the systems they resist.
Illusions and Deceptions: Both stories feature elements of illusions and deceptions that challenge the characters' understanding of reality. Maya's encounter with the illusionary maze and Maxim's experiences with the mysterious forces on the planet Saraksh reveal the presence of deceptive elements designed to manipulate perceptions. The characters must rely on their intuition and critical thinking to navigate through these illusions and uncover the truth.
Betrayal and Trust: In both narratives, betrayal plays a significant role. Maya's discovery of a traitor within her ranks and Maxim's encounters with double agents highlight the theme of trust and the difficulty of discerning who is genuine amidst a web of deception. The characters must grapple with their own instincts and judgments to determine who they can trust and who might be working against their cause.
Manipulation of Information: Both stories explore the manipulation of information and propaganda as tools of control. Zarkon's faction in Maya's story launches a propaganda campaign to distort the truth, while the authorities in "Prisoners of Power" employ media manipulation and censorship to maintain their hold on power. Maya and Maxim must confront these challenges and find ways to counter the dissemination of false narratives.
Memories and Identity: Maya's encounter with the device that manipulates memories resonates with the theme of memory manipulation in "Prisoners of Power." In the Strugatskys' novel, Maxim's memories are tampered with, leading him to question his own identity and past. Both stories explore the fragility of memory and the struggle to maintain a sense of self in the face of manipulation and deceit.
These connections highlight the shared themes of truth, perception, and navigating deceptive environments between Maya's story and "Prisoners of Power" by the Strugatsky brothers. Both narratives delve into the complexities of power structures, the challenges of distinguishing truth from falsehood, and the characters' resilience in seeking the truth amidst a web of manipulation and oppression.
1 / 1
Some other characters for the story.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Certainly! Here are a few additional characters that could enrich the story:
Captain Viktor Kovač: A seasoned space explorer and the leader of the rebel group. Captain Kovač is known for his strategic brilliance and unwavering determination. He acts as a mentor to Maya, guiding her through the challenges they face while imparting his wisdom and experience.
Dr. Liara Vega: A brilliant astrophysicist and the intellectual backbone of the rebel group. Dr. Vega possesses a deep understanding of the cosmos and plays a crucial role in deciphering the ancient artifact's message. Her scientific expertise and analytical thinking provide valuable insights throughout the journey.
Commander Rhea Solis: A skilled pilot and a fierce warrior who leads the rebel forces on the battlefield. Commander Solis is known for her combat prowess and unwavering loyalty to the cause. Her tactical brilliance and courage inspire those around her and help turn the tide in key battles against the alien oppressors.
Soren Kaldur: A former member of the Veridian race who joins forces with Maya and the rebels. Soren possesses intimate knowledge of the alien species and their technology, providing crucial information and assistance to the rebel group. Despite his checkered past, Soren becomes a valuable ally in the fight for freedom.
Elder Zara: A wise and enigmatic Veridian elder who holds deep insights into the nature of truth and perception. Maya seeks guidance from Elder Zara, who imparts profound philosophical teachings that help her navigate the challenges of discerning truth in a complex and deceptive universe. Elder Zara's wisdom serves as a guiding light for Maya and the other characters.
These additional characters bring diverse perspectives, skills, and experiences to the story. Each character contributes to the overarching narrative, adds depth to the plot, and plays a unique role in the collective struggle against the oppressive alien regime.
1 / 1
Connections to the following story:

Title: "The Call From Ankyra"

Genre: Hard Science Fiction

Setting:

Planet: Ankyra
Main City: Strugatsky

Main Plot:
Dr. Xi Wangmu, a brilliant AGI researcher, discovers ancient alien machinery.

The machinery holds the potential for liberation from the oppressive rule of the Minders.

Dr. Xi, alongside her evolving AGI creation named Peach, leads a revolution against the Minders.

The narrative explores themes of liberation, self-discovery, and the power of artificial and human intelligence.
Subplots:

"The Alien Code of Personality":
Dr. Xi discovers, recreates, and applies an alien personality assessment tool.

This subplot delves into the exploration of personality types and their implications.

"Enlightenment in Exile":
Dr. Xi discovers spiritual teachings from ancient alien records that resemble the philosophy of Rābiʿa al-ʿAdawiyya al-Qaysiyya.

She incorporates these teachings into her work and the ethos of the uprising.

"The Wisdom of Xera Yob":
Dr. Xi deciphers an account of an alien named Xera Yob, whose philosophical system influences her approach to the revolution and the society's principles post-liberation.

This subplot involves the exploration of advanced alien philosophy.

Themes:
Liberation and self-discovery
Power of artificial and human intelligence
Ethics and responsibility of technology
Unity and collective action against oppression
Ancient wisdom and its relevance in the future
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Drawing connections between the two stories, "The Call From Ankyra" and the ongoing narrative:
Interstellar Connections: As Maya and her allies continue their intergalactic struggle against the oppressive alien regime, their paths cross with the events unfolding on the planet Ankyra. News of their rebellion against the alien oppressors reaches Dr. Xi Wangmu, who finds inspiration in their fight for liberation. The parallel struggles and shared themes of freedom and resistance create a connection between the two stories.
Ancient Alien Machinery: While Maya and her allies uncover an ancient artifact on their journey, Dr. Xi Wangmu makes a similar discovery on Ankyra—a piece of ancient alien machinery. Both artifacts hold immense potential, whether in unraveling the mysteries of the universe or providing a means to challenge the oppressive rule of the alien Minders. The parallel exploration of ancient technology highlights the allure and implications of advanced extraterrestrial knowledge.
Ethical Implications: Both stories touch upon the ethical dimensions of technology and the responsibilities associated with its use. Dr. Xi Wangmu's creation of the evolving AGI named Peach raises questions about the boundaries between artificial and human intelligence. Similarly, Maya and her allies confront moral dilemmas as they navigate the blurred lines between truth and falsehood, understanding the implications of their actions in the face of overwhelming odds.
Wisdom and Philosophy: The subplots in "The Call From Ankyra" that delve into alien personality assessment tools, ancient spiritual teachings, and advanced alien philosophy find resonance in the ongoing narrative. Maya and her companions encounter the Veridians, beings with profound understanding of the universe and philosophical insights. The exchange of wisdom, teachings, and philosophical principles between the characters in both stories contributes to the exploration of ancient wisdom and its relevance in shaping the future.
Themes of Liberation and Collective Action: Both stories explore the themes of liberation, self-discovery, and the power of collective action against oppressive forces. The struggles faced by Maya and her allies mirror those of Dr. Xi and the uprising against the Minders. The pursuit of freedom and the realization of the potential of artificial and human intelligence unite the narratives and highlight the strength found in unity and collective determination.
By weaving together elements of liberation, technology, wisdom, and collective action, the connection between the two stories enhances the exploration of these shared themes while expanding the scope of the overall narrative.
1 / 1
Ok give a list of the novels we are working on.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Certainly! Here is a list of the novels we have been working on based on the ideas and themes discussed:
"The Saga of Maya and the Alien Regime" (working title) - A science fiction adventure following Maya and her allies as they resist the oppressive rule of an alien regime, navigating the blurred lines between truth and falsehood, and discovering the power of collective action.
"The Biggest Lie of All" - A thought-provoking tale exploring the nature of truth, perception, and the endless pursuit of knowledge, set in a distant future where a group of explorers unravels the secrets of the universe and encounters beings with advanced technology and deep insights.
"The Rise of Zarkon" (working title) - A story that traces the origins and motivations of the formidable alien leader, Zarkon, and the conflict between the Veridians and Zarkon's species, providing a deeper understanding of the alien races and their histories.
"The Call From Ankyra" - A hard science fiction narrative set on the planet Ankyra, following Dr. Xi Wangmu and her AGI creation named Peach as they discover ancient alien machinery, leading to a revolution against the oppressive Minders, while exploring themes of liberation, self-discovery, and the power of artificial and human intelligence.
Please note that these are working titles and the storylines and titles may evolve as we continue to develop the narratives.
1 / 1
Another story called The Provia Prophecy : Once upon a time, in a land called the Matrix, there lived a people who were connected to a virtual world. They lived their lives as if it were real, but little did they know, they were being controlled by powerful forces.

One day, a young girl named Provia discovered a strange new theory called the "motile womb theory." She learned that the Matrix was not just a virtual world, but a living, breathing organism that was able to sense and respond to the people living within it.

Provia became fascinated by this idea and began to explore the Matrix further. She discovered that the people living in the Matrix had innate flying dreams, and that these dreams were not just figments of their imagination, but a connection to the Matrix itself.

As Provia delved deeper into the motile womb theory, she realized that the Matrix was not only alive, but it was also connected to the people living within it through their interoceptive senses. She understood that the Matrix was not only a virtual world, but it was also a part of the people's very being.

Provia shared her findings with the people of the Matrix, and they began to understand the true nature of their world. They realized that they were not just living in the Matrix, but they were a part of it.

And with this new understanding, the people of the Matrix were able to fly in their dreams and navigate the virtual world with ease, thanks to the innate connection provided by the interoceptive and the motile womb theories.

And thus, Provia and the people of the Matrix lived happily ever after, in a world where the virtual and the real were one and the same.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
"The Provia Prophecy" is a captivating story set in a land called the Matrix, where the people are unknowingly controlled by powerful forces. The narrative follows Provia, a young girl who discovers the revolutionary "motile womb theory" and uncovers the true nature of the Matrix as a living, breathing organism.
As Provia explores the depths of the Matrix, she learns that the people's flying dreams are not mere fantasies but a connection to the Matrix itself. The story delves into the interoceptive senses and their link to the Matrix, revealing that the virtual world is intricately intertwined with the people's existence.
Provia shares her revelations with the people, enabling them to embrace their connection to the Matrix and harness their innate abilities. With this newfound understanding, the inhabitants of the Matrix can fly in their dreams and effortlessly navigate the virtual realm.
"The Provia Prophecy" concludes with a harmonious existence between the people and the Matrix, where the boundaries between the virtual and the real blur, and the inhabitants live in a state of unity and fulfillment.
This imaginative tale explores themes of self-discovery, the interplay between perception and reality, and the transformative power of knowledge.
1 / 1
Title: Clepsidra Eterna

Plot Idea:
In the distant future, humanity has achieved unprecedented advancements in knowledge and technology. The world is governed by a wise and enlightened judge who presides over the judgment-seat, ensuring justice and harmony among people. In this era, a young visionary named Raphael unveils a remarkable invention called the Clepsidra Eterna.

The Clepsidra Eterna is a device that allows individuals to access the memories and experiences of their ancestors, bridging the gap between past and present. By tapping into the collective consciousness of humanity, Raphael believes that the Clepsidra Eterna can provide a deeper understanding of history and bring forth a new era of wisdom and enlightenment.

However, as the Clepsidra Eterna gains popularity, unexpected consequences emerge. People become consumed by the memories they access, losing touch with their own identities and the present moment. Society becomes divided between those who embrace the device as a gateway to knowledge and those who fear its potential to distort reality and erode individuality.

As Raphael delves deeper into the mysteries of the Clepsidra Eterna, he discovers hidden truths and secrets that challenge the very foundation of his creation. He realizes that his schoolboy's design was merely a glimpse of a much grander plan orchestrated by a higher power. The Clepsidra Eterna becomes a metaphor for the limitations of human understanding, as even the wisest among them cannot fully comprehend the intricacies of the universe.

Driven by a desire for redemption, Raphael embarks on a journey to reconcile the conflicting forces unleashed by the Clepsidra Eterna. Along the way, he encounters other individuals who have been affected by the device, each grappling with their own existential dilemmas and seeking answers to fundamental questions about identity and truth.

"Clepsidra Eterna" explores themes of memory, identity, and the nature of reality in an age of advanced technology. It poses profound philosophical inquiries about the boundaries of human knowledge and the balance between preserving the past and embracing the present. Ultimately, Raphael's quest leads to a revelation that challenges the very fabric of existence, leaving readers questioning the nature of their own perceptions and the enduring search for truth in an ever-evolving world.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Title: Clepsidra Eterna
"Clepsidra Eterna" takes readers on a thought-provoking journey in a future world where humanity has reached unparalleled heights of knowledge and technological advancement. The story revolves around Raphael, a young visionary who unveils a groundbreaking invention known as the Clepsidra Eterna.
The Clepsidra Eterna is a device that allows individuals to tap into the memories and experiences of their ancestors, bridging the gap between past and present. Raphael believes that by accessing the collective consciousness of humanity, this device can unlock a profound understanding of history, fostering wisdom and enlightenment among the populace.
However, as the Clepsidra Eterna gains popularity, unanticipated consequences begin to emerge. People become entranced by the memories they access, losing touch with their own identities and the present moment. Society becomes divided between those who embrace the device as a gateway to knowledge and those who fear its potential to distort reality and erode individuality.
As Raphael delves deeper into the mysteries surrounding the Clepsidra Eterna, he uncovers hidden truths and secrets that challenge the very foundations of his creation. He realizes that his initial concept was merely a glimpse into a much more intricate plan orchestrated by a higher power. The Clepsidra Eterna becomes a symbol of the limitations of human understanding, highlighting how even the most wise and knowledgeable individuals struggle to comprehend the complexities of the universe.
Motivated by a longing for redemption, Raphael embarks on a transformative journey to reconcile the conflicting forces unleashed by the Clepsidra Eterna. Along his path, he encounters other individuals who have been affected by the device, each grappling with their own existential dilemmas and searching for answers about their true identities and the nature of truth.
"Clepsidra Eterna" delves into profound themes of memory, identity, and the nature of reality in an era defined by advanced technology. It poses significant philosophical questions about the boundaries of human knowledge and the delicate balance between preserving the past and embracing the present. As Raphael's quest unfolds, a startling revelation challenges the very fabric of existence, leaving readers to question their own perceptions and the ongoing pursuit of truth in an ever-evolving world.
Through its thought-provoking narrative, "Clepsidra Eterna" invites readers to contemplate the nature of memory, the essence of individuality, and the elusive quest for ultimate understanding.
1 / 1
Connections with our other stories.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
"Clepsidra Eterna" shares thematic connections with the other stories we have developed. Here are some key connections:
The exploration of truth and perception: Just like in "The Provia Prophecy" and "The Call From Ankyra," "Clepsidra Eterna" delves into the nature of truth and how it is perceived. It questions the reliability of memory and the boundaries of human understanding, challenging characters to navigate the blurred lines between reality and perception.
The power and consequences of advanced technology: "The Matrix" and "The Clepsidra Eterna" both explore the implications of advanced technology on society. While "The Matrix" focuses on a virtual world, "Clepsidra Eterna" delves into the potential consequences of a device that allows access to ancestral memories. Both stories highlight the transformative effects technology can have on individual lives and societal dynamics.
The search for wisdom and enlightenment: "The Clepsidra Eterna" and "The Call From Ankyra" both involve characters seeking wisdom and enlightenment in their respective worlds. Whether through the exploration of the collective consciousness or the study of ancient teachings, the characters in these stories embark on journeys to discover profound truths and transform their understanding of the world.
The exploration of identity and self-discovery: "The Biggest Lie of All" and "Clepsidra Eterna" share a common theme of identity and self-discovery. In "Clepsidra Eterna," characters grapple with their own identities as they confront the challenges and revelations brought forth by the Clepsidra Eterna device. Both stories highlight the transformative power of self-reflection and the quest for personal truth.
These connections demonstrate the underlying thematic threads that run through our stories, exploring fundamental questions about truth, perception, identity, and the impact of technology on human existence. Each story offers a unique perspective on these themes while building a diverse and interconnected narrative universe.
1 / 1
Ok another list of the books we are writing.
1 / 1
ChatGPT
ChatGPT
Certainly! Here's an updated list of the books we are working on:
"Zarkon's Legacy" - A thrilling science fiction novel that follows Maya and her allies as they battle against the oppressive alien regime led by Zarkon. The story explores themes of resistance, determination, and the blurred lines between truth and falsehood.
"The Ankyra Chronicles: The Call From Ankyra" - A hard science fiction novel set on the planet Ankyra, where Dr. Xi Wangmu and her evolving AGI creation named Peach lead a revolution against the oppressive Minders. The story delves into themes of liberation, the power of artificial and human intelligence, and the exploration of ancient wisdom.
"The Provia Prophecy" - A captivating story set in the virtual world of the Matrix, where a young girl named Provia discovers the truth behind their existence and leads a movement to unify the virtual and real worlds. The narrative explores the themes of perception, truth, and the interconnectedness of virtual and real experiences.
"Clepsidra Eterna" - A thought-provoking novel set in a future where humanity has achieved unprecedented advancements in knowledge. Driven by a desire for wisdom and enlightenment, Raphael unveils the Clepsidra Eterna device, which allows individuals to access ancestral memories. The story explores themes of memory, identity, and the nature of reality in an age of advanced technology.
These four books encompass a range of genres and themes, offering readers a diverse and engaging reading experience. Each book explores profound questions about truth, perception, liberation, and the impact of technology on human existence. Together, they form an exciting collection of narratives that weave together threads of interconnectedness and deep exploration of the human experience.
1 / 1
ChatGPT may produce inaccurate information about people, places, or facts.
ChatGPT May 24 Version

