Understanding Deep Learning
Open sidebar
Understanding Deep Learning
Summarize: The history of deep learning is unusual in science. The perseverance of a small cabal of 
scientists, working over twenty-f i ve years in a seemingly unpromising area, has revolution- 
ized a i eld and dramatically impacted society. Usually, when researchers investigate an 
esoteric and apparently impractical corner of science or engineering, it remains just that 
— esoteric and impractical. However, this was a notable exception. Despite widespread 
skepticism, the systematic ef f orts of Yoshua Bengio, Geof f Hinton, Yann LeCun, and 
others eventually paid of f . 
The title of this book is "Understanding Deep Learning" to distinguish it from vol- 
umes that cover coding and other practical aspects. This text is primarily about the 
ideas that underlie deep learning. The i rst part of the book introduces deep learning 
models and discusses how to train them, measure their performance, and improve this 
performance. The next part considers architectures that are specialized to images, text, 
and graph data. These chapters require only introductory linear algebra, calculus, and 
probability and should be accessible to any second-year undergraduate in a quantitative 
discipline. Subsequent parts of the book tackle generative models and reinforcement 
learning. These chapters require more knowledge of probability and calculus and target 
more advanced students. 
The title is also partly a joke — no-one really understands deep learning at the time 
of writing. Modern deep networks learn piecewise linear functions with more regions 
than there are atoms in the universe and can be trained with fewer data examples than 
model parameters. It is neither obvious that we should be able to i t these functions 
reliably nor that they should generalize well to new data. The i nal chapter addresses 
these and other aspects that are not yet fully understood. 
Your time is precious, and I have striven to curate and present the material so you 
can understand it as ef i ciently as possible. The main body of each chapter comprises 
a succinct description of only the most essential ideas, together with accompanying 
illustrations. The appendices review all mathematical prerequisites, and there should be 
no need to refer to external material. For readers who wish to delve deeper, each chapter 
has associated problems, Python notebooks, and notes that summarize the area's history 
and the latest research. 
Writing a book is a lonely, grinding, multiple-year process and is only worthwhile if 
the volume is widely adopted. If you enjoy reading this or have suggestions for improving 
it, please contact me via the accompanying website. I would love to hear your thoughts, 
which will inform and motivate subsequent editions.
The history of deep learning is remarkable because a small group of scientists, including Yoshua Bengio, Geof f Hinton, and Yann LeCun, persevered in an apparently unpromising area for over twenty-five years and revolutionized the field. This book, titled "Understanding Deep Learning," focuses on the underlying ideas rather than coding and practical aspects. It introduces deep learning models and discusses how to train and measure their performance, specialized architectures for image, text, and graph data, and generative models and reinforcement learning. The final chapter addresses aspects of deep learning that are not yet fully understood. The book includes succinct descriptions, illustrations, and appendices that review mathematical prerequisites, and associated problems, Python notebooks, and notes summarizing the latest research. The author encourages feedback and suggestions to improve subsequent editions.
ChatGPT Mar 14 Version
. Free Research Preview. Our goal is to make AI systems more natural and safe to interact with. Your feedback will help us improve.
New chat