MUSIC
This is the traditional Bali area, different from the other international areas,
which is the uniqueness of Bali.
This is the unique part of Bali,
which is the unique part of Bali,
which is the unique part of Bali,
which is the unique part of Bali,
which is the unique part of Bali,
which has a very high philosophy about Bali's culture.
Like a baby,
she can walk to the left or to the right,
or dancing kite,
which is not found in other traditional areas all over the world.
The baby,
the baby is from the land,
which is the life of the fish in the water,
as a means of entertainment and stability.
The life of the fish in the lake,
which is why the baby lives on the right and left.
The Bali area is usually full of sounds and sounds,
which gives a high sense of harmony
and gives a message about the nature
towards the sound of the waves.
Balai jaipur
Balai's traditional Manitobes have the meaning of
the sound of the a بين theYOth.
It's made of metal.
It's the slang that makes a lot of Change.
It's made from a bucket or tile.
The sound of children playing the sound
is in the middle and on top of the valuable.
Mawakili is a man and a woman.
A man and a woman must be harmonious to maintain their relationship.
There is a conflict between a man and a woman.
Simul from Gwanghan said a message to the harmonious
that the relationship must be maintained with stability and harmony.
The message that was conveyed was to keep harmony and stability of nature.
Because the human life in nature must be responsible to keep nature here.
Mawakili is a man and a woman.
Mawakili is a man and a woman.
A man and a woman must be harmonious to maintain their relationship.
Mawakili is a man and a woman.
Mawakili is a man and a woman.
The
In the present, there are many different types of bali culture,
including the strong buddha,
especially the Hindu religion.
The three strong colors of the Hindu culture in Bali,
which we use in traditional Bali,
are red, white, and black.
One more is yellow as a symbol or a symbol.
Brown is red as a symbol,
where there is power or strength.
White as a black color,
or a guardian,
or a guardian of the earth,
as a symbol.
White is a symbol,
or a symbol,
or a symbol of nature.
Yellow as a symbol,
or a symbol of harmony.
Here, the buddha,
the traditional Balinese language,
is very strong in the philosophy
of the Hindu religion in Bali.
Traditional language,
the philosophy of the Nagas.
There are two Nagas,
which are known in Bali.
One is the Naga Anantaboga,
which is a symbol of harmony
and the protection of the nature,
which protects the earth's protection.
Another is the Tatsaka Nagas,
which is located in Angkasa,
as a stabilizer.
The Naga Anantaboga
is a symbol of harmony
and the protection of the nature,
which protects the earth's protection.
The Naga Anantaboga
is a symbol of harmony
and the protection of the nature,
which protects the earth's protection.
The Naga Anantaboga
is a symbol of harmony
and the protection of the nature,
which protects the earth's protection.
The Naga Anantaboga
is a symbol of harmony
and the protection of the nature,
which protects the earth's protection.
I am now ordinary
I am now ordinary
When I was little,
I was born and raised in a small town like Anana Kechil Masa Lalu
I met my friends and started working in the field
After that, I started to make a field that is made of clay
With the materials that I found from the field, from plastic bags
I went to the hotel from Sampah to the hotel
I visited to get the materials from the field, such as paper or plastic
I used it to make the field so that it would be a memory that is beautiful
Because at that time my field had a hotel logo, all the hotel logos on the floor
In addition to bamboo, other materials such as paper, cotton or wood materials
I used these materials to make organic materials
We found in the forest, in Batukaru village, or in the village
While we process the bamboo, in a way to find a good day to relax
That is, the bamboo field was planted during the week
So, during the week, there is a calendar of Bali, where we cut the wood
The wood is a good paper, or wax paper
We want to enter the first month in the calendar of Bali
That is, wax paper, wax paper, paper
With ideas to inspire me, including giving a message
Like the materials from the bamboo and the wood
As an idea for me to take care of nature
Because we live from nature, and can take care of global warming, global warming
To continue to take care of nature
While the wood from the paper, I put this idea in the bamboo field
To criticize the people who have such a plan
To continue to take care of the cleanliness, or the development of natural exploration
And give certain message, to appreciate the nature's balance
Thank you for watching!
