Unusual Latin phrases
Open sidebar
Unusual Latin phrases
Give me a list of the more unusual and difficult Latin words and phrases. Omnia quae aguntur, tam in politicis quam in privatis, iustitiam spectare debent. Nam sine iustitia, nihil est quod ferendum sit. Quamquam autem homines iustitiam amare debent, nonnulli eam negligunt ut lucrum capere possint. Hoc tamen est absurdum, quod, cum divitiis effluxerint, egestate prementur, et a vera felicitate longe abeant.

Iustitia autem non solum de pecuniis est, sed etiam de jure et aequitate. Jura sunt, quae hominibus garantiunt ut se invicem tractent recte et cum humanitate, aequitas autem est, quae utrumque respicit, ut nemini noceatur et unicuique suum tribuatur.

Sed non solum de humanis rebus est iustitia, sed etiam de rebus naturalibus. Nam res naturales sicut aqua et aera et sol, non solum utiles sunt hominibus, sed etiam sanctae sunt. Quare ea conservare et protegere debemus, ne posteri deserta inveniant.

Oportet igitur omnes, tam privati quam publici, adiuvare ut iustitia et aequitas in mundo servetur, ne malum in dies augeatur. Nam si omnes bonum agere inciperent, profecto mundus emendaretur."

ğ˜ˆğ˜¯ğ˜¥ ğ˜µğ˜©ğ˜¦ ğ˜µğ˜³ğ˜¢ğ˜¯ğ˜´ğ˜­ğ˜¢ğ˜µğ˜ªğ˜°ğ˜¯?

Everything that is done, both in politics and in private life, should aim for justice. For without justice, there is nothing that can be endured. Although people should love justice, some neglect it so that they can gain profit. But this is absurd, because, when they have lost their wealth, they are oppressed by poverty, and they are far from true happiness.

Justice, however, is not only about money, but also about law and fairness. Laws are what guarantee that people treat each other properly and with humanity, fairness is what takes both into account, so that no one is hurt and each is given what is due.

But justice is not only about human affairs, but also about natural things. For natural things like water, air, and sun are not only useful to humans, but they are also sacred. Therefore, we must conserve and protect them, so that future generations will not find them deserted.

Therefore, it is necessary for all, both private and public, to help maintain justice and fairness in the world, so that evil does not increase day by day. For if everyone began to do good, surely the world would be improved."
Unusual & Difficult Latin words/phrases in the text:
Iustitiam spectare debent
Negligunt
Effluxerint
Egestate
Aequitate
Jura
Humanitate
Aequitas
Res naturales
Protegere
Adiuvare
Emendaretur
More, and with meanings
Unusual & Difficult Latin words/phrases in the text with meanings:
Iustitiam spectare debent: To aim for justice
Negligunt: Neglect
Effluxerint: Have lost
Egestate: Poverty
Aequitate: Fairness
Jura: Laws
Humanitate: Humanity
Aequitas: Fairness
Res naturales: Natural things
Protegere: Protect
Adiuvare: Help
Emendaretur: Improved
Continue
Omnia quae aguntur: Everything that is done
Tam in politicis quam in privatis: Both in politics and in private life
Sine iustitia, nihil est quod ferendum sit: Without justice, there is nothing that can be endured.
Nam: For
Nonnulli: Some
Lucrum capere possint: To gain profit
Hoc tamen est absurdum: But this is absurd
Cum divitiis effluxerint: When they have lost their wealth
A vera felicitate longe abeant: They are far from true happiness
Non solum de pecuniis est: Not only about money
De jure et aequitate: About law and fairness
Hominibus garantiunt ut se invicem tractent recte: Guarantee that people treat each other properly
Cum humanitate: With humanity
Unicuique suum tribuatur: Each is given what is due
Sed non solum de humanis rebus est iustitia: But justice is not only about human affairs
Sanctae sunt: They are sacred
Posteri deserta inveniant: Future generations will not find them deserted
Oportet igitur omnes: Therefore, it is necessary for all
Tam privati quam publici: Both private and public
Ut iustitia et aequitas in mundo servetur: To maintain justice and fairness in the world
Ne malum in dies augeatur: So that evil does not increase day by day
Si omnes bonum agere inciperent: If everyone began to do good
Profecto mundus emendaretur: Surely the world would be improved.
ChatGPT Mar 14 Version
. Free Research Preview. Our goal is to make AI systems more natural and safe to interact with. Your feedback will help us improve.
New chat