So many people have noted that the current cultural societal structure seems to be facing
all sorts of problems.
These problems have been characterized by some people as a metacrisis in that there
are a multiplicity of different difficulties that society is facing writ large and they
intersect in a way to create a potentially catastrophic vulnerability such that if we
do not shift fundamentally our way of relating to each other, our technologies in the planet,
we may be facing global civilization collapse and at the very least facing massive amounts
of distress, dysfunction and difficulty relative to our potential.
There are a number of different aspects of this metacrisis and I would like to list four
that provide at least a framing for what we are facing.
So one can be framed in relationship to this, the techno environmental crisis.
The techno environmental crisis refers to the fact that the explosion of the industrial
age across the planet and the way in which we then manufactured human technology on top
of the planet created a massive vulnerability and fundamental flux within the earth's ecology
writ large and in many specific locations.
The press that we put on the environment is very vulnerable to disrupting the general
systemic sustainability of the earth's ecology.
That is most obvious in terms of climate change and global structures, it is also very obvious
in terms of press on local populations, the great extinction and the massive amounts of
transformation that humans are doing so that geologists identify this as a new era called
the Anthropocene resulting in so much shift that if that change does not get stabilized,
it creates massive amounts of fluctuations such that the back half of the 21st century
may literally result in a planet that is barely livable.
So there's a techno environmental crisis.
There's also an unbelievable transformation in the way we're living in the world.
The digital world has exploded onto the scene and is changing the institutional infrastructure
for virtually everything.
That institutional infrastructure then is in the process of an enormous amount of flux
of which we see many different potentials for virtual metaverse and many different dangers
of a virtual metaverse and that is undermining and creating change in the old institutional
structures in a way that is well filled with both pitfalls and potentials.
There's an enormous amount of uncertainty upon which the digital globalization process
will unfold and whether it will be organized in a way that reveals and cultivates human
potential or whether it will be transformative either into a destructive chaos or into some
sort of technological nightmare and a sort of George Orwellian 1984 techno social control
system that imprisons us all.
So the digital globalization and the techno environmental crises reflect the large scale
human relationship with the planet, the evolution of technology and interface and the demands
that put on the planet and the questions that it raises in relationship to our relations
with each other.
But these aren't the only meta crises.
There are at least two other major lines.
One of which can be framed in relationship to the meaning crisis.
The meaning crisis refers to the knowledge systems and their organization and can be
summarized in the sense that we have lost a shared sense or never had at this level
of abstraction, a fundamental shared sense of what is true and good.
Instead, the current structure of our understanding can be characterized as a chaotic fragmented
pluralism such that we are overloaded with perspectives and information and possibilities
and the generalized knowledge structure of our understanding lacks any coherent integrated
framework that affords us the capacity either at a process level or a knowledge content
level that would enable effective sense making and the coordination of our understanding around
what is true and what ought to be good.
And that's the dissemination of information absent a particular shared set of understanding
is essentially overloading the system with chaos and that means overloading the system
with the inability to coordinate activity, understanding and sense making with any kind
of shared reality and the absence of that leads to craziness.
It also leads to an enormous difficulty with our education structures because the intergenerational
transmission of knowledge and the legitimacy of elders to children and the ability to socialize
them into the system is now breaking down completely.
Indeed, Zach Stein identifies this educational intergenerational problem where you confer
the legitimacy of shared meaning amongst the elders to the young and that obliteration
of that is at the fundamental center of the core of the problems that we face and the
chaotic fragmented pluralism that has engendered our knowledge structures flooding us with
uncertainty is then generating also a mental health crisis.
The mental health crisis is seen very clearly in the fact that despite our physical and
biological control over the world, our felt sense of being in the world is now characterized
by levels of depression, anxiety, substance use, suicidality, isolation, loneliness, alienation,
nihilism, narcissism and a fundamental sense of meaninglessness that generates existential
crises across populations writ large.
And these elements are tragic beyond state in the sense that we have all sorts of potential
opportunity to flourish, given our power, and yet we are floundering.
And the intersection of all of this, how are we going to coordinate our technologies and
relationships to nature in each other?
How are we going to manage the evolution of the digital all its potentials and pitfalls?
Fuck is going on with the meaning crisis and the chaotic fragmented pluralism that's driving
everybody insane showing up in terms of mental health crisis and situating us so that we
are unable to effectively coordinate our action toward wisdom.
You Talk has something to say.
You Talk fundamentally has something to say about the meaning crisis.
It diagnoses the fundamental structure, the architecture or knowledge systems that emerge
in the context of the enlightenment and demonstrates why they were entirely inadequate to afford
us a coherent integrated framework that would allow for the multiplicity of perspectives
to be engendered as such, meaning they are multiplicity of perspectives, and yet at the
same time to position them into and in relationship to something that's coherent and integrated.
And the reason it could not do that is because the emergence of modern empirical natural
science was associated with philosophical developments that broke synthetic understanding.
And the reason it broke in synthetic understanding is because the systems that were developed
were never able to place improper relation, the matter in motion framework that emerged
so unbelievably powerful with the physical sciences with the qualitative experience of
subjective being and the nature of mind itself.
So we have a conundrum of profound proportions failing to specify the proper relation of matter
and mind.
In addition, the power of scientific knowledge and reason to lead to transcendental truths
was also not effectively contextualized with the social construction of knowledge and subjective
experience of being and not placed in a pragmatic social cultural context, which gives rise to
the post structural and postmodern critique of modernity that says all of your transcended
justifications towards reason and individual rationality and progress actually situate
themselves in a way that biases power structures and marginalizes weak and oppressed individuals
and creates a massive imbalance of power that then is justified through reason and progress,
creating a fundamental error in the organization of our society, one that's profoundly
unjust and profoundly questions the capacity of to achieve any kind of transcendent knowledge.
The combination of the failure matter in motion to be corresponded with subjective mind and
the failure of clarifying the nature of scientific knowledge in relationship to the social construction
and subjective experience of knowledge all has spread the ground of confusion that spawns
the current chaotic fragmented pluralism when we are overloaded with fragmented bits of
information and mid-level theories that cannot be coordinated you talk diagnosis the enlightenment
gap affords a meta modern sensibility, meaning that we can embrace the realistic scientific
achievements and at the same time effectively situate them in the social construction of
knowledge and position objectively generated scientific behavioral truths with the fundamental
experience of psychic organization at the level of the ideographic subject and it affords for the
first time the opportunity to synthesize these perspectives bridge the enlightenment gap and
does so with a level of specification around the center of the enlightenment gap which is found
in the problem of psychology and psychotherapy and what you talk fundamentally is about is
demonstrating the possibility of a coherent science of psychology and its focus on human
mental behavior with the work of psychotherapy and the contextualized individual psyche the
capacity to bridge those particular structures has never been engendered before but it is engendered
now and thus we can move by diagnosing the epicenter of the problem that gave rise to the
chaotic fragmented pluralism into a coherent integrated pluralism that bridges and resolves
the enlightenment gap solves the problem of psychology and psychotherapy and affords us a
way to cultivate knowledge oriented toward wisdom
