It's said that you can tell a lot about a city by its tallest structure.
In New York, that was once the Chrysler building, capitalism colliding with art and hubris to
reign supreme over the skyline.
The city's tallest building has, of course, changed hands many times since.
But the Chrysler's become a landmark in the one place above all others that's now
synonymous with the skyscraper.
Now it's set to be covered up by a new generation of glass-covered office towers.
Manhattan simply wouldn't be the place it is today without the skyscraper.
When it was first formed millions of years ago, its geographic size wasn't that notable.
And if it stayed a small, low-rise island, it probably wouldn't have amounted to much.
But these remarkable structures, rising from the island's solid bedrock, have let it continuously
increase its area to welcome the millions of people and businesses who all want a slice
of the action.
It's skyscrapers that made New York.
These awe-inspiring buildings have risen through every chapter of this city's story.
Each a product of the context and forces at play at the time, and each going on to
shape the era that followed.
We saw it in the extravagance of the 1920s, and then the slicked-back modernism of the
60s.
Skyscrapers personified the excess of the 80s and then found themselves with an existential
crisis in the wake of 9-11 as everyone tried to work out what the future of the skyscraper
would be.
And now we're seeing it again in the 2020s as they come to reflect some of this city's
biggest challenges.
What happens in New York is reflected in its skyscrapers.
They stand both as monuments to its past and silent influences of its future.
This city is so much more than just the home of the skyscraper.
It was made by them.
Greatness of New York is perhaps most spectacularly seen in its buildings.
For here on the island of Manhattan is the most impressive concentration of stone and
steel masonry the world has ever known.
New York is synonymous with skyscrapers as what everybody around the world thinks of
first when you say the word New York.
The Chrysler building is just the grandest of them all, one of those buildings that you
can't imagine New York City without.
It was Joseph Campbell who famously said that you can tell a lot about a city and what drives
it by its tallest buildings.
In medieval times it was often the spire of a cathedral.
In 18th century towns it was the political palace.
And in 1920s New York it was the office building.
The American Dream embodied by steel and sheer grit the skyscraper was capitalism incarnate.
The roaring 20s was a decade defined by excess and wealth.
One which marked the transition of power from London to New York as the world's metropolis.
It all gave rise to the Chrysler building, a shining beacon that announced the city's
arrival and America's wild success.
What's more characteristic of the American Dream than unabated competition?
Carol Willis is an architectural historian and the founder of New York's Skyscraper
Museum.
The Chrysler building's existence was fuelled by the fierce rivalry of two four business
partners.
Architects Craig Severance and William Van Allen.
Severance was hired to design the Manhattan Co building now known as 40 Wall Streets.
Van Allen was asked to design the Chrysler building.
Both were vying to construct the world's tallest skyscraper and both would do pretty
much anything to make that happen.
As the planning and construction of each skyscraper took place the designers from either side
would steal or leak plans of the buildings.
The Manhattan Co building began adding more and more floors pushing the limits of what
its foundations could handle in a desperate attempt to best Chrysler.
And it seemed to work.
The building completed in 1930 and was the tallest in the world.
For about a month.
Van Allen had ingeniously constructed a secret spire inside the crown of the Chrysler building.
Once the Manhattan Co building was finished the spire was pushed up through the roof into
place, dramatically beating the other tower by 36 metres.
But when the Chrysler building first appeared on the skyline many thought it was an eyesore
and yet today it's held up as one of the world's greatest examples of Art Deco architecture.
It's an undeniably iconic landmark, one of the emblems of New York.
Well the Chrysler building everybody loves the Chrysler building, it's such a wacky skyscraper.
Everything about it is an expression of the moment in the 1920s, recognizability, iconicity
is something that has value in and of itself when you say you know I work in the Chrysler
building people know where you work.
Walter Chrysler had wanted his skyscraper to represent opulence and luxury, but that
didn't go over well as the roaring 20s came to a screeching halt with the crash of the
New York Stock Exchange and the onset of the Great Depression.
The city where this worldwide economic crisis began had at the same time built a 319 metre
monument to capitalism, unemployment rates were at their peak nearly a third of New York
City's population was out of work, the extravagance of the 20s was over.
Despite all the effort that had gone into making the Chrysler building the world's
tallest skyscraper it only held the title for 11 months until the Empire State Building
completed astonishingly quickly in 1930.
Then the Great Depression and the Second World War conspired to create a 40 year period
without any record breaking skyscrapers in New York.
The city's focus was elsewhere and that chapter of its history is recorded in a period of
absent high rises.
When the skyscraper did finally make a comeback it had to be seriously rethought.
I never could do that.
By the 1960s New York was a different city, there were protests, strikes and violence,
it was a time of radical change and unrest, it was a time for something new.
Ornamentalism and detail weren't right for buildings, it became all about simplicity
and function.
In an attempt to revitalise the then struggling lower Manhattan, Japanese-American architect
Minoru Yamasaki was selected to design the World Trade Centre in 1962.
He put forward an idea for two enormous twin towers, a pair of grey modeliths that were
almost an extreme iteration of modernism.
They had sleek straight lines, were aggressively vertical and had none of the step-backs or
details of New York City's Art Deco skyscrapers.
These were buildings born out of a very different New York.
110 stories times two buildings, 220 acres of office space, that's as many square feet
as exist in many downtowns of second-tier cities.
Yamasaki's fear of heights meant the towers had relatively narrow windows, just 45cm wide.
They only covered 30% of each building, making them look like solid metal slabs from a distance.
Now at the time it wasn't economically feasible to build a skyscraper more than 80 stories
tall because of the space that its elevator shafts would take up on the floor plate.
The higher you build, the more people you have living or working up the building, and
the more elevators you need, particularly in structures like this that don't taper and
have a huge floor plate, even at their summits.
That all means more elevator banks eating up lettable floor space.
Elevators don't pay rent.
To get around this, Yamasaki and his team designed sky lobbies on the 44th and 78th floors of
each tower that would break up the elevator journey.
Crucially that meant that different elevators could use the same shaft and reduced the overall
number of shafts needed on the floor plate.
It enabled the buildings to rise 110 stories above the city, but also created a mini-commute
for anyone with an office above a sky lobby floor.
That wasn't all, structural engineering also had to advance to make these towers possible.
The support columns for the towers were both at the central core, like a traditional skyscraper
and around the outside of the buildings.
This essentially made each tower a sort of box within a box, joined by horizontal trusses
at each level.
This meant there were no support columns within the actual floor plates, allowing for vast
open office space.
The Twin Towers of the World Trade Center is a real anomaly in the history of the skyscraper
in New York, not just because they were the tallest buildings in the world, they were
also exceptionalist because they were built by government.
The towers finally opened their doors in 1973 to a public who had grown weary of them.
The project cost the equivalent of US$4.5 billion in today's money and had reportedly
come at the expense of some public transportation facilities.
Some residents of Lower Manhattan were still angry at having to be relocated, and critics
said the towers looked like filing cabinets.
All the boxes that the Empire State and Chrysler building were delivered in.
But over the next decade, they steadily became embraced as American icons, helped by films
like King Kong, Superman and Manhattan, as well as Philippe Petit's heart-stopping tightrope
walk between them in 1974.
The Twin Towers became synonymous with the city itself.
Big Hair, Big Ideas, Big Buildings.
The 80s were about risk, excess and glitz.
It was a time when subtlety was thrown out the window.
If you were going to do something, you had to be bold.
Architecture was swinging away from the restrained clean lines of the 60s to something more extravagant.
This was an era of experimentation, of clashing styles and ideas that wouldn't ordinarily
work together.
New York was an altogether different beast in the 1980s too.
The Wall Street boom and falling unemployment spurred on the real estate market, though
at the same time, the city was experiencing record crime and soaring murder rates.
This was a place of contradictions, of division, of glamour alongside poverty and violence,
and of extreme wealth and opportunity too.
Rising from all of it was a new skyscraper on Fifth Avenue that would kind of come to
embody the ethos of the era.
Enter Trump Tower.
At 202 metres, it was the tallest all-glass structure in the city.
Wrapped in bronze with interiors made of pink, white veined marble, mirrors and brass, the
building is unmistakably 80s.
It contained some of New York's most prestigious residential, commercial and retail spaces,
as well as an 18 metre high waterfall and a rumoured gold toilet.
Some may call it gaudy, others may call it pure luxury, and that may be precisely the
point.
To make way for Trump Tower, something of the old had to be sacrificed, and the Bondwick
Tower store took the hit.
Opened in 1929, the iconic 12-storey limestone granite emporium was designed by Warren and
Wetmore, the same architects as Grand Central.
Donald Trump had his eyes on the site for years, and when he acquired it in 1979, planned
to demolish the building to make way for his own skyscraper.
He hired architect Der Skutt, who later told New York Magazine of Trump's vision for
the site.
Preservationists wanted to save a pair of 4 metre Art Deco sculptures and a large nickel-plated
grille over the store's entrance.
Both were promised to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, but were ultimately destroyed when
the effort to preserve them was found to be causing construction delays.
And it wasn't the only controversy surrounding the building of this particular skyscraper.
In many ways, Trump Tower embodies the runaway ambitions of this time.
The 1980s were the era of Reaganomics, real estate booms, and stock market highs and lows.
Capitalism, growth and success, no matter the cost.
In later years, the Tower has taken on new meaning, both as a place for supporters of
and protesters against the former president.
It's perhaps more divisive now than it was when it was first constructed, and what was
the landmark of decadence is now a symbol of division.
What a building represents, what it means as a symbol, can change over the years, or
even in a single day.
The world changed on 9-11.
New York and its tour buildings were thrown into an identity crisis.
How do you build a skyscraper after 9-11?
Does the world even want skyscrapers anymore?
For a time at the start of the 2000s, no one really knew the answer to those questions.
Some said American cities should stop building skyscrapers altogether, fearing they'd create
a magnet for future terrorism.
Architect David Childs even said that many of his clients would not want to build such
visible symbols, such iconic and tour buildings, ever again.
9-11 was a gigantic trauma for New York City, and you know, it set back in every way, not
the least widespread emotionally across the New York region.
So much of the reaction was, death of the skyscraper, will there ever be another skyscraper?
One of the very few prominent skyscrapers to actually be built during this era was the
Hearst Tower, rising a relatively modest 182 metres above the city.
While the rest of the world was trying to figure out the future of high-rises, Foster
and Partners set about completing one from the past.
The firm made a conscious and active choice to push forward with construction despite
the post-9-11 climate.
They successfully combined modern architecture with the past before, both at the British
Museum and the Reichstag.
Now they were taking that technique to new heights.
Constructing a vertical extension on top of the existing Hearst Tower was moderately
easier than it would have been with most other buildings.
The historic structure was intended to support at least seven additional stories, with some
accounts putting that as high as 20.
It also had six elevator shafts, double or triple the normal number for a place that
size.
The facade of this building is more than just an eye-catching design.
Its diagonal grid pattern in fact comes from its supporting trusses.
But despite that striking effect, the Hearst Tower is something of a forgotten skyscraper
in this city, probably most well known for being the first to emerge here after 9-11.
In time, the city's high-rise hiatus began to fade, and engineers and developers started
to find themselves in a race for space.
What happened after 9-11, yes, the predictions of New York's demise and the demise of the
skyscraper were far exaggerated.
As the 2000s wore on, and rolled into the early 2010s, the reimagined World Trade Center
began to emerge in Lower Manhattan, filling the painful void that had been left in the
skyline.
Formed by a potent mix of emotion, politics and compromise, the tallest new skyscraper
to rise from the site sought to evoke the silhouette of the former Twin Towers as if
they had merged together.
It reached a symbolic height of 1,776 feet, nodding to the year of American independence,
and looked down to a pair of sunken waterfalls on the footprints of the buildings that had
once stood there.
The sound of crashing water drowning out the city and creating a space for reflection.
New York was beginning to move on, but it would never forget.
In a way, the rebuilding of Ground Zero started the turning of a page and gave a kind of gentle
permission to the city to start building tall again.
As it turned out, the skyscraper wasn't over.
It had just been reinvented.
Gone are the domineering office towers.
Architecture is now an asset.
There's not much space left to build on in Manhattan, so as the 2010s progressed, developers
started getting even more inventive, constructing skyscrapers over live rail yards and pushing
the limits of engineering.
The 1920s may have had jazz and Gatsby, but the 2020s has a new billionaire class.
Never before has there been so much wealth for so few, and those people need somewhere
to put all that money.
Welcome to Billionaire's Row.
To develop the small sites remaining on 57th Street, with buildings tall enough to offer
central park views and enough floor space to make a return, developers here spent years
acquiring the air rights for properties around their lots.
That enabled them to combine those rights onto their sites and build their towers taller,
helpfully preventing some nearby buildings blocking their views.
And it's all given rise to this, 111 West 57th Street, the world's thinnest skyscraper.
Between 435 metres above the city, but with a width of just 18 metres, the structure offers
ultra-luxury apartments and tries to hark back to the past.
The classic stepped form has returned, as well as terracotta, a material not really seen
on towers since the days of Art Deco.
This remarkable, pencil-thin structure and its neighbours were all born out of the latest
force shaping New York.
Extreme wealth.
These buildings are no longer simply property, they're assets.
The luxury apartments they offer are less home or safety deposit box in the sky.
Many are bought and left empty, sometimes deliberately to retain their value.
In mid-2021, properties in the area were half empty.
Love them or hate them, these super slender towers now stand as immovable markers of this
latest chapter in New York's history.
They rise in a time of growing billionaire backlash and in a world that feels like it's
changing faster and more unpredictably than ever before.
So what does the future hold for New York?
Well that's something that's always captured our imaginations.
The far future, as unknowable as it is, may still contain flying cars and impossible superscrapers.
But the immediate future is a little easier to predict.
The skyscrapers of the 2030s are actually being planned today and we've got a preview.
Remarkably, we're about to see the return of the mega office building, much like the
Chrysler and Empire State.
New York's about to witness its next skyscraper boom.
There are at least four new supertools being constructed, collectively adding some 11 million
square feet of new real estate to this island.
And it's all because of one little decision made in 2017, the rezoning of Midtown East.
Now please don't tune out just because we said rezoning, this is actually very interesting
stuff we promise.
You see, Midtown East has a problem.
It's one of the highest profile business addresses in the world, there's over 60 million square
feet of office space, a quarter of a million jobs and numerous Fortune 500 companies.
But it's also extremely old.
The average age of its buildings goes back more than 70 years.
So Midtown and especially the zone around Grand Central, the glorious Chrysler building
had had fallen on harder times in the 21st century.
It was not completely wired for all of the necessity of larger digital businesses.
And the spaces of the floor plates were smaller.
So the historical fabric that already existed in Midtown was beginning to need to be refreshed.
In response, a dramatic rezoning or rewriting of the rules was approved by the City Council,
enabling far greater and denser office buildings.
In exchange for that greater density, developers would have to contribute to a new district
improvement fund to create a transit and pedestrian network.
Of that is due to improve the subway in and around Grand Central.
Now we know what you're thinking and many of the skyscrapers coming up out of this rezoning
were in fact designed before 2020 and therefore meant for a very different world.
COVID-19 can be characterized as a pandemic.
The office as we know it is over.
The possibility of a recession is looming large as the Federal Reserve raises interest
rates in the hopes of driving down inflation.
The last couple of years haven't exactly paved the way for a great office tower comeback.
But that's kind of reminiscent of the birth of the Empire State Building, which found
itself adding hundreds of thousands of square feet of commercial real estate into Manhattan
during the Great Depression.
We may be at a time where there is a dramatic shift in the work patterns and perhaps even
the occupancy of buildings, but I don't think we're at the end of cities.
I think cities are our future and they must be our future.
270 Park Avenue is one of the first new skyscrapers to enjoy the benefits of greater density.
The 423-metre supertall is designed like a series of dominoes.
Just a bit taller than the Twin Towers were in 1973, the building returns to the iconic
stepped form of classic New York skyscrapers, a move that makes its dominating presence
a little easy to take.
But 175 Park Avenue, or Project Commodore as it's also known, doesn't pull back from
making an impact.
This immense skyscraper is rising just across the road from the Chrysler Building, and at
480 meters will completely block out the New York icon.
The famous structure from the start of our story now superseded, consumed by that relentless
race for the skies that it helped start almost a century ago.
The Chrysler Building may only have been the world's tallest for less than a year, it
may have been disliked when it was first constructed, but the Chrysler Building is New York.
It's bold and it's brash, it's a product of fierce competition, it's an advertisement,
a capitalist monument and a spectacular piece of art.
It's an eyesore and one of the most beautiful structures ever constructed.
What happens if you cover it up?
New York is like all cities, it's resilient because cities are important to civilization
and to economies, but you know that value of a kind of embodied energy and investment
in the city by history gives New York an advantage which is continuing.
It could be lost the way Rome lost its advantage in 300, it could be lost by other cities, but
New York still persists because it is a place of invention and energy.
You can tell a lot about a city and its people by the buildings that dominate its skyline,
whether that's the church steeple, the mega office building, the half empty luxury apartment
tower or a true icon.
Each stands as a monument of its era.
Our buildings tell us something fundamental about who we are and what we prioritize.
That's the case all over the world, but nowhere is it clearer than in New York City.
We may dislike new buildings when they first appear, but the fact is the city doesn't
belong to one person, one time or even one building.
It's constantly changing, constantly evolving, exactly as it should be.
New York is never finished.
This video is made possible by Bluebeam, you can learn more about that at the link below.
There's also the chance to dive deeper on this and other topics on our channel over
on the world's best construction podcast, available now wherever you get your podcasts.
And as always, if you enjoyed this video and you want to get more from the definitive video
channel for construction, make sure you subscribe to The B1M.
