The abstract consisted of this picture.
The idea would be that this ship here is HMS ontology.
That is an old Mediterranean harbour somewhere, very scruffy, and this new gleaming white
ship is sailing out into the oceans where real work can be done rather than the sort
of stuff that you do when you sit in your medieval library fussing about what Bonaventure
might have meant by individuation.
Someone pointed out after the talk that the ship is actually going backward.
Rentano made this claim.
The method of old philosophy is nothing other than that of the natural sciences.
I'm putting forward a somewhat similar thesis, namely that we shouldn't be doing philosophy
anymore.
The true method of what we wanted to achieve when doing philosophy was the method of the
science of ontology.
In 1874 he argued that it's psychology, which is the core discipline of philosophy.
And then in 1879, Wundt created the world's first laboratory of psychology.
So when Rentano was writing, psychology was not really an empirical discipline.
That was only just beginning.
Rentano and Wundt were at the beginnings of modern psychology.
You can see how students of Wundt, who were much more influential in the longer term,
spread through the world, including to America, and students of Rentano spread more through
central Europe, but influenced the subsequent history of psychology to some degree and the
subsequent history of philosophy to a much greater degree.
First laboratory of psychology in America, Wundt gets formal recognition for his strange
new empirical psychology work.
Carl Stumpf, who was one of the most important early students of Rentano, publishes a book
on the psychology of sound.
And Wundt establishes a journal to start publishing in the realm of experimental psychology.
In 1889, you have the first Congress of Psychology.
Meinung founds the first laboratory of psychology in Graz.
There is psychology in Chinese, albeit it's called mental philosophy.
And the title of Wundt's new journal was Philosophical Studies.
American Psychological Association founded.
Stumpf is given a chair of philosophy in Berlin, a very, very powerful chair.
So it's a direct from the ministry kind of thing.
And he's told that he has to establish in Berlin an Institute of Psychology.
So this was a thing to do to show your power in this era.
So we're 1894, still very early on.
And then the Berlin Institute, which grew out of Rentano, influenced psychology through
the Gestaltists.
So Bert Heimerkerl and Kofke are the three great figures of Gestalt psychology, which
has now become, in a way, part of the mainstream of psychology, but it's no longer called Gestalt
psychology.
It's just called Principles Governing Perceptual Organization.
And Fardowski, who was another Rentano student, founded the first psychological laboratory
in Poland.
All of these people were professors of philosophy.
They didn't have professors of psychology in those days.
So there is a question.
When was psychology born?
Roughly speaking, when Wundt's laboratory got official recognition.
Or when the first professor of psychology was created.
Or when the first department of psychology was created.
All of those are at different times.
But roughly speaking, in this time, the discipline of psychology was born.
A new science was born.
Now why?
Well, people hated philosophy.
Because in Germany, particularly, they had crises all the time.
Hegelians hated young Hegelians.
Young Hegelians hated Marxists, Marxists hated Fichtians, and so on.
So each group was fighting other groups.
And no one seemed to be making any progress.
It was very much a matter of in-group competition.
People wanted jobs, and so they joined movements.
But it was the job which mattered.
It was not the philosophical content that mattered.
Hosser, in a very early stage in his career, worked with Weierstrass, who was a mathematician.
I'm not sure if this is exactly right, but roughly right, Weierstrass married the daughter
of Hegel.
A Weierstrass is a mathematician, a great thinker.
He had a sign in his office which said, Hegel shall not be reviled in this office.
Not because he was a fan of Hegel, just because he married Hegel's daughter.
Now, but that shows you that there was a climate in which people did not really want to have
philosophers around anymore.
You didn't go to study philosophy, it was seen as being a dead end.
And so they were looking for new ways of tackling philosophical problems.
And empirical results were regarded as being a benefit.
So how can we make philosophy experimental?
No one today would ever think along those lines.
But then it was regarded as a new and exciting idea.
And it meant that there would be an increasing intersection between philosophy and other
disciplines.
So philosophy of science started to be important.
Not just philosophy of psychology or philosophy of the mind, but philosophy of science generally
trying to make philosophy itself more exciting by linking it to extra philosophical things.
This is a long quote from Stumpf.
German idealism, which is all this Hegel stuff, failed.
And Stumpf is arguing that the reason it failed was because of this division of labor,
division of groups, constant battle between groups based on dogma and intolerance.
That was his idea.
And this, he says, is alien to science which rests on the principle of cooperation.
I think he's exactly right.
I think that was exactly the problem.
All right.
So what do you need to found a new discipline?
You need a career path.
You need to be able to get jobs in the distance.
You need journals, institutes, departments in universities, degrees, ideally, conferences.
You need a society.
You need a subject matter.
And for the psychologist, this was the mind or mental processes.
You need methods.
You need results.
And you need teaching.
There needs to be something that, which means you need textbooks.
You need training.
You need content.
And now what does that do?
Well, this creates a struggle for resources.
There was a philosopher's trade union protest which led to an advertisement in the Frankfurt
newspaper, declaration of lecturers in philosophy in Germany against the occupation of philosophical
professorships with representatives of experimental psychology.
Now another typical result will be that the new discipline will be, it will be full of
young people with scraggly hair from outlying cities, because all the philosophers in the
big established cities are going to be doing philosophy and being successful.
So in Austria, in places like that, in Bohemia, you will find people doing this new psychology.
And they will then be dismissed by the people doing the big city philosophy as being trivial
in one way or another, scientists or materialists.
But on the other hand, because all of these young, scraggly people are doing new work,
which is visible and international and so forth, they'll get more resources.
They'll have bigger conferences.
They'll have more urgency in their work.
In modern day terminology, they'll get more grants.
So now we come to the distinction between good old fashioned metaphysics, which is a
part of philosophy, and ontology, which is a discipline which is designed to be the
basis for applied ontology in the realm of data-driven science and other data-driven
activities of various sorts.
Then we have the technological artifacts created by ontologists, which are classification
systems of various sorts.
And we have the National Center for Biomedical Ontology, which was created as a collaboration
of these groups, a lot of funding.
And you see that the Department of Philosophy in Buffalo was one of the collaborators.
This was the original website.
If you went to Google whenever I caught this image, you got 54 million hits for ontology,
and number four was the gene ontology.
Number three was ontology computer science in brackets.
Number one was what is an ontology by Tom Gruber, who is an artificial intelligence scientist
responsible for the Siri app.
So at least four out of the top six are related to ontology in the applied sense.
And this is a broader illustration of how ontology boomed.
So in 2004, if you went to Google, you get 58,000 hits on ontology in Heidegger, even
though ontology is a big thing in Heidegger.
That's because the Heideggerians didn't buy computers.
But for ontology and information systems, you get 702,006, that's when I took the slide
from a minute ago.
51.4 for ontology as a whole, 2.7 for ontology in philosophy, 9.8 for ontology in database.
And then here in Buffalo, we founded in tandem with people from Stanford, the National Center
for Ontological Research.
And these are some of the organizations which came to Buffalo for the opening event.
So some of them are academics.
Some of them are research.
We had NIST, we had the Lawrence National Laboratory, the gene ontology.
They came to Buffalo because they realized that the discipline of ontology in general,
not just biomedical ontology, but ontology in general, was important to the various different
kinds of work that they were doing.
Encore, the National Center for Ontological Research, was an organization established
to create the new discipline of ontology.
So just as psychology was created in 1890 or thereabouts, out of the mothership called
philosophy.
So ontology was created in 2005 or thereabouts, out of the mothership called philosophy.
And the goals were to advance ontology as a science, to advance educational ontology
and to develop all those measures of quality that I was referring to earlier.
So we have ontology, the science.
One of the first initiatives which we established around this time was the Oboe Foundry, which
was designed to create in biology a collection of ontology modules, which would be non-overlapping,
developed in tandem on the basis of scientifically tested principles, and which would be open.
So the open biomedical ontologies found it.
And this is the very early sketch of what the Oboe Foundry would look like.
Some of these ontologies have been approved for being in the Oboe Foundry.
Some of the gene ontology, or the three gene ontologies, most importantly.
Some of them are waiting in the queue, as it were, because we have very high standards.
And some of them have been renamed.
So the Functional Genomics Investigation Ontology was renamed the Ontology for Biomedical Investigation.
And it's an OB, and it is part of the Oboe Foundry, and the Protein Ontology is part.
I've referred to some of the new disciplines which have arisen, and so how did old ontology
work as part of philosophy, otherwise known as metaphysics?
Well, it worked by people engaging in pleasant conversations, sometimes in arguments, and
promoting theses and defining terms, sometimes logically.
So Roderick Chisholm is probably the best example of good methodology in the old ontology
world, because he tried to define every single term, apart from a few primitives, which he
declared as primitives.
They aim for logical cleverness, but they don't aim for utility.
So this is an example.
Sometimes they aim for reductionism, so we've talked about that before.
Sometimes they aim just to do ontology, and so far as it seems to be implied by the needs
of first-order critical logic.
Sometimes they're nominalists, sometimes they believe in concepts, and each one of these
ontologies forms a kind of sect within the philosophical world.
Now science is never sectarian, and so the goal is to find a way of doing ontology, which
would be non-sectarian.
So the new discipline of ontology exists.
It has conferences, it has journals.
So an example of the way we worked, and we wrote papers on this at the very beginning
of BFO.
What is a system?
Well, we have systems in the body.
What is the ontological assay of a system in the sense that a digestive system and a respiratory
system and so on are systems?
And the ontological assay would strive to be applicable to other kinds of systems, for
instance the solar system, or the IBM system for contracting, or the New York subway system.
And so the first thing that appears to be true of all of those systems is that they're
made of material entities.
The second thing is that they're made of multiple material entities, multiple objects.
The third thing is that these multiple objects are causally interconnected.
The next thing is that some of these multiple objects have specific functions, or specific
dispositions within the system.
So functions for the solar system probably not, but for all the other systems I mentioned,
we have specific functions.
That gives a definition of what a system is.
And it doesn't fit into Aristotle's category.
There is nothing here for systems.
There's no systems interconnect with other systems, and so that's something else that
we have to add to our ontology of systems.
And furthermore, systems very often contain other systems as parts.
The separation between these two systems is not a physical separation, it's not a physical
discontinuity.
And certainly not if you look at the way they're actually intersecting with each other in a
single field.
It's a kind of fiat boundary rather than a physical discontinuity.
And systems have functions, again, leaving aside the solar system, which means they can
malfunction, and then sometimes they really do malfunction, and then you die.
So what we do is we take Aristotle, and we add the thing, well, Aristotle has substances
and accidents, he had also universals in particular.
But he didn't have holes, he didn't have parts, he didn't have fiat and bona fide boundaries,
he didn't have systems and networks of systems, he didn't have functions and malfunctions.
He probably had some of the function part in his account of final cause.
He probably had some of the system part in his account of, for instance, cities, perhaps
even in his account of organisms.
But he didn't have the term system, he didn't have an ontology of system.
And he certainly didn't have an ontology of fiat boundaries, he would have hated that,
because for him everything is natural.
So this was put together in 2006, the approach that we're aiming at here, which is basically
the DFO ontology, is going to work at every level of generality.
So it works for bones and hearts and lungs, but it also, if it's going to be good, is
going to work for chemical complexes and chemical reactions.
So the same ontology should work at each level of generality, that was our idea.
Now while we were developing all of this, we had in the back of our minds a very common
principle which philosophers teach their students when they teach the philosophy of science.
And it's kind of insurance policy.
They say, when you do the philosophy of science, you should not interfere with scientists.
How could you, a mere philosopher, tell a chemist or a biologist what to do?
You want to make it clear from the very start that you're very modest when doing philosophy
and that you're not trying to interfere with science, you're trying to understand science.
The problem is that we are living in an age where philosophical nincompoops doing computer
science are having a gigantic influence on scientists.
We saw some of that in the HL7 stories.
There are clear cases where computer scientists' use of simplified models and lack of understanding
of the goals of science led to scientific problems.
And so I see the part of the mission of ontology, which is not part of philosophy, as being a
counter to the bad influence of certain kinds of computer scientists.
And so ontology is a technology founded by Gruber and his friends in Stanford, has some
of these same confusions.
So this is the typical HL7 confusion.
And the confusion is shown by the fact that he uses exists in sneer quotes.
So the use of sneer quotes is very often a mark of anti-realist philosophy.
So you say exists, who would ever worry about what exists?
What we're interested in is what AI systems can represent.
That's the idea.
All right, so we've seen some of this.
A disease is an act of observation, that's what HL7 says.
If we're going to do ontology science properly, then it should not be a part of computer science.
It's going to have to work closely with computer scientists, but it shouldn't be just a branch
of computer science, just as it shouldn't be a branch of philosophy.
But it will certainly play a big interdisciplinary role, and it is playing a big interdisciplinary
role.
The better the ontology is of the science, the better it will be able to play this role
of fostering interdisciplinary communication and also interdisciplinary integration of
the data created by the experiments in different disciplines.
All right, so let's go back.
What are the typical reasons for founding a new discipline, triviality, and so on inside
philosophy?
That's even worse today because of all these French people.
There are new methods for doing philosophy, namely ontology, for instance, which have
empirical results, for instance.
There is an increasing intersection between philosophy and all other disciplines through
the channel of ontology, and therefore an increasing need for cross-disciplinary collaboration.
And now we have a career path, there are people getting jobs for doing ontology.
There are ontology journals, institutes, conferences, societies, there's a subject matter, there
are methods, cumulative results, teaching.
So here in Buffalo we have the world's first teaching institution devoted to ontology, which
is the Division of Biomedical Ontology in the Department of Biomedical Informatics.
And there are many industrial applications, and the BBC is one.
All right, so this is the international meeting of the biocurator.
Right in 2003, you see that it's still going strong, biocurators work with ontologies daily.
They are biologists whose job is to use ontologies to annotate data and literature.
That's one of the journals, there are other journals, international journal of metadata
semantics and ontology, for instance.
There are conferences, this is just one of several conference series, this is from 2006,
but it's still going strong.
There is an international conference on biomedical ontology, which will be held in Buffalo in
the summer next year.
And then what are the typical reactions to the founding of a new discipline?
So when I gave my talk, Why I Am No Longer a Philosopher, I received, for the only time
in my life, hate mail, it was written in red, blood-colored ink.
But they're 95.
But basically he didn't think I should have a job in a philosophy department.
So I should immediately resign.
And he may have a point.
It's a struggle for resources.
Some people have jobs in philosophy departments, some people want jobs in philosophy departments.
Some people think that philosophy gives rise to new disciplines, and that that's going
to lead inevitably to periods of time when people who are working in new disciplines
will be hired in philosophy departments.
In fact, there are some people who think that's the whole purpose of paying philosophers,
because that means that you have a fertile soil for the creation of new disciplines, or
new ideas like artificial intelligence, which was partly an invention of philosophy, or
logic, or Cartesian coordinates.
So this is an old slide of the UB philosophy department, which had these little tiny things.
So they let me put it down here in small type, where we could announce the fact that we had
a special track of ontology.
So what are the typical results?
Well, ontology certainly lacks sophistication, and it's dismissed by established philosophers
as trivial, gets and requires much larger resources than philosophy gets.
There are several conference series in ontology, more international cooperation, more cooperation
with deadlines.
So philosophers are slow.
Ontology is very often a matter of get this ready within the next two days, or lose the
contract.
Publication in ontology journals is much quicker than publication in philosophy journals.
Real results, a discipline is shaped by the age when it's started.
So we really, we philosophers, of which I'm not one, still model ourselves on the Greeks,
the symposium, the idea that you can stand around or sit around doing philosophy.
That's not how ontology was established in a different age.
We work primarily through teleconferences.
So I attend, on average, five teleconferences a week, doing real work with real deadlines.
And there's nothing like that in philosophy.
There is no branch of philosophy where people are getting results in groups which meet every
week or every two weeks for an hour or two hours to thrash out urgent matters.
And we use PowerPoints.
All right, so this is the Encyclopedia of Database Systems.
And there's an article in this Encyclopedia by Tom Gruber, defining ontology.
And as I said, Tom Gruber is the father of the Siri app, which is based on ontology.
Aristotle had one database of 158 constitutions, but only one entry survived.
This is the Constitution of Athens.
He collected 158 constitutions and created an ontology, which would look like this.
So even Aristotle was already doing ontology.
