I have been racking my brain today. I've been thinking. Been thinking a lot.
I've been trying to think of one single justifiable reason for a person to use
either macOS or any Apple products. And, you know, maybe I'm just not smart
enough. Maybe I'm just... I don't have the wisdom, but I cannot think of a single one.
No offense, but I just cannot think of one. Now, let's start... let's start this way.
Linux people like me are divided into two general categories. There are the
people who hate Mac, but they really hate Windows. And there are people who hate
Windows, but they really, really hate Mac. And I am definitely of the latter
category, because I can think of some reasons that you might want to use a
Windows machine. I mean, I ultimately don't, you know, want to rationalize... you
know, I don't want you to use one. But, you know, if you want to play a full-screen
video game, I can understand, you know, taking advantage of the better support
that you have on Windows. You can play a lot of these games on Linux, but it's
easier to do on Windows. So I can understand having an alternative desktop
for doing something like that. Same thing, you know, if you... of course, lots of people
have jobs that require some kind of proprietary software that's written
only for Windows. Okay, I understand that. But that said, those are the reasons you
might want to use a Windows machine. I can't, for the life of me, think of any
reason to use macOS or to use an Apple device. Now, and I can additionally think
of many reasons to not want to use Apple devices or macOS. Let's get into it. Now,
first, hardware. Apple makes deliberately debilitated hardware that is planned to
be obsolete. There's a lot of planned obsolescence. You know, a lot of people
will realize, oh, look, there's a new iPhone. Suddenly, all of the software or
all of the hardware that, you know, the last iPhone is no longer compatible with
all of this new software. It's not because there's anything principle behind
that. It's because you are deliberately disabled from updating your phone when
they want you to buy a new one. Okay, just basic things like that. Or, for example,
let's take actually repairing your hardware, right? So, if you have a Windows
machine, if you have a normal computer, it doesn't have to run Windows. I have a
ThinkPad running Linux. Now, if something goes wrong with my ThinkPad, let's say I
accidentally pee on the keyboard or something like that. It's happened before.
I'm not proud of it. It's happened. Let's say I pee on the keyboard and, you know,
I want to replace it. Well, it's no big deal. I send out for a $10 keyboard on eBay.
I unscrew my old keyboard, replace it. That's it. That's all I have to do. Same
thing with the screen. Same thing with anything else. Okay, everything's easily
replaceable. If I don't know, if I haven't replaced something, I can look it up on
YouTube. It's super easy. Now, Mac devices, on the other hand, are built to be
difficult to modify. You're not supposed to make any kind of changes or repairs.
Now, how specifically? Now, for example, Apple devices, you may or may not know,
have special screws in them that normal screwdrivers cannot unscrew. It's not
flathead. It's not Phillips head. It's, you know, their own special thing that's
supposed to be difficult to unscrew because they don't want you going in
there. And that's not because, oh, we just, you know, we're interested in the user.
We don't want them to, you know, mess anything up. No, no, it's because they
don't want you to fix things. If you're opening up a computer, you know what
you're doing, more or less. The other thing is, of course, Apple has these
licensed dealers. They want to constrain the number of people who can modify
these kind of devices. And how that results, of course, is there's a more
constrained market. It's a lot more, it's a lot less competitive than, you know,
a repair industry for Windows machines. So that makes it worse for you as well.
You're paying more for the same or the worst product. Okay. So now, the reason,
of course, people have Macs is sort of an issue of social signaling, right?
There, you know, there's a certain brand that you are buying, like when you get a
Windows machine, some, you know, and go to Walmart and get whatever, there are all
these different brands, they're all competing. They all look different. But
if you get an Apple Mac, they all look the same. They're all totally uniform.
And they're supposed to be like that because you are buying into a brand and
nothing else. You're not getting anything special. You're buying into a brand. And
that's, you know, that's sort of the point. They want to advertise, not the
hardware being better because it's not. They're trying to advertise that specific
brand. Now, correlated with the hardware issue is the kind of mentality, which
isn't a mentality, it's a strategy that I think is taken deliberately by Apple.
And that is the fact that Apple software and hardware sort of conspire for you.
They conspire to take over more and more of your life. Okay? So if you get an iPod,
for example, do iPods even still exist? I don't know, but if you get an iPod,
whatever, they want you to use iTunes to sync with that. They make it difficult to
use other software. And in fact, iTunes works in a way totally different from
other MP3 players when you sync it with, you know, an iPod or something, right?
So normal MP3 players back in the good old days, they worked like any kind of USB
device would. You'd drag and drop your songs in whatever way you want. You can
customize it. Usually when you load them up, you can also sort them by artist or
whatever. That's fine. Okay? iPods aren't made like that. They store data in a very
special way, special in the like bad way, of course, in that they, the iPod only
wants to show information the way it wants to and nothing else, right? So you
can't sort things by folder directory. That doesn't exist. Okay? And the thing
about these kind of Apple devices is that they're all on their own wavelength
because they want, Apple wants it to be more difficult for you to actually use
the products. They want you to have to, if you get an iPhone, they want you to
also have, you know, a Mac, a MacBook or something, because they're supposed to
sync with each other better by making it more difficult for you to interface
with other programs. They don't want you using any other music player other than
iTunes or everything sort of conspires in a way to get you to use the same
stuff. And of course, it's a little ironic, isn't it? It's a little ironic that,
you know, Mac used to be, you know, you remember the commercial, right? When, you
know, the girl is running up and she has a mallet or a hammer. I don't remember
what it is and everyone's watching Big Brother and then she throws the hammer
and it breaks the screen. Oh, wow. So if you buy a Mac, you're like a rebel and
you're against the system. Well, now you all have computers that look exactly the
same. Now you have, everyone does everything in the same way. I guess some
people have different desktop backgrounds. But every, you know, all computers are
identical, totally replaceable. It's expensive to replace, but they are
totally replaceable. And all of the actual choices that you have are
constrained. And that's part of the plan. It's part of the plan. It's part of the
plan, okay? Because they want to control you. I mean, and don't get it wrong.
Don't get it twisted. Windows would like to control you the way Mac does. Mac
simply is a brand. No one wants to be in on the Windows brand. No one cares.
People have bought Windows machines because they work or because they're
used to them. People buy Mac machines because they want the brand. They want
to participate in this. And again, it's a slippery slope. You buy one expensive
overpriced Mac device, you're gonna be buying more if you want them to sync well.
Now, here's a dumb argument people say. This isn't so much of an argument, but
it's like a justification of the existence of Mac. People say something like,
oh, don't, oh, Luke, well, here's the thing. You might know a lot about computers,
or Billy on the street might know, he might be a leap, he's a hacker or
something like that. He knows a bunch about computers. But there are lots of
dumb people that need a computer that just works. That's nice and simple. And
Mac is that for a lot of people. Now, I don't buy that argument for a bunch of
reasons, okay? First off, you gotta put yourself in the shoes of a normie. You
gotta start thinking like them. Now, when they use a computer, they don't
really care about operating systems. They might be abstract if they've fallen for
advertising. But what they want, what they want is big buttons, big logos on the
side that have their browser and all the programs they use. And they want those
big buttons there, and they want to be able to click on them, and they want a
program to come up. And if the program takes too long, then they must have a
virus, okay? That's how normies think. I mean, we're talking about, we're talking,
when I say normies, I'm talking about people who don't even know how to do
private browsing. Like, you go to their web browser, you go to their URL bar,
start typing something in, and all the porn they watch comes up. We're talking
about that kind of normie. Those kind of normies, those kind of bottom of the
barrel normies, they don't care about the difference between Windows and Mac.
Both of them are equally usable. It doesn't matter. Any kind of Linux desktop
environment, Ubuntu Unity or Mate or anything, they're all equally usable,
as long as you've got the big buttons you can click on, okay? And most people are
doing stuff in the browser anyway, so it doesn't matter. Now, as it comes to the
Mac being idiot-proof thing, first off, as I said before, Mac stuff is made to be
difficult to repair. It's made to, you're not supposed to, whether you are dumb or
smart, you're not supposed to be able to fix your stuff, or change your stuff,
or do anything, okay? Now, the thing is, Mac is not idiot-proof, it's actually
smart person-proof. It's smart person-proof in a couple of ways. They make it
deliberately difficult for you to customize things. You cannot easily change
stuff about your graphical environment in the way you can, even of Windows.
Windows doesn't have that much, but you can still shift things around really easily.
You can get your own setup. When I use Windows, I used to do something like that.
Mac is nearly impossible to do that kind of stuff. You have to really know the system.
People who want to have their own wavelength in their own machine don't have that ability
in Mac OS, because again, you have to do everything the Mac way, and the Mac way is
infuriating. It is not idiot-proof, it is smart person-proof, and that's the
problem. That's the point. They're making devices that you cannot improve, that you cannot
actually make your own. They're supposed to be a product, and they're selling a brand.
Now, what does a brand come down to? Last and not least, what does a brand come down to?
It comes down to a kind of social signaling. Now, most people in the country still use
Windows machines, and they will continue to use Windows machines. But where I live,
I live at a university. I live and work at a university, and most of the people I see
who are going to be upper-class people, all of them, everyone I know who doesn't use a Linux
machine, uses Mac, all of them. Actually, there's one token Republican in our department,
he uses a Windows machine. Everyone else, besides me, of course, and a couple of the
people who actually do computer stuff have Linux machines, but Mac is the norm in my socioeconomic
class. And that pisses me off. Well, maybe it just pisses me off being here. That should be what I say.
But what I mean is, Mac has just become the brand of a particular socioeconomic class
to differentiate themselves from the unwashed masses. That's all it is. I think everyone
understands that. There is a status signaling aspect of Mac, because when it comes down to it,
it has all the hallmarks of conspicuous consumption. You are buying a product that is worse,
that is more inhibited. It is always showing how Mac it is. It's always showing its well-known form.
You're always supposed to know that it's a Mac device. And that's sort of the problem.
It has all of these things. They all conspire. And when it comes down to it, there's no
rational reason, apart from social signaling, to use these kind of devices. So that's all I
wanted to say. But it's nothing you don't already know. So have a good one.
