But what I think what I'm trying to get at is that I watch people, you know, the reason
I've never taken a particular interest in philosophy is that once you've taken a particular
interest in mathematics, you understand just how sensitive many of these things are to
small issues of language. And this is partially what happened to philosophy is that there
were a lot of big interesting questions. And then there was a period of time where it became
a focus on language rather than on big, meaningful, meaty questions. I don't know
that the human layer supports this level of analysis because of some of the reasons that
we're talking about. So, you know, we can notice, I mean, I don't even think, for example, that
there is a status game. I think that there's a panoply of status games and that they're taking
place simultaneously in a million different dimensions. And the key question is, can we
isolate the principal components of some of those so that we understand like what is,
what is, where's the majority of the action happening? Or are we actually doing violence
to the problem by virtue of the fact that we've singled out a few of them and then we've misnamed
it while that was going on in the status game. So for example, any univariate measure has the
property that it has an ordering on it, but every bivariate measure, unless there's a metric,
does not imply an ordering. Like if you have one attribute that's positive that is greater than
mine and one that is worse, until we can say in some sense how those two things interrelate,
we can't say Agnes is better than Eric or Eric is better than Agnes. However, if there's only one
attribute, like who can run faster than one of us is better and the other of us is worse,
unless there's a bizarre tie. Now, what I'm trying to get at is, here we are, 21st century beings,
and we're outside of the confines of the academy. And the key question is, what is this
philosophical modality doing in our lives? How does it, is the, is the examined life
really aided by philosophy or is there a sort of infinite tower of questions and that it's
sort of an intellectual check kiting scheme by which you keep getting into deeper and deeper
water by noticing something, only to find out that the noticing created a larger problem than the
previous one that you had. I think one way to put the case for philosophy is like, you have to have
a right, you have to, you can't just draw a distinction, you're just not allowed to just
draw a distinction. That's why I said a thing about the quadripartite. You're not just allowed to
slash the world up into bits. The place where this comes, the place where philosophy comes from
is parmenides, parmenides was really the first philosophy. And this is pre-Plato, right? This
is the pre-Socratic philosophers. And he, like Zeno's paradoxes are sort of woven into parmenidianism,
but the basic idea of, parmenides' basic thought is that there's only one thing you can say,
it is. So there's just one thing, it, and there's one thing you can say about it, that it is.
And you're like, well, parmenides, no, look, there's also like this chair is.
And parmenides is saying, says, well, if you say that the chair is, and you want to say that the
chair is something, and it's different from say that table, right, then you're saying that the chair
is not the table. So you're saying that the chair is not. But you're also saying that it is.
Parmenides and generations of people after parmenides thought this was like just this really terrible
puzzle about how non-being can be. How can, how can there be anything that isn't like this chair
not being this table? And the problem of non-being is, has a lot of different manifestations. So
difference is one manifestation, change over time. How can the chair at one time exist
and then later it's collapsed and it's not there anymore? And, you know,
parmenides thought was that our, like our thinking cannot support this way of talking.
It's like, it's just words. When we, when we, when we talk about the diversity out in the world,
and there's only one thing we can coherently say, there's only one thing where when we say it,
we've understood what we said, and that's, it is. Now, Plato comes along and he's like,
no, parmenides, that's nuts. We have to be able to talk about some kinds of difference,
but you're right that the entire world, as we see it, right? The entire sensible world,
that's just nonsense. That doesn't make any sense. That's a bunch of contradictions.
But there are these things called forms, okay? Like the beautiful or the just or whatever. And
at least the beautiful, it's always beautiful. The only thing that's true about it is that it is
beautiful. And that's something I can say. The beautiful is beautiful. The just is just. So at
least I'm like one step beyond parmenides, right? I'm like, I can talk about these forms. I still
can't talk about the chair, right? Okay. And then you get Aristotle and Aristotle is like,
no, guys, we have to be able to talk about like human beings and things and,
and we need to enrich our language further. Now, the reason I bring all this up is
that the basic philosophical impulse is that when you draw distinctions and you carve things up
and you talk about layers, okay? You've in a sense, you've in a sense collapsed your own thought
into a bunch of different things that are like not unified, right? And you need to be able to see
the unity of them. If you can't, you haven't actually had a thought. Like you haven't thought
anything. You just said words. So philosophers are constantly attuned to this worry that we might
just be saying words and not having thoughts and that there's a standard for the unity of a thought
that's like a pretty high standard. And, and so like if you draw a distinction, you need to
understand the unity that underlies the distinction and what legitimates the distinction. And so
like if I say, you know, if I say even like I ate the cookie, even though I knew that it wasn't
the right thing to do and you're like, well, wait a minute, you freely ate the cookie, you chose
to eat the cookie. Yes. So that was an intentional action. Yes. So an intentional action is when we
have a reason. Yes. So a reason means that you think that it's all things considered the best
thing to do. Yes. That's what a reason is. Wait a minute. You just said you thought it was all
things considered the best thing to do and you thought that there was something better that
you should do. You just contradicted yourself, right? And Permanente thought that contradicting
yourself was written into, this is a chair and this is a table, right? And so, you know,
so we've come really far. We can talk about so much now. But only, I think, because only if we
can sort of back those checks that these distinctions have some way of like holding together.
Breathe with me. I don't, I don't know why I'm so singularly unmoved by this kind of thinking.
Well, object to it. Where did I go wrong? I don't know. One place I went wrong.
You know, Hegel at some point said, the absolute idea, the idea is unity of the subject of an
object of idea is the notion of the idea. A notion whose object is the idea is such and for
which objective is idea, an object embracing all characteristics in its unity. Okay.
When I talk like that, I sound insane to myself. And the key question for me is what is an idea
that settles down when its analysis doesn't sort of alter and destroy it. It's sort of a fixed point,
if you will, under analysis. So if I communicate, the problem, let's say with the status game with
which we began our discussion, is that in some cases, when you call attention to your need for
status, you diminish your status. That's also true. I think that's not the only reason why you
can't call it. But there are ways in which you can try to call attention to your status in which
the amount of status that you achieve by calling attention to your status remains
constant, that the calling doesn't effectively alter the problem. For example, you might signal
that you're comfortable enough in your own skin to talk about a part of your mind's petty needs and
a part of your mind's reasonable needs for status. I have both, for example. And I don't think it's
a terrible thing to say that there are times when I simply want to be regarded because I am
and that there are times that I want to be regarded because it is important not to derange a
conversation. Let's say I only have 45 minutes for something and if we begin with the wrong notion
of who I am, it will take too long. So there's always this question in the bad breath example.
The problem is, is that the talking about it has to do with an interpretive complex around client
inside your interlocutor's mind. And so your input stimulates a process that is
transpiring within the client-side architecture. And it leads to an uncomfortable and unpleasant
and not untrue outcome. If I could find the input, which when processed remains the input.
In other words, it's like an eigenvalue of truth, an eigenvector of truth. Then that's something
which is philosophically interesting to me. What concerns me is the tower of
concepts and conflicts which don't seem to settle down the more we understand them.
So one thing is, I really liked what you said about Hegel. When I talk like that,
I sound crazy to myself. So I think that is Parmenides' point about saying that something is
not. Parmenides is the guy who realized when I talk like that, when I say the chair is not the
table, I sound crazy to myself. You're really used to talking that way because that's just
how we talk. Parmenides saw the giant crack in everything. And so if you think about how
like when I hear someone say, I know I shouldn't have this cookie, but I really feel like it's
so I'm going to have it. If I talk like that, I sound crazy to myself. And so I'm like, I can't
talk like this. I have to find another way of talking. Okay. So that's the idea that at some
level, first of all, you need a primary description of it. Most of us understand weakness of will
intuitively, but we don't understand weakness of will as a is emergent from fundamental principles.
And I think you don't understand it intuitively. You just think you do.
Well, again, you can pick out the phenomenon. You can point to your point about the practicality.
You may be able to work with it at a practical level. So for example, I might be able to sell a
product where you put cookies in a time release safe. And so you can't get your own cookies until
one is dispensed to you. People will immediately understand that. But the key question is,
can I take a placebo and get the placebo effect if it's labeled placebo? These are the sort of
unstable, non-fixed points of the philosophical problem. One of the reasons that I really love
physics as an alternative to philosophy at its ground level is that it tends to be stable under
analysis when we have an idea. But now in quantum mechanics, the propagation in quantum mechanics
has a very stable interpretation. It may be wrong, but we think we know what's going on when
we're asking how an electron moves. It's when an electron gets measured, when you're asking a
bad question, which is, are you in state A or state B and it was in state A plus B,
then the multiple choice nature of that quantum mechanical question is bizarrely accommodated
by the system somewhat randomly falling into state A or state B as a weighted probability.
Now, that bothers us because we have the sense that maybe that's not really a fixed point.
Did we know what we were when we asked the question? Were we part of the quantum system?
Did we hold ourselves aside and keep ourselves classical while asking that the electron be
considered quantum mechanically? Was it in a semi-quantum, semi-classical state?
So we're not really sure whether we've committed a sin against God and logic in that case.
Yeah, good. I mean, I think that a lot of your worries about the tower and the,
I still think they go back to something.
There's a question whether we ever make any progress in a conversation.
That seems to me to be the real question there. Like, can we learn from each other?
And can we learn from each other in some sense
without making any,
without taking as the frame of our conversations something that we just happened to get slotted into
and that we don't question. And I actually think that it's true about philosophy that you are not
guaranteed in any way that the answer to that question is yes. You don't know that it's yes.
You've had epiphanies in conversations which have changed your life?
My problem is that I have too many of them, but yeah.
That must be an awesome life.
It's not a dearth of epiphanies. It's a total instability. But can I just say, there's this
moment, okay? Like, I feel like you're Meno, okay? This is Plano's Meno and they're having this
conversation. Socrates is like, you're a big opponent of excellence. Meno comes to Socrates
and he's like, I want excellence. How do I get it? And Socrates is like, well, let's start by
figuring out what it is. And Meno's like, that's not hard, right? That's super easy. Meno says it's
easy about like seven times in a row. It's really funny. He's like, here's what it is. Socrates
like refutes a bunch of times. And at a certain point, Meno's like, look, this is not going anywhere.
Like, obviously, you can just sort of come up with more words against my words.
How do we ever know we'll ever get anywhere with this, right? And Socrates actually at that point
turns to math and they use a mathematical example about finding the double square. So if you have a
square and you want to find the square whose area is twice as big as that square and how somebody
who goes into that problem making a certain set of assumptions will never find the answer. We
talk about it if you want. It's a great example. But the point is afterwards Socrates is like,
yeah, the truth is there is no guarantee. We don't know, right? But I think that it is better.
We will be better men and braver if we believe that we ought to inquire than not. And you know,
you say you like physics, but I don't see it as an alternative in the sense that it's not going to
give me it's the layers levels problem, right? It's just physics is not going to give me the
answer to the questions I have. And I can't just abandon those questions. And I would be a coward
if I didn't try to find answers to them. Coward is in a very high state of the stack, high level
of the stack, right? In some sense, the questions that really have come to animate me throughout
my adult life have to do with this question is how how can we improve upon it is without
involving ourselves in the equation. Maybe that's a good I'm mostly interested in the equations
that essentially involve me. Right. So that may be a big difference.
