Wordless Imageless Thought
Open sidebar
Wordless Imageless Thought
Put this into King James 1611 English: Wordless Imageless Thought

Ernest Osborne's short article on "Thought" in the Lone Hand for June provoked a two-hour long discussion among some of my friends. The main conclusions are here concentrated for you:

If wordless, imageless thought be a possibility, is it not a further argument for obeying the inhibitions of conscience without waiting until the inhibitory impulses can be put into words?

For instance, if one becomes conscious of an uneasy feeling when one is about to do a certain action, would it not be better to avoid doing the action even if one cannot put into words the reason why the action should be avoided?

There are unmistakable emotional impulses towards right action which occur periodically and which we should train ourselves to obey unhesitatingly.

No time should be spent in seeking a logical reason for the impulses. Obey them. You know they are right—right for you at any rate.

This knowledge at critical moments of what is right and wrong is an instance of thought unclothed with words.

Such knowledge springs from a level of the mind deeper than the layer on which operate thought-images, combined with the capability of verbal expression.
 
When the deeper levels of the mind operate harmoniously with the outermost layer (we took McDougall as our authority for speaking of mental "layers" and "levels"), then only is a man at peace with himself and the universe.

For him the paradox, Right speech is right action, is no longer a paradox. The majority of us are unhappily crammed with Freudian complexes which make harmonious speech and action nearly impossible. Hence the saying, "He acted against his better self."

Translated into modern psychological terms the phrase would read, "The layers of his mind were not acting in unity."  

After the masses are sufficiently educated, a new terminolgy for mental operations will have to come into being.

Such psychically identical terms as "conscience," "intelligence," "will," and "reason," will fall as far into the limbo of  
disuse as such words as "humours" and "faculties" have already fallen.

The greatest lesson of modern psychology is that the mind is not a concatenation of separate powers, but one power using as its instrument the whole body.

— L. Woolacott, 1920
Wordless Imageless Thought
Ernest Osborne's short article in the Lone Hand for June prompted a two-hour long discussion among some of my friends. The main conclusions are summarized here for you:
If it be possible to have wordless, imageless thought, is it not further evidence for obeying the inhibitions of conscience without waiting until we can put those inhibiting impulses into words?
For instance, if one becomes aware of an uneasy feeling when about to do a certain action, would it not be better to avoid doing that action, even if one cannot articulate the reason why the action should be avoided?
There are unmistakable emotional impulses towards right action that occur periodically, and we should train ourselves to obey them unhesitatingly.
No time should be spent seeking a logical reason for these impulses. Simply obey them. You know they are right - right for you, at any rate.
This knowledge, at critical moments, of what is right and wrong is an instance of thought without the use of words.
This knowledge arises from a level of the mind deeper than the layer on which thought-images combined with verbal expression operate.
When the deeper levels of the mind are in harmony with the outermost layer (we took McDougall as our authority for speaking of mental "layers" and "levels"), then a man is at peace with himself and the universe.
For such a man, the paradox "Right speech is right action" is no longer a paradox. The majority of us, unfortunately, are filled with Freudian complexes that make it nearly impossible to have harmonious speech and action. This is why we say "He acted against his better self."
Translated into modern psychological terms, this phrase would read "The layers of his mind were not acting in unity."
Once the masses are sufficiently educated, a new terminology for mental operations will need to come into being.
Terms such as "conscience," "intelligence," "will," and "reason" - which are psychically identical - will fall into disuse, just as words like "humours" and "faculties" have already fallen.
The greatest lesson of modern psychology is that the mind is not a collection of separate powers, but rather a single power that uses the entire body as its instrument.
L. Woolacott, 1920
Rephrase it into a flowery, archaic style, making it sound like old English or Shakespeare.
Verbless, Imageless Thought
Ernest Osborne's trifling tract on "Thought" in the Lone Hand for June sparked a discourse that lasted two hours amongst some of my companions. The principal conclusions are here distilled for your benefit:
If the possibility of verbless, imageless thought exists, is it not further proof of the importance of heeding the dictates of conscience without delay, even if those inhibiting impulses cannot be expressed in words?
For example, if one becomes cognizant of a disquieting sensation when about to undertake a particular action, would it not be wiser to abstain from that action, even if one cannot articulate the reason for avoiding it?
There are unmistakable emotional impulses towards virtuous action that recur at intervals, which we should cultivate the habit of unhesitatingly obeying.
No time should be wasted seeking a logical justification for these impulses. Simply obey them. You know they are right - right for you, at any rate.
This knowledge, at crucial moments, of what is right and wrong is an instance of thought untainted by words.
This knowledge springs from a level of the mind that lies deeper than the layer where thought-images combined with verbal expression operate.
When the deeper levels of the mind are in accord with the outermost layer (we took McDougall as our authority for speaking of mental "layers" and "levels"), then a man is at peace with himself and the universe.
For such a man, the paradox "Right speech is right action" is no longer a paradox. The majority of us, alas, are afflicted with Freudian complexes that make it almost impossible to have consonant speech and action. This is why we say "He acted against his better self."
Translated into modern psychological terms, this phrase would read "The layers of his mind were not acting in harmony."
Once the masses are sufficiently educated, a new terminology for mental operations will need to come into being.
Terms such as "conscience," "intelligence," "will," and "reason" - which are psychically identical - will fall into disuse, just as words like "humours" and "faculties" have already fallen into obsolescence.
The greatest lesson of modern psychology is that the mind is not a concatenation of separate powers, but rather a single power that employs the entire body as its instrument.
L. Woolacott, 1920
ChatGPT Mar 14 Version
. Free Research Preview. Our goal is to make AI systems more natural and safe to interact with. Your feedback will help us improve.
New chat