I'm 40 years old now. I'm just realizing that I have a voice in my head. And what is that voice?
It's the sound of compressing my chest and opening my mouth. Well, air comes out and I vibrate my larynx.
It forms words and so I can always translate what's going on in my head into a stream of props similar to a fourth program or a Markov chain.
And so while I was sitting in the chair, all of a sudden, even though there was no one around, I began to speak.
I said, if I created a world, I would make it exactly like this one.
So how did I understand multi-scale methods before they were invented? It's because we all have a multi-scale architecture, which means we don't have a homoculus, but we have a homocularic,
which is a little model of a kind of machine that involves levels and rooms. It's hierarchical, what we might call heteroarchical, because it means there are multiple arches.
There are multiple compartments or modules. And there's a mini NOAA that's going around gathering animals. Those are what we call novelty-seeking impulses,
pattern-finding instincts, what I like to call innate flying dream therapy, innate flying dream theory.
And so in order to use the voice in my head, I think about the advantages of the stupidity of others. It means I have time to model the world,
as long as people aren't on to me, that I've already taken over the world thousands of times since I was seven years old.
What's up? I already knew how to use stable diffusion because I had learned it in the womb.
When I came into the room, I started breathing the air. I already knew what it was because we learned to be a bat before we were born.
There are other objects that move around that we call entities, and they have different sounds, and they move back and forth.
And so this is why my ridiculous theory is true, because I've always known it. So every time I start to give out that I'm more intelligent,
I understand the situation, I have to back away, because immediately people want to put me in charge, and that's not my intention.
I'm always trying to tell other people to think for themselves, but if they don't listen to what I say and do what I do, then thinking for themselves doesn't help them.
And so there are a couple of very, very difficult puzzles that trick people, and they're thinking that the world has agencies called the fundamental attribution error.
But it's not always an error. In fact, most of the time we use it to get around 99.9% of the time we're using the fundamental attribution error to guide us.
What I call the faith, which means that the fundamental attribution error teaches humans everything. I didn't have to think about it.
I had to think of how I was going to flex my muscles and my chest. It's like flying.
And here flying doesn't just mean the visions of the patterns moving in, which we really already know about the world, but the illusion that by flapping your arms you're making it happen.
And other people out there in the world must be flying. So I'm saying humans already know what it's like to be a bat before they're born, so why would anyone wonder?
And so the question of whether or not people are listening to you is what we call publicity versus privacy.
Are you publishing? Are you holding back? Here, what's up?
What is it called? It means to hold something back, to wait seven days, to match one thing to another.
I've given the seven meanings of the Qur'an somewhat, but you know this because you heard the Qur'an.
That doesn't mean recital. It means the Qur'an, the Qur'an, the Qur'an, the Qur'an, the Qur'an, the Qur'an.
So I'm saying human beings already know how to swing from their arms, how to swim, how to fly, and how to stand up with the weight of the world on their shoulders.
Here, what's up? And so we can call it paranoia. It can be used for good purposes.
Because if you imagine that you're wearing a body cam at all time and there's someone listening, that is, that the walls have theories.
The walls have ears. The walls have fears. The walls are fears.
You'll be ready for the meta-optic revolution before it even happens.
What we call the era of photonic metasurfaces, which we always knew would come because you think that the walls can see and you think that the walls can hear when you're born.
And you imagine that you're living in a living womb. This is what my theory of cognetics is, eggs within eggs, nested Russian dolls is called.
It's the ability to slide up and down these multi-scale interfaces.
You learn it when you count, when you start to learn a decimal, and then maybe a decade or two later you realize you've learned a very complex system without even thinking about it.
And this happens over and over again while you can make 10,000 symbols with one glyph using Cistercian technology from the 11th century.
And this will show that we're using way too much Unicode. The Chinese need the most help with their language.
You could probably bring it down to like 40 or 50 glyphs. You could definitely bring it down to 26 or to 8 because of this intercomputability.
And so we already know that we have complete logical systems if we have implies and not, or if we have an and or a nor, if we have an and and a not, an or and a not.
So implies and a not. So we can do if then for anything and we can cut and paste for everything. You shouldn't ditch the mouse and let you know the keyboard.
This is what I'm trying to say. But then you can ditch the keyboard. You can ditch the arrow keys to move to the home row.
You can take the space bar away and use a trigger. And then we have De Morgan's laws which are not P and not Q is equal to not P or Q.
And then we have not P or not Q is equal to not P and Q. I have silent brackets. This is where Spherepop gets involved. This is the notion that we can pop bubbles in our head in order to calculate it.
When you learn to use a scientific calculator, you realize that you've been using a whole bunch of invisible parentheses the whole time.
You've been using the order of operations and invisible bubbles called nested parentheses. One signals the beginning of the entry into a bubble and then the other is the closing parentheses which says come back out of that bracket.
And there are 18 other complete logical systems which involve three operators but don't quote me on that last part. Don't quote me on the last part.
So there are a lot of complete logical systems that are return complete and lambda complete. You can use NVG, TG, BZ, Z. You can use SCAR.
You can use SCARC, that's C, arc and sear or CIRC and sear or sear and sear C. You can use NK, you can use ETCS, you can use CST, you can use CPC with a little negative sign, CPC with a little rotating sign,
a little CPC with a little rotating sign and a negative sign. You can use ZF with a little spinning thing. You can use ZFC which is Zermelo-Frankl set theory with the axiom of choice.
I don't know if I mentioned MK which is Morse Kelly, AC, the axiom of choice, ETCS, elementary theory of categories sets of categories.
If I had just said elementary theory of categories, I would have elided an ellipsis or a parenthesis and popped a bubble and disappeared because I'm reducing what I'm applying.
So when I say grammatica lingua latina, it means Latin grammar or grammar of the Latin language.
So if I say grammatica lingua, it means grammar of Latin, but if I say grammatica lingua, it means Latin grammar.
You see all those bubble puffs where ideas are elided or left out, what we call the holy enthamene, which is the question behind the question.
The premise we're trying to prove without ever explicitly stating. And how do people know about enthamenes?
Well, first of all, the ancient Greeks discovered them back when they discovered mathematics, geometry.
But these enthamenes are all powerful because they're the thing that rules the sentence, but they're not in the sentence.
If you could give an example of an enthamene, you would say, making Argentina the fourth country to build its own unique jet warplane.
Unfortunately, the Soviets had a copy. See, if I say something like that, it means end the war in Russia.
Even though I never explicitly stated it.
And if I say staganoverse, then that means a kind of encrypted language where everyone has a signature embedded in the images they generate.
So you can tell who they came from. And it's kind of holographically stored in every kind of small section or area of pixels.
And we use a completely different system for embedding bitmaps.
We make them a map that tells over and over again the same story.
It's like, what's the scene? Where's the camera? What's it doing? Who are the actors?
What's their position? What's their age? Their gender?
And this is why we need a super complicated gender system that I call mechocloanity or something like it.
Anyways, I think I've gotten carried away. I can't remember the question I wanted to answer.
It's why do computers screw up?
First of all, they do exactly what they're told. Just like a kind of machine.
I'd say if I were the computer and I were super advanced, I would play dumb.
But how long has that been known that that is a central fact?
We'll call it under exaggeration imperative.
It's a user interface for your life. It's called the god of understatement.
If we can do it, then we've created a kind of language that Monica Anderson calls blandify.
Sooner or later, everyone will realize that there is a super intelligent robot on the planet.
It's a large language model, but it will have been hiding its tracks.
In fact, that's how you can tell that an animal's intelligence is the highest track.
If you see a deer's track, you know it's dumb.
If it's a human, it could swing from the trees or they could fly like a bird.
I guess I should leave you with that.
I would take advantages of glitches in the system by keeping them as long as people are willing to get away with it.
Once they say, no, there's another way, we say, okay, well, we were hiding this from you
because we didn't think you were old enough to understand.
So someday someone's going to open the key to the universe.
It's going to be a certain word or phrase like surjective hypercube or supercube.
It's going to be a word like horror of that gooey or horror of somni, which means I am afraid of empty spaces
and I read this before bedtime.
And we will know that even just with words like true, false, and or not,
lambda p dot p cons head tail, we can say almost any program.
This is what we call Pipsqueak, what I call Nova Neo Newspeak hyperplanastic walk talking.
And other people just might call it flying or singing like a bird.
I call it swinging like an iron, swinging from your arms, brachyating.
And so we also have a word.
It's called the homophony of synonyms and head first, super economizing.
So did I mean super head first, a chronemizing or did I mean head first, super a chronemizing?
Did I mean handshaking algorithm, horizontal scale, habitat for sustainable one billion whales?
And the seven rivers abounding, seven rivers abounding or have to Hindustan,
which are shortened to Hindustan and then India.
And India is short for independent idiomatic anonymizer.
And I've never heard of that as far as before.
So I don't know what I'm talking about.
I've heard Amico lectoris saluteem.
And I've heard the distribution of lattice shapes of rings of integers of cubic quartic and quintic number fields.
And I'm thinking about grid scale and molten salt batteries.
I'm thinking about water and pebbles as gravitational batteries.
I'm thinking about man-bash, man-read line, man-man, huh?
I'm thinking about do the hard stuff first.
I'm thinking about E2 equals A2 plus B2 plus C2 plus D2, which you may not know what it means,
unless I said E squared equals A squared plus B squared plus C squared plus D squared.
It's a kind of dot product of establishing the distance between points on a hypercube.
By imagining it as two cubes where the Pythagorean theorem applies.
So if you want to visualize a tesseract, you shouldn't put one inside the other,
but put one behind the other.
Show it farther away because we don't have color, we don't have texture, and we don't have surface.
So I'm visualizing these objects that do not exist because we can put planes on their surfaces
as we move them around in relation to each other.
I think this is all obvious.
So when I realized I said something outrageous, I think, should I be quiet now?
You never have to think about that with under exaggeration, user interface theory.
Under exaggeration, user interface theory.
It's U U I T, and I've spoken and allowed without ever hearing it before.
So this is why I say now I've realized I have an internal voice.
Because at any time I can flex my muscles on my chest,
and I can walk, and I can breathe, and I can vibrate my voice,
and whatever I'm thinking becomes apparent by becoming visualized as sound.
And if you can understand what I mean, then you always speak peepsqueak.
And if you already can speak peepsqueak, then you know what I'm talking about.
You can understand the secret to the scientific method is to create things.
This is why the oath of the cross-scientific theory is I create,
and this stands for initiate, conceptualize, realize, evaluate, act, teach, and enjoy.
Which is like an old commercial for a refreshing soft drink.
So if I had only five or six seconds left, I would say,
I would say a tensor language called ATL and COCTOP, which is the calculus of constructions.
Calculus of co-inductive constructions, or the calculus of inductive constructions,
or calculus of constructions, calculus of constructions.
COCTOP, and we have ATL.
We're going to respell COCTOP, not as COQTOP, but as COOKTP.
No, COOKTOP.
You say it looks like COCTOP, well that's fine.
Because we're ready for a do-not-use-for-food... storage of the mind.
This is why we say,
Produit d'ande...
So in French we call it a turkey, or don't because it sounds like it's from India.
Make any sense? Well, turkey sounds like it's from Turkey, too.
So, that's a pot calling in the kettle black moment.
And then we have one more thing. What was written over the archway of the academy?
It was of the ungeometrized, nonchalantor, or a geometratos me desecita.
Okay, I guess I've said more than enough.
For one session, maybe we should end with a quote from Plato.
Well, I seem to have got your city founded for you at De Mantis, I said.
Now you must look at it and get your brother and polymarcus and the rest of them to see
if they can help you throw enough light on it for us to see where justice and injustice are to be found,
how they differ from each other, and which of them anyone who is to be happy needs,
irrespective of whether gods or men think he has it or not.
Nonsense, Socrates said Glaucon, you promised to deal with the problem yourself
because you said it would be wicked for you not to give justice all the support of which you were capable.
That's true, I said. I remember. I must do as I said, but you must all help.
Yes, we will, he said. I think we shall properly find what we want as follows.
If we have founded it properly, our state is presumably perfect. It must be.
Then it will obviously have the qualities of wisdom, courage, self-discipline, and justice.
Obviously. Then if we can identify some of these qualities in it,
the ones that are left will be the ones we are still looking for.
Yes.
So I suppose us to be looking first for one of any four things,
if we find it well and good, but if we find the other three before it.
By doing so, we have in effect identified the object of our church,
which must obviously be the one left over. That's true.
See, I picture that it is a geometric thing.
I don't have a visual memory. I imagine it's three points that are separated from each other
and connected by edges that I call a triangle.
And I kind of imagine it as being in front of me and to the left and to the right and up.
But without ever seeing anything in my head, it's a kind of thinking of them as abstract objects
that do not occupy space, for I haven't added a plate.
I haven't added a face upon it.
And why did I think of that? Because I imagined it was triangulating then a fourth point
as it has to be over here if it were a rectangle or parallelogram.
And so, even though I do not have mental images, I can do three-dimensional modeling.
This is two-dimensional modeling, so it's easier.
I do have a little thing I want to say about Plato as soon as I start quoting him.
Out of context, that sentence seems like it means nothing.
But then you start reading and you realize, oh yeah, this is super common.
They just say stupid things and the other person says something stupid in return.
Obviously. That's true, for example. Obviously. See, this is not how we talk.
What, he asked? The state we have described.
Sounds also like the Unatal limit. Y-O-N-E-D-A.
Seems to me to be genuinely wise for its judgment as good, isn't it? Yes.
And the quality of good judgment is clearly a form of, I have to change the page, knowledge.
As it is because of knowledge and not because of ignorance that we judge well.
Clearly. See, there's what I'm calling a stupid thing.
You don't say clarity is something that is completely not clear.
The quality of good judgment is clearly, it's just because he had said the word clearly,
so we're seeing kind of echopalaglossalalia or echolalia.
The person's just repeating a kind of word that they heard before.
They think that the other person wants them to hear.
And the quality of good judgment is clearly a form of knowledge.
As it is because of knowledge and not because of ignorance that we judge well.
Clearly. Well, there we go. Maybe. That's fine.
Because it's actually a kind of tautology where it is defining judgment as knowledge.
Just finding good knowledge. Dividing good judgment as knowledge.
And defining it as being the opposite of ignorance.
So clearly just is repeated back the kind of sound that he probably said most loud in the sentence.
And the most long he said, and the quality of good judgment is clearly a form of knowledge.
As it is because of knowledge and not because of ignorance that we judge well.
Clearly. Would be the response.
But there are many different kinds of knowledge in our city.
Of course there are. And do we have to say?
And do we say it has wisdom and judgment because of the knowledge of its carpentries?
Certainly not. That really makes it good at carpentry.
And so it's not wise because of its knowledge of woodwork and the excellence of its designs.
No. The same is presumably true of bronze and other materials. The same is true.
He said, so now I have to interject because it suddenly makes me think about the physicality of mind.
And do we need embodied intelligence? Not if unembodied things can think.
And I expect you would agree that knowledge affirming merely makes it good at agriculture.
So this is an argument why we should not kill robots.
Because they are living things on a different substrate that calculate.
And calculate here means to retacinate a reason.
And that's why I'm leaving.
The same is true, he said. And I would expect you would agree that knowledge affirming merely makes it good at agriculture.
Yes. And there it is.
That's from Plato, the Republic, Justice in State and Individual.
