But for the real family entertainment at its most sublime you'll have to wait till after Christmas
when Star Wars opens in London. Even by the standards of Hollywood, a place where nothing
succeeds like excess, Star Wars is a phenomenon. It only opened in America at the end of May,
but already it's the biggest box-office hit in cinema history, having grossed the best part
of $200 million and the United States alone. Perhaps one important reason for this immense
popularity is that it somehow combines elements of all the best-loved themes of romantic adventure,
from the Arabian Knights to the Western, from the Knights of the Round Table to science fiction
and space fantasy. Alec Guinness as a sort of elderly space-age chagallahad is the best-known
actor in the film. The juvenile leads being played by Harrison Ford, Mark Hamill and Eddie
Fisher's daughter Carrie as the kidnapped princess. But the real stars I fancy will turn out to be
two robots known as C3PO and R2D2. Ironically enough Star Wars was turned down by two studios
before 20th Century Fox agreed to back it without too much initial enthusiasm and with
a comparatively modest budget of £6 million. Even more ironically most of the spectacular sets and
the live action scenes, which are about half the strength of the picture, were created by British
technicians at Elstree Studios. But of course none of the monstrous profits will come back
to support our own local film industry. In fact the overwhelming success of the picture surprised
everybody including Fox, the producer Gary Kurtz and the director George Lucas. Had they been able
to predict it we should already be inundated with commercial spin-offs such as toy models of R2D2
and C3PO. They won't be here in time for Christmas but ray guns, space ships, t-shirts, posters and
Star Wars wallpaper, bubble baths and breakfast foods should be on the market pretty soon. As one
Fox executive put it it's not so much a film it's more an industry and the man chiefly responsible
for both film and by extension industry is the writer and director George Lucas who spent years
writing and rewriting the script until he felt it was good enough to go into production.
And the script which is like everyone's nostalgic memory of glorious Saturday morning matinees
is quite as important to the overall film as the special effects. George Lucas is best known or
wasn't till now for American graffiti but I suppose the initial seed of Star Wars was
shown in his first picture a science fiction story called THX-138 made when he was a 27 year
old graduate of film school. It's really quite irritating to think that even while he was making
that picture George Lucas was already mulling over ideas for Star Wars and now five years and
only two films later at the age of 32 he's so rich he need never work again. Oh well it's no
good being jealous he's a good director and deserves his success. Damn him.
you
