I had this term that I started using a long time ago. Back when I was a Nike
So I have to tell you a story and it's a quick story. Hopefully I'll keep it under 10 minutes this time
so I started getting successful as an engineer because I was you know self-taught as auto didact and blah blah blah and
you know, it's like he's internals webmaster and
You know, I knew Linux and and other people didn't even know what it was. This is like what 97 and
A bunch of stuff like that if I actually had it the infrastructure team come to me and say
Can we put it? Can we put Apache in Linux on your systems?
They don't like yeah, that's fine because they wouldn't do it
They wouldn't put Apache on there. They would have to put Netscape on there
Anyway, but what started happening is because I had a really great manager Barb. Love you to death, you know
She's still happy and healthy
And she she really stuck up for me and she really helped me out and she was watching out for me
and all kind of thing and
But she also and she was she wasn't this isn't about managers sucking
I don't want anybody to do misunderstand
This is this dumb term that I came up with that I that I don't have a better term for but what managers suck is is it's when
You get asked to go to these to these meetings because you're an SME you're a subject matter
as
And s let's put the as an SME subject matter expert. So so subject matter experts get pulled in
Subject listen with this subject matter experts
Get pulled into meetings
More and more okay, and then what happens is their skills go down
So I this happened to me I they started, you know
I wanted a word because I set up their internet blah blah blah and I started getting you know some reputation
With the company I was a real go-getter
I would go out and people would call me on the phone and they had questions about how to how to put their
Department on the net it was really great time to be there because they wanted everybody wanted to put their their first website inside of the
Company they want to put it up and they would call my phone
And so I would go out it's kind of like a salesman I'd go out there
You know my Mormon missionary training worked well, and I would say okay, what do you need?
You know we need this and this and this and this and I'd say okay
Let's work with you on that and I would help them to to put their their thing up right and and so
The inevitable result of that was I started getting sort of this reputation as this you know
You know have tech will travel kind of internal consultant that would walk around all over the place and help people out
And so obviously because it's like it's very matrix management
It's very very you know Lucy goosey in terms of who you report to what you your time
And so they say as long as you're helping out
I mean you're there are customers so so they would ask for me to come to all these meetings
Right, and I got stuck. I got stuck in meetings. I was like spending so much time in meetings that I was actually getting disconnected
From the technology
From the tech the thing that makes
That makes you an SME
So and that's a super dangerous. This is this is a dangerous risk
I want to make sure everybody understands this
You made meetings optional cool
So but as you're entering your career particularly when you're getting successful because you're you're a go-getter and you're an autodidact
You got lots of energy and you want to help people you're there for the customer. You're not there for the tech
Yeah, that's another we do a whole video just on that right you're being paid to help provide a service
You're not being paid to screw around with cool tech. I
Hate to break it to you
It's the way it is so you need to be there
You know you need to be touch grass touch code
Yeah, I do and so you're gonna get pulled into a lot of meetings and and it's actually happened to my friend of mine
Beware of becoming someone's pocket tech, okay?
And you know pocket tech right you like you guys are like pocket medic from TF2
Do you know I'm talking about you get that rough maybe you do if you're gamers
But actually I have a friend who became a pocket tech for CTO of a big company and he loved it
He actually this this but he was he was like wind and dined
It was like he was like he was the the tech mistress for the CTO
I mean he seriously he got he got totally winded dying to go all these extra bonuses under the under the covers
Not it covers, but you know I mean and he loved it
We would tell we were sure even though I say you want to go rollerblading
I could do rollerblades today or you know, so it was like he had like a
Total like a guitar collection of all the stuff that he had because he was this pocket tech for this for the CTO
And they made the CTO look phenomenal, right? And maybe that's what you want. That's fine. If that's what you want to do
So
So the the the thing I just want to show you is that this is this is the kind of thing that can happen to you in the
enterprise so you can be
You can be stuck, you know and and I think it's really dangerous is wait. Is it flatters your ego?
Let's put that flatters your ego. So so you can be you can be you got to be aware of that
Beware right when somebody when somebody says, but you're the best and we want you in our meeting and and yeah
But I got these other things I need to do and I was gonna practice using Apache
You know X and Y or I was gonna learn Pearl or you know or Linux just has any release
And they don't care right because they just want what they want and you've been really good at providing for their needs
And that's when they really want you and so then they'll because you're largely doing it for free or not
You're getting paid to do it, but but and now you're they're competing over you
So this will happen. This will happen if you're good. This was I promise you this will happen to you because because you it's
Yeah, you'll mix pro 12 just dropped
So so you're not gonna have as much time to keep your hands in the code and actually you could make the case that the reason that the
SRE
Google made such a big stink about something that everybody was already knew doesn't matter
That you know SRE's met. Hey, you're an admin, but you have to have your hands in the code
And you have to stay, you know hands-on with with the operation stuff
So I mean this is this video could be really short. Just don't let yourself get flattered into
Becoming just a manager because because pretty soon
pretty soon
you will
start
to grow
pointy hair
And that is an internal cultural reference that I'll let you guys figure out
Stay close to the machine phrase that Ellen. Oh, I love it. Thank you Ellen Oldman
Said stay
Stay close to the machine if you get too far away from it
Then you're no longer relevant all the things that made you want to come there or not there
And you will grow pointy hair and pretty soon you guess what Daniel start looking for your own pocket techs
I've seen this happen so many times. I've seen engineers all of a sudden become
Architects right so soon as you start going to the architectural route now
You're just talking about the best choice that somebody should make instead of actually doing the engineering
You're not actually plugging things in and setting computers up anymore
And who knows what Kubernetes is going to do to all of this, right?
I mean, you know Kubernetes is is is already a thing
And so you're gonna get called into the architecture role and now you're like making decisions
You're you're being paid more to make the decision about what to use because they're they're but paying for expertise
Not for your immediate technical ex engineering expertise
Which got you that architectural knowledge and then what and now you're an architect now
You're doing stuff and you're doing nothing but architecture and you don't have time to get anything done anymore
So what do you do you hire engineers and then all those engineers are doing the the work
they're the ones with the hands-on and they get doing it and then you'd have to make a conscious decision and by the way
Unless I'm gonna put this
Unless you want to become a manager and there are a lot of people that would argue
That in the tech world at some point if you're gonna realize your value and this is why I actually left IBM based on a lie
That that you're you're not gonna get paid engineers don't make as much as managers bottom line. They don't they should
It's like an age-old problem, right?
The engineers if people that are doing the work if people who have the kick-ass skills that are that are crucial to the company
Do not make as much money as the decision makers and the architects and the
Distinguished fucking engineers. That's the title for my BM. It's a total lie. It's crock of shit. Don't ever believe it
the most the most
insanely
Underskilled people I have ever met at IBM were distinguished engineers and I left a great job at Nike
At least I thought I did one of the things that convinced me to go over to IBM from Nike because I was like
I don't want to work for that big ugly company and they were doing a peace love and Linux anybody remember
They were doing a big peace love and Linux campaign in the 90s and they wooed me over
They were like all about open source and they they've talked to big games all bullshit by the way
It's it's kind of not bullshit now. They bought red hat. So who knows they still kind of like I don't know make your own decision
But the point is they got me over there because they had this title called distinguished engineer
And this is the way I thought my career was gonna go it's like okay engineer engineer engineer engineer
No, not going to your SME meeting not going to your SME meeting staying an engineer making not a lot of money
Boom ceiling, right? I hit my ceiling. I can't make more money because I'm just an engineer
I'm just a programmer. That's all and then you have to decide
Do I make a cut over to management and then go management architect CTO now? You're just making money for bullshit reasons because
Honestly America or whatever
The salaries up in the CTO and CIO range no offense Jenny and others
They're they're not based on anything, you know, besides the theory, you know
The ether out there. I don't know what they're making
They're making money because there's a lot a lot writing on them that they if they go that they go bad, right?
So my my so actually mistakenly thought that the distinguished engineer position at IBM cries to see I
We have CIOs and CTOs who are beloved members of my community, but they know what I'm talking about believe me
They do otherwise I wouldn't be here
They're here because we're hands were boots on the ground here, you know, we're like engine we talk engineering stuff most of the time
And I and it's not the first time by the way. I've had multiple executives
They they know that I've like forcibly kept myself down and when I mean that I mean it
I mean, you know, I was I was offered in writing a quarter mill for, you know, a
CTO type position. I'm flexing here. I'm just trying to say I could do it if I wanted to I
Just haven't I've forcibly kept myself down and and it's hard
It's hard because there's big money there
But but I would rather have my hands in the tech and and you know, and I've even talked to my media manager about this very problem
So
Why don't engineers organize themselves? Oh, are you talking about going against the the the bigger power powers of you?
So let me just finish the story of the distinguished engineer thing
So I thought that IBM I thought a distinguished engineer. Oh my god that title is so cool
That title is so awesome. It's like they're an engineer. They're still getting paid executive money, but they're still hands-on engineers
Right. There's a there's a title out there right now called staff software engineer, right?
And I don't know if that's I actually put it in my title for YouTube
I think it's like it's like does that actually mean that they're hands-on that they're gonna continue that some companies actually
Gonna pay what you're worth and experience. I mean, seriously, seriously, if I were paid for every bit of experience in my 50s
you
Know if I was paid paid for every single thing in my in my 50s including all my language skills and everything else
I would be making crazy gobs of money, but nobody pays you for every skill that you have unfortunately not in this world, so
Staff and it was my entry-level title staff engineer was your entry-level title. You're kidding me really?
Because that's actually that's actually a pretty they can't decide what title to use it doesn't really matter
It's like, what are you doing right? What are your skills? So so that I'm gonna end this video now this video is really about
Choosing your own destiny. Do you want to be you know, I
Can't make it work captain, you know the Scotty who overestimates things and under dollars. There's a really great Bologna quote by the way
Captain Janeway says aren't you gonna tell me it's gonna take two weeks and do it in a day and she goes no that would be unethical
It was a direct stab against study. It's one of my favorite quotes from Bologna Torres and voyager
She also my second favorite quote from Bologna Torres and voyager is she says
Warriors
engineers build civilizations
Warriors get the glory and and I feel like that's true for for
for managers so like, you know engineers
build
civilizations and
and
managers
Get the glory and this goes all the way back to the Douglas Engelbart the guy who did the mother of all demos
He did the whole demo off of a team of engineers who set it all up for him and didn't even mention their names
So
Yeah
So that's that's kind of my point on that. Hopefully this is I mean, it's to be fun
I don't I'm not attacking you. Please don't feel attacked if you're in any of those positions, but please just know
that that that's a thing and
and
And we're gonna we're gonna we're gonna go ahead and leave it at that
If you want to stay an engineer, you're gonna you're gonna have to make sacrifices
You're gonna be working harder. You're gonna be you're gonna, you know
You'll have clout within the company and within your team, but you're probably not gonna get paid for it
And but you can easily leave that that team and go to any other team
The bet disadvantage of becoming a pointy-haired person manager or is because is now you're being paid based on seniority and
Picking order and managerial skills and those jobs are a lot harder particularly in the middle ranks
Don Tabscott in
Predict it in the digital generation back in the 90s that if you had middle in your name
You needed to get out of it because it was going to get eliminated
It was with a whole movement for you know
This this this crunching of hierarchies that happened because of the internet and he was right
He you know if there's if you're a middle manager
You were seeing this all over the point with Kubernetes and other stuff. We don't need you
You know we could you can you have engineers that are reporting directly to customers now and and and to the executives
And so there's there's far fewer
Layers in the middle and if you if you get pulled over into an SME role the next after that is probably a manager
Unless you can jump all the way up to an exec like a CTO or CIO you may end up in a spot
that's pretty precarious because
You are making a lot of money you're used to a lot of money
But you don't have the engineering skills to maintain that level of income and you you're you're you're betting on the possibility
That if they get rid of you and by the way, I've seen many many middle managers get chopped
You know why because they're the easiest to do because when when IBM made a massive layoff
And the people who got laid off with the people who got paid the most that was it
They didn't even look at their at their and we I went to my manager
I was like did they even look at the skill sets of these people?
They said no they took the people with the highest salaries and it got rid of them
And and I learned at that time to make myself a good deal
I kind of I didn't know for sure
But I kind of kept myself a good deal even though I was making enough and to do the job
So but that meant that I didn't get I never got chopped
I lived through three massive layoffs at IBM
And I was the one of two people left out on a team of 15 people that got got got let go because I was a good deal and
Because I had championed the architecture of the thing and I had kept myself an estimate with the hands-on skills
And I believe that's the reason I survived on that personally and I ended up leaving on my own terms
So that's into that video. Hopefully it'll give you something about
