Welcome, everyone. Today, we are very honored to have a keynote address by Barry Smith. Barry
is the director of the National Center for Romological Research. He's also Julian Park,
distinguished professor of philosophy, professor of biomedical informatics, professor of computer
science and engineering, and professor of neurology at the University at Buffalo in Buffalo, New
York. So today, we're going to hear him speak on command and control. Barry? Thank you, Ken.
So I'm going to start with a short video. It really is very short. The relevance of the
video will become clear later, but here it goes. Today, I'm going to be talking about command
and control. The birdsong that you just heard are going to illustrate a very important fact,
which is going to steer me through what follows, which is that control comes before command. So
the correct title for this talk should really be control and command, which sounds somehow
unnatural, but which is in fact doing more justice to the order of development in evolutionary
history. Now, the person who first explored control in the sense that we're interested in it in a
serious way, I believe, was Carl Buehler, who was a member of the Gestalt psychology movement on
the fringes, but he was central to what was then called the psychology of thought processes,
dengue, which we now probably would call cognitive science. And he was one of the founders of
psycholinguistics. He was incidentally supervisor of Popper's PhD, but he had many other famous
students, and so his influence is quite strong in not only in linguistics and psychology,
but also in sociology and behavioral biology. And Buehler's idea is that language is embedded in
behavior. So he was one of the first authors to talk about speech acts. And in fact, he was one
of the first authors to use the term speech act in his writings. And then language has three
fundamental dimensions. First of all, there's an innate dimension. So all human beings are born
with the innate capability to learn the language, and also with certain innate capabilities, for
instance, to acquire the use of the past tense or plurals and so forth. But of course, they don't
have an innate capability to speak Italian or German or Greek. They have to learn a specific
language. And one important dimension of everything I say and what follows is the dimension of
training or drill. And this is supplied by mothers, siblings, peers, and so forth, television.
That this is this is an inevitable compliment to the innate capabilities with which humans are
born. And then there are two types of behavior, which we find already in, for instance, nighting
gales that and illustrated by the the brief clip earlier that these are expression on the one hand,
which is what the the baby birds are doing and control, which is the main topic of what comes
next. So these birds are sending out an auditory signal. And they're doing this for several reasons.
So they are announcing a need to the parent or parents who are going to bring the food.
They're announcing a location and providing guidance for the parent to find them again.
They are out competing each other or trying to out compete each other. And this is a very
neat evolutionary trick to make them scream as loud as they possibly can. Because the ones who
scream loudest are the ones who have babies. And so gradually the ones who can't scream are
eliminated from the gene pool. But all that they are doing can be put together in one single function,
which is begging. And begging is a way of controlling the parent. What the parent does
is totally in the hands of what the babies want and what they express as what they want.
The parents are functioning entirely innately. The babies are functioning entirely innately.
The only thing which is new here is the begging function, which is switching the right switches
on the side of the parents to make them bring food. So this is control. Now it's not language.
What we have in the case of the Nightingales is not language. It's something which involves
audiovisual signals. So we can think about what the most primitive language might be. And Wittgenstein,
who was a contemporary of Bühler's in Vienna, although they almost certainly never met,
Wittgenstein has this idea of what might be one possible complete primitive language, which is
the language on a building site where we have a builder and an assistant. And the builder says
slab. And the assistant brings a slab. And so it goes. This is a similar language to the language
we find in a surgical theater where the surgeon says scalpel and the nurse brings a scalpel. So
this is a kind of language. And here again, we have multiple functions, but they're all unified
under a single heading. It's control all the way through. That's the only thing the language does.
Now, actually, there is some similarity between Wittgenstein's account of this primitive language
and Bühler's account of control, which was first identified in this paper by a long standing
collaborator of mine. And it's the paper describes the theory of language developed by Bühler,
which he called the organ on model. And it has three components, the sender, the receiver,
and the state of affairs in the world, which the sender is representing and which he wants the
receiver to represent. This is different from the more popular semantic triangle, which has three
components, which are symbol concept and referent. There's no real room for concepts in Bühler,
because he wants this to work for what we might think of as imageless or conceptless thought.
But what there is is the sign and the sound phenomenon in the case of auditory communication,
which are illustrated here in the middle. Everything else is concrete, or anyway,
it's concrete in the beginning, but it gets abstract as time goes by. So in the Nightingale,
we only have two components. We have the sender and the receiver. And there's control
affected from one side to the other. And there's control affected from the builder to the apprentice
in Wittgenstein's case. Now, Bühler adds to this organ on model what he calls the two-field theory.
On the one hand, there is deictic communication, which involves pointing or something similar
to pointing, because you're dealing with entities which are within the visual or auditory field
of both the sender and the recipient. Language allows a second kind of communication,
which we call symbolic communication, which relates to everything else in the universe,
the whole universe. I just referred to the whole universe by using a piece of symbolic
communication in the beginning of this sentence. Now, this means that we can effectuate control
in two ways. First of all, through deictic representation, where Boris tells his audience
to come and take this brick by pointing to it and holding it in his hand and showing it to the audience.
And then thereby asserting deictic control over the audience, they all want to come and get his
brick. I'm making up this story, by the way. And this is the symbol that he's using in order to
emphasize this pointing expression, effectuating deictic control. And then a second case, which is
symbolic control. Boris wants somebody in the audience to bring him a fly ash clay brick.
And to do that, you might use a symbolic chart of different kinds of bricks and compare the
chart to the bricks that you have available and then bring one of those bricks. It doesn't matter
which brick you bring, so long as it is of a certain type. Such activities are possible for
human beings. They are the basis of language. And they are impossible for non-human animals.
Symbolic representation is what is new. So this is the two field theory. I'm just summarizing it now.
And well, you can see that the symbolic field can allow us to use language to relate to what
happens in the future. This is what makes planning possible to what happens in some remote spatial
region, which we are not now present in, so we can plan our holidays in Mallorca, for instance. But
then there is an abstract realm. And this is the realm that we make. Abula was not so interested in
this abstract realm. But the beginning of his discussion of the abstract realm lies in his
account of group behavior. And for Abula, it's group behavior, which is responsible for the origin
of language. So human beings needed language because human beings started certain sorts of group
behavior which were organized. So organized group behavior is what is responsible, according to
Abula, for the origin of language. And we can see some examples here. Planning for the next harvest
is an obvious one, but also hunting and so forth. And why is language needed here? Because what is
needed is mutual control. Abula often used the word steering for control. Mutual steering of the
behavior of different members of the group. Now, this is easy in the deictic case. You can push
your apprentice around, take him by the ear and point to a brick and pull him towards the place
where the brick needs to be deposited. You don't leave language for that. You can use violence.
But when you're dealing with the goals which involve objects and states of affairs which lie
beyond the deictic field, then you have to use symbols. And that's why symbols, symbolic language,
that is to say language, began to exist. But now symbols are not enough. Symbols are really difficult.
No animal can cope with symbols. But humans, all humans cope with symbols. And that's because
the, our ancestors who were unable to cope with symbols did not have as many children as those
who could cope with symbols. And that's why we have an innate capacity to learn language.
What is, but then we have to learn a specific language. We have to learn the codes of the people
we are living with. And for that we need training, continuous training. So even when we're adults,
we're constantly being trained into the correct or appropriate use of language. And the training
involves sanctions if we misuse language. Sometimes we misuse language by using it incorrectly.
Sometimes we misuse language by using it too correctly. And then we're punished because we sound
too pompous. And this is a constant fine-tuning of language among all the people around us.
Sometimes we speak multiple different languages because we mix with different crowds. And all
of this is possible because language depends on training. And note that this is a very important
Bula point. And the more recent Speech Act theorists did not really emphasize this point because
they were interested in the philosophy of language. Bula was interested in the biology of behavior.
And so what he emphasized was that when, as we learn language, we also learn the behaviors
associated with those uses of language, including strictly linguistic behaviors such as promising,
but then also non strictly restrict, non strictly linguistic behaviors, which are illustrated,
for instance, by football hooligans at a football match who shout rough things about the Liverpool
football team while at the same time defending themselves against the attacks, the physical
attacks of fans of the Liverpool football team. So behavior and language are interrelated. And we
see this also in cases like airline pilots who learn a special language, which they use when they
are piloting their planes, or terrorists, for instance, Islamic terrorists who use a special
language when they are performing their terrorist acts. Okay, now, John Searle, of course, is the
most conspicuous of the latter day Speech Act theorists. And he has, he has explored the created
world, the world that we create by speaking. And this is the world of claims, obligations,
rights, and so on. And Searle says that these entities exist because we represent them in language.
And that's correct. What what Searle does not talk enough about, in my view, is the behaviors
associated with these things, which are learned as we learn language through the same processes of
training and sanction. All right, so these are all Speech Acts, Marryings, Promisings, and each
one of these changes the world. But there are various background conditions which have to be
satisfied, which were identified already by Austin. So you have to, when you're marrying, you have to
use the right ritual phrases. You have to have a legitimate authority. Everyone has to be sincere
in their intent. And the addressee, the wife who is being iced if she commits to the marriage,
has to accept the marriage. She has to say, I do. And they have to speak a common language.
Everybody has to understand the language in which the ceremony is being held. And sometimes, of
course, two languages might be used to make sure that both parties are understanding the details
of what is taking place. When the priest declares the couple man and wife, then he performs a Speech
Act and the world, according to Searle's view, changes instantaneously. But now we're not interested
in that instantaneous change. We're also interested in how this marriage bond between two people is
sustained in existence. So the initial creation can indeed take place just by Speech Acts or by other
ever-nescent phenomena such as handshakes. And in a small community, in a village, memory is enough,
everybody remembers that Jack married Mary. And so Jack remains married to Mary forever,
because if Jack behaves badly in the village, then he will be sanctioned. But if you're dealing with
a larger society where people move around a lot, memory doesn't work. And so the next important
component in this presentation is documents. So when you're in the larger society,
it's documents which preserve created entities like claims and obligations. They preserve them
in existence. And that's why we have paper contracts, why we have registry offices,
why we have magistrates, where we have written plans. The existence of these things documents the
beginning to exist of the claim or the obligation or the commitment, but then it sustains the claim
or the obligation or the commitment in existence over time and allows the original contract to be
checked, for instance. Now, Searle, in his book Making the Social World from 2010,
uses on the cover a very interesting example of all of this, which is again the case of marriage.
What sustains marriage in existence? Well, in part, it's the marriage contract. It's the certificate.
This is Elvis Presley's marriage certificate. That is what I learned from the internet, at least.
And this contains what Searle would call a standing declaration. A declaration is normally
something which is associated with the Speech Act. Searle says that you can associate declarations
also with documents. And this document contains the phrase, join in lawful wedlock.
So Elvis Presley joins in lawful wedlock to Priscilla Ann Bollier.
This means that as soon as the certificate is signed, this relation of lawful wedlock
obtains between these two people. Now, this is another standing declaration. It's not from new
Jersey. It's from the island of Jersey. It's on the Jersey five pound note, which is always,
and as a matter of necessity, identical in value to a British five pound note.
It's signed by the treasure of the states of Jersey who promises to pay the bearer five
pounds on demand. Now, the nature of this promise is unclear. I'm using it here solely to illustrate
the idea of a standing declaration, which is how a document preserves something in existence over
time. In this case, something like the value of a piece of paper. All right. Now, documents too,
all by themselves are not enough to guarantee sustainability, a value or whatever it else
it might be. What we need further again is training. So when you become a lawyer,
you spend six years or however long it is,
becoming trained in how to use documents, how to understand documents, but also how to use
documents. And the same applies in other spheres, wherever documents are important. Nowadays,
wherever paper documents, but also digital documents are important. So this view that
the world of created entities is maintained in existence by documents is now being transformed
because digital documents are taking over from paper. And now we get to command and control.
So as I think most of you know, the army has a command called TRADOC, the training and doctrine
command. Doctrine is a set of documents, which is used as the basis for training the army so that
the soldiers in the army at different levels can perform certain acts, speech acts on the one hand,
but also acts of other kinds, including commanding acts on the other hand. And the army doctrine
hierarchy is a hierarchy of publications. So TRADOC makes the army. So the army is a created
entity just like a marriage or a bond of wedlock is a created entity. And the army, of course,
takes a lot more effort to sustain it in existence. And that's what TRADOC is for. So it designs the
army by changing the plans, which will hold of it in the future, particularly, of course, the plans
for training. But these are also then manifested in the way the plans for training, the rules for
training are documented in the corresponding planning and training documents. And then TRADOC
builds the army by isolating the people who are good enough to serve in the army and then isolating
the subgroups of that group, who are then going to be developed into becoming leaders of the army.
And all of this is taking place continuously, just as we are creating and preserving language
continuously. So TRADOC is creating and preserving the army continuously. It never ends.
And this is not just true of the army. All military services are subject to joint doctrine of which
army doctrine is logically subservient. And this is the joint doctrine hierarchy,
which again includes more general publications at the top, and then more specific publications down
as you get into the collection of publications that you see here before you, each one of which
points to a PDF file. One of them points to a dictionary. And the dictionary is designed
for human beings. It's a dictionary in the sense in which Webster's dictionary is a dictionary.
And of course, there's a problem because nowadays, the army is employing not just human warfighters,
but also all kinds of computational digital artifacts. And that there is an issue about
how we will extend doctrine to apply to those artifacts also. So military doctrine is there
to establish the common ways of accomplishing military tasks, the common rules, the common
plans, and so forth. Thereby facilitating readiness. You train and plan all the warfighters so that
they are ready to follow commands of specific types immediately because they've been drilled.
And those Lego bricks of activities that they can perform are used in the plans so that the
plans will require of the troops exactly those actions in which we have been drilled. So doctrine
is a guide to action, drilling people so that they can perform some actions, many kinds of actions,
which interlock like Lego bricks automatically and instantaneously. Just as we perform
those acts which are innate automatically and immediately the swallowing action, for instance.
There has to be no hesitation. And of course, the reason for this is because when the war starts,
you can follow the plans in the initial way because you have not yet met opposition.
But you need this spontaneous and automatic ability to follow commands also when the orchestrated
part of the war breaks down and you confront unanticipated obstacles. There you need to be
able to accept new commands which didn't fit into the plan but which still rely on your troops
being trained to follow those new commands spontaneously and automatically. All right,
so the doctrine hierarchy contains a dictionary, doctrine pub1-02, and the dictionary is
made for human beings. So if you can see on the left, it looks like Webster's dictionary. But for
computers, we built the joint doctrine ontology and you can see a small fragment of it here.
The blue at the top are BFO terms and the blue further down are terms from the Common Core
ontology, which was created by Kubrick here in Buffalo to address the needs of large military
organizations to have a very, very broad scale ontology to support interoperability of military
software. Just as the joint doctrine dictionary supports interoperability of human actions,
human systems, so the joint doctrine ontology and the Common Core ontologies are there to
support interoperability of machines. And then the idea is that because the joint doctrine ontology
is built to be logically identical to the dictionary which underlies joint doctrine for humans,
then the way in which the machines operate will be compatible with the way in which they are
supposed to operate if they follow joint doctrine. All right, this is another example that processes
a BFO term and then activity is a joint doctrine term and then there are various kinds of activities
such as operations and one important set of activities is control and here is where we get
the relation then between documents and control and very soon we're going to get the relation
between command and control. All right, so the army profession, army doctrine reference publication
number one, this is how TRADOC builds the army. So the army profession involves instilling in the
people selected to join the army five essential characteristics, expertise, honor, trust,
esprit de corps and long-term responsibility. So this means responsibility for things like veterans
and it all starts with something which is a speech act and we'll see what this is in the moment.
Making the army professional rest not just on training but also evaluating, testing and then
those people who pass the test enjoy credentialing and then they're assigned to various tasks
which are appropriate to their credentials and then their evaluation, their realization of
those tasks are evaluated and then the cycle begins again. So there's a constant cycle which
is a cycle of promotion of medals consisting of sequences of evaluation, action, evaluation,
command, evaluation and so forth and the people who've passed the tests who passed the evaluation
are promoted and now I'm just going to check whether there are lots of activities on the chat.
Nope, so I'm going to keep going.
So the TRADOC is responsible for making the army professional on the basis of joint doctrine
so that soldiers will coordinate spontaneously when acting in relevant circumstances.
Now I said that we would get gradually to command. Now there are speech acts which are what happens
when the commander issues a command but this is a document act. The symbols here are parts of a
language which other people can understand, other people who need to understand them and the stripes
on the shoulder and the stars on the lapel are all documents which are understood by the people
who need to understand them so that the relevant speech acts by the person who's wearing the relevant
uniform will have the relevant deontic effect and then this is the code to understand these
documents and on the right we have the way in which the army is organized in such a way that we can
see the command hierarchy from one level to the next and all the way down and this starts as I say
speech acts with a specific kind of speech act namely an oath and the oath has the structure
of the promise so the oath is to affirm support and defend the constitution of the United States.
This is a promise and this is the ontology of promising which we're going to use as the basis
for understanding the ontology of command. We will see that command is ontologically speaking the
other side of the coin from promising so the promise is a person, the promise is a person,
the promise is an act and it depends simultaneously on the promissor and the promisee. The relation
is a one-sided dependence relation, you can't have a promise without a promisee and the promise
itself has a complex internal structure, it consists of an act of speaking, an act of registering
and a certain content which is the content of what the promissor promises to do
and the act of registering is needed because the promisee has to register and and not necessarily
overtly or explicitly but by his registering consent to the thing which the promissor
wants to do, you can't promise to kill somebody unless there are very special circumstances
and there we have a case of three-sided mutual dependence so that particular content
is not just the content of a sentence, it's the content of that specific ritual act of speaking
accompanied by an act of registering by the promissor and then immediately two things come
into existence, the obligation on the side of the promissor and the claim on the side of the
promissor and what we have here is a two-sided dependence, you can't have an obligation without
a claim and you can't have a claim without an obligation and then we have the felicity condition
for this to be a promise rather than a sham promise, the promissor has to sincerely intend to do f
and another felicity condition is trust and there are background felicity conditions for
instance the promissor has to use the same language, he has to have the required expertise,
it has to be possible for him to perform the act and so forth and the promise gives rise immediately
not just to an obligation and a claim but also to a tendency to realize the thing which was promised
for instance mowing your lawn and that thing has to be done by or arranged by the promissor
now let's look at command, it looks very similar but it is in fact a mirror image, here
in the promise the promissor has the obligation, here the commander, the executor of the act of
commanding, the speaker has the claim and the commandee has the obligation and here the felicity
condition, the prime felicity condition is authority, the commander has to have authority over
the commandee, this trust may be involved in commanding but it's not the central felicity condition
and the sincere intention also has to be there and if we have time we will talk about what that
means but the sincere intention in the promise and the trust in the case of the promise are much
more central, in the case of the promise the one who promises does the act, in the case of command
the one who commands, the one who is commanded does the act and so the obligation is also a duty
and then in the case of commanding you have what is very rare and perhaps impossible in the case of
promising which is collective commands, this is possible but then also inherited commands,
commands which flow down a plan hierarchy, so plans consist of subplans and sub-subplans
and the command involves sub-commands which are themselves the result of duties on the part of
subservience subordinate commanders who have to follow the major command
by performing sub-commands to their commandees according to this hierarchy. Now this is very
similar to what happens in an orchestra, there you have the orchestral score which is the plan
followed by the conductor which is the ultimate commander in the hierarchy on the previous slide
and then the individual performers have their subplans which are the staves for the separate
instruments and this illustrates modularity of planning which is illustrated both in the musical
case and in the military case on this slide and here again we find the hierarchy of different
levels of expertise and different levels of training which we saw in the slides relating
to trade-off and in the slide relating to how to decipher the symbols which are the lapel stars
on the uniforms of the commanders involved in some military mission and this is how control
flows down, this is by now obvious, each one of these steps involves the realization of specific
elements of a plan at the first level, a subplan at the second level and a sub-subplan at the third
level and so modularity is present also in the case of the orchestra so each group of instrumentalists
forms a module corresponding to the elements illustrated here and modularity is a necessary
presupposition for a massive shared agency, you remember that we began with Bula's idea
that language came into existence because of organized collective action, organized collective
action requires language, massively organized collective action requires language which is
trained for specific sub-modules which means specific sub-groups of people who are organized
in a hierarchy and then in both cases the massively organized agency is possible because of
training and now this training is in many cases more properly described by using the word drill
so to learn to play a musical instrument means drill over years and this drill continues when
that you learn to play a musical instrument as part of a chamber ensemble or a whole orchestra,
you have to be drilled in performing your action in such a way that it's synchronized with
the actions of all the other instrumentalists and it's exactly the same applies where the
planners in the military are orchestrating a mission, this goes hand in hand with the
presupposition that you have troops which have been drilled in the relevant actions
but also where you have troops who have been trained in the relevant mission which corresponds
on the orchestral side to the relevant symphony and this is how to do things with documents
so you use the score to rehearse the orchestra and you couldn't rehearse without scores and the
sub-scores for the instrumentalists and you can't perform without either having so many
rehearsals that they all know the score of by heart or by having the score in front of the
instrumentalists so drill and documentation complement each other very nicely here you can't
you can have one without the other but you don't have anything without either one or the other
and the same is true in the military case so a joint mission is rehearsed and all its sub-plans
are rehearsed and the mission itself cannot exist without those rehearsals and the mission itself
can't be performed without rehearsals specific to this particular plan and but then there are
differences of course so c2 in the military has a much longer chain of command and c2 in the military
involves an enemy and there are no enemies other very rarely other enemies in orchestral
performance and so you you orchestrate a war but you never compose a war you compose a symphony
and then you orchestrate it all right now the final topic i'm going to talk about very briefly is
the difference between a plan specification and the plan so if you read a recipe in the
recipe book you may do that for fun with no intention of ever cooking but typically you
read the recipe in order to realize the plan which the recipe specifies the plan then exists in your
head when you decide decide to cook this particular dish so the plan specification is a document the
plan itself is a disposition in the minds of its realizers and now i'm not going to say very much
but that distinction underlies the joint planning process and i'll just go through it so
we know that we're going to need to invade iraq so we analyze the mission this is all
performed by the the staff of the relevant commander and then there is what is called
course of action development which means developing alternative plan specifications and then you test
these plan specifications you war game them you you run tests in in the field and then you compare
the results and then the general approves one particular course of action and then we we cease
to at that stage we have plan commitment course of action commitment at that point the plan begins
to exist in the general's head and then immediately the staff and the sub the subordinate commanders
also acquire the corresponding subplans in their heads no longer just plan specifications
no longer just documents but actual dispositions to act to command subordinates to control subordinates
in order to realize the plan and that is then the end of what i'm going to say and thank you all
very much and now i hope you're still there um let me see if i can uh good and now i'm not sure
if i pause share maybe i can see a bigger screen um i have a question please um i have worked in
the space business for a long time vaguely related to military but not exactly um and
everybody likes the metaphor of legos and the problem is it's really really wrong
legos fit together in only one way all of the other components and conditions fit together
in multiple ways and trying to think of them fitting together as legos is a really bad idea
says me so um that i i agree with you actually i think probably i will not use the lego analogy
anymore but just just for the sake of argument and this truly is just for the sake of argument
um i would note first of all that um legos fit together in multiple ways so when you buy a lego
brick set you're not restricted to make just one uh item you you can make many items so it's not
quite as bad as as you as you make it sound secondly in the military uh they have something
called the joint universal task list and then they have the army universal task list these are
so these are what i had in mind when i talked about lego bricks in light of your question i would
i i i would agree with you that they are to be fitted together in not in the way that lego
bricks fit together it's much more complicated much more messy than that but i would maintain
the idea that to make the army work you have to divide things up into small task units
otherwise you can't train you can't test you can't evaluate you can't war game you can't
do any of the things that the army has to do to train its troops agree so uh i think we're agreed
and i i promise not to use the word lego again well it's a metaphor that everybody understands
so i i know why it's used yeah yeah but it's not it is indeed misleading uh the the um as and as i
think about how the the juttles and the outlaws are used they're not they're not uh they're never
used in the way that lego bricks are used that there's always a lot more going on okay thank you
i have a question um i uh i love the the notion that you know that you these there's a strong
link between language and behavior that you you said a lot about the training of behavior
as i'm watching my grandchildren grow up and then we've got one year old and two two year olds
you know it seems play actually is a big component of learning behaviors and learning language
and i actually believe in the military play play something that's why there are war games it's a
play kind of thing so i wonder i'm just curious from your philosophy because training and drilling
is about taking a language and and and really reflect taking a behavior language and refining it
but what's the purpose in your larger construct of play yeah so that's a very interesting question
one of the areas in which carl boula was very influential was in the study of child behavior
and his wife charlotte boula was actually a world famous child psychologist he published a number
of important works in child psychology and they both lived in america at the end of the end of their
life so they they they survived the second world war and and she lived a very long life i think she
died in the 60s um and and i was as i say very influential now the role of play i think the
first thing to be said is that boys play hard they fight they they run risks they uh they run to the
edge of cliffs and this is an important evolutionary this is an innate tendency on the part of boys
and it's important from the evolutionary point of view what they're doing when they do that is
testing and discovering their limits and making making it the case that they push themselves
in their behavior to their limits and then the ones that push themselves too far die or anyway
they get injured they are subject to evolutionary obstacles thereafter this is an evolutionary
brilliant uh device to make sure that men come out as strong and as ambitious and and as gritty
as they can i'm getting carried away here um uh now play otherwise is uh is clearly initiation
for following rules so that we play not only the dare games that boys play that i dare you to
jump off this cliff uh that that that is not a rule-based game but then card games and and board
games they are um i don't think that that's going to be innate although i i'm willing to be
directed here but it's certainly something which plays an important role in allowing
children then to learn how to follow more important kinds of rules uh for instance when they um
uh when when they they join a large organization and there are company rules that they have to
follow and so again another question that would be interesting to consider is the role of video games
in a child development and whether it has the same sort of positive role that old more old
fashion board games have and i don't know the answer to that question but it would be an interesting
question to explore i agree thank you there's a quote from a movie the talented mr rippley
where uh i think it's with paltrow says why is it that when boys play they always play at killing
each other well now we know yeah i have a question this is mitch koker um so your
representation of command commanders and commandees or um reminds me like the pattern of
client and server in computer science and so the so the question is i can see that you
a commandee becomes a commander at a lower level so how do you model this in the ontology
practically because like in peer like in the client and server there's sometimes when you want to
move a system from client server to peer to peer all of a sudden you need a different class
peer yeah so do you need something like this in your oncology or or not yeah so bfo deals
with cases such as this by using the term role a role in bfo is something which is assigned to
an entity and the entity itself continues to exist it just has a new role and so the the commander
has the commander role at a certain time and in a certain situation but then at a later time
and in a different situation he has a commandee role and it's the same person all the way through
just two different roles now what we're going to have to do and this this is the interesting
next step and i i have to confess that bfo is not it has not been tested here whether whether
this can work but what we have to do is is to describe the authority relations on the one hand
between the commander and the commandee but then also the obligation relations
i have authority over you therefore you are obliged to follow my commands how we model
this obligation is is still a work in progress in the buffo community we need it in order to have a
bfo conformant ontology of law for instance we also need it to have a bfo component ontology
of everything which is involved in a hierarchical organization which is something that we are
working on at the moment so it's interesting that you mentioned now situation so finally it's very
closely related to the process so the question is do you have a notion of situation here ontology
yes so um that that is indeed an interesting question i'll be talking a little bit about
this tomorrow at the what is it tomorrow when we have the workshop i'm going to talk about
the way in which bfo will start to deal not merely with the counterparts in the world
of nouns but also with the counterparts in the world of sentences and to do that i need to
talk about situations and i i have a respect for situate the situation calculus but the
situation calculus will not work and i will explain why it will not work for our purposes
very interesting thank you very much hello i'm Gabriel Jacobson i'm here hello your presentation
had a kind of two parts one is a kind of uh builders psycholinguistic theory of of language
and second part was about the command and control language and speech acts in army so
i do have two questions for maybe questions comments one is regarding the builders psycholinguistic
theory you looked on language mostly as a instrument of communication
and the same time during evolution the language had a also different role in terms of language for
for internal reflection of the reality so otherwise kind of thinking so do you think so
that these two roles of language as a instrument of communication and instrument of reflection
played an equal role or there was a kind of prevailing on one of them now that's a very
interesting question um it throws light on my thought processes in putting this presentation
together i was i was pushing towards command and control which is the the almost the paradigm
example of language for communication in a in a big and powerful way you're not merely trying
to communicate you're trying to communicate in such a way that you exert control of a very strong
sort um and now if we bulla tended to emphasize the relationship between language and group
behavior in other words language used in communication um he in his earlier psychological
work he was associated with a group of people which were interested in the phenomenon of
languageless thought and um but now we what you're interested in is language full thought
which is not a matter of communication now bulla was to some degree influenced by hustle
who was the founder of phenomenology whose whole theory of language was based upon
solipsistic monologue so for hustle that's where you start that's the paradigm example of language
and that leads to a view of language used for communication which sees communication as a
kind of secondary subsidiary effect and i'm a big fan of hustle and i'm a big fan of bulla
i think in this respect bulla is correct communication came first thought using language
was only possible because people had already been trained drilled had language beaten into them
in such a way that they could also use it for rather strange kinds of things for instance
private sort prayer writing poetry and other sorts of
activities which have nothing to do with group survival with organized group behavior in the
service of survival and reproduction so i don't know whether that answers your question but yeah
tells you something about bulla actively i have very short follow-up question the
the previous question just happens to be that i more or less equally actively speak three languages
and and just happens if i am doing something myself and later on trying to find the question
in what language i actually was thinking i have very hard time to answer my usual answer i don't
know maybe it's the reason is that we de facto think not by symbolic strings but think by visual
objects or your visual perception of the reality so that might i ask which three languages they are
no english russian and estonian okay actually they happen to be very different languages
so um first of all it's it's known empirically that some people think much more in images than
other people so there are image thinkers and there are word thinkers i i guess you might be an image
thinker and i'm not sure whether this distinction is innate or whether you can learn to be an image
thinker uh because that brings more benefits if you if you speak multiple languages these are
interesting questions but unfortunately i don't know the answers yeah yeah okay i'm sorry about my
second question is you you talked about the the flow of commands from top to lower hierarchies
but in many cases maybe not in the army but let's say in the mission control let's say moon mission
control it's it's very hard to build very strict hierarchical top down command structure and actual
people are using models which they call federated control which means some commands are given to
federation and federation itself by its own rules maybe including sub sub hierarchical structure
but anyway in this federated command structure we cannot see very nice and control flow from top
down and later on reconstruct from from bottom to up again so what do you think about that
that's good so this is a a twin to the lego question earlier i think that
the army in order to make itself work it's it's a huge organization needs to
err in the direction of lego bricks and clean hierarchical chains of commands and the whole
the whole organization is based upon that structure however it knows that in in particular war time
situations where things break down that structure too is going to break down and the the troops
are going to have to be trained to behave in in the right sorts of ways even when the command
structure is no longer in operation that's the first thing but secondly there are kinds of
activities which do not work well in a strictly hierarchical chain of command kind of structure
this may be true of programming it may be true of very very creative planning and so i'm sure i
don't know the details on this but i'm sure that the army allows for let's say more innovative
command structures where they are needed so the again the basis is the lego brick hierarchical
command structure i'm exaggerating a little bit now the basis of everything is that but then once
you have that you can experiment with more innovative kinds of command structure in specific contexts
