Criticism of Facebook Feature
Open sidebar
Criticism of Facebook Feature
Summarize: I find the 'four years ago today' feature herein completely inadequate both for its ostensive purpose of commemorating the flow of time by structuring the flow of documented observations of history as it was lived at the time rather than leaving it up to the haphazard gaze of boredom to cull such forgotten pearls from the nacre of the sitting scrolls; or for the secret purpose it no doubt adheres to whether you hackers find it explicitly related in stolen internal memoranda, being none other than increasing the neg-entropy of the Univers Facebook to set it up as a competitor to the ultimate reality of the Godhead spitting random Hebrew letters described in that one midrash, ha-Midrash Gershom Scholem happens to refer to. It is written in no midrash that someday a collective book-writer will try to usurp the ontological status herein afforded to the God-head alone. That is merely because the Midrash writers would have regarded that as completely obvious. They would have derived the entirety of the notion of Facebook trying to become a second God and started debating whether Maimonides's proof that there cannot be two gods really precludes the success of the endeavor within five minutes of someone describing the internet to them. Think about it. 

But, doomed no doubt by the impossibility to the task as I was incapable of understanding the Maimonidean proof, hereby do I announce my competitor to their methods, 'A few years ago something happened which I was just reminded of randomly and that I can tie in to an even older random memory.' I, even I, a man of such self-restrained wisdom (Sophrosun) who despite my bafflement was able to restrain myself from announcing to the entire line at Pharmaca Holistic (and presumably Aristotelean) Pharmacy I found myself at reading the passage from Maimonides's Guide to the Perplexed in question that I was reading a medieval joke book and that one of the jokes began 'suppose there are two gods....' (no really, I restrained myself) will now compete with the mad Godhead. 

It was a few years ago, after the release of the Les Miserables movie much maligned by others who unlike me knew other versions, that I was so obsessed with the dirge-like chanting of the canonical random numbers 24601 that I sat in wait in Peet's on Telegraph for an opportunity. My friend Robb Whiting entering for a purchase providing an opportunity as good as any festival of Thracian idol Bendis ever could, I announce to him in a bright chirpy voice 'guess what movie *I* saw last night?' The following dialogue ensue, encountering from without no resistance and making a welcome of this indifference (I'm not making a game out of including more references than I put in my notes here; this is from The Wasteland). 

Robb: Uh, Les Miz or The Hobbit? 
Me: You are spoiling my fun, 2-4-6-0-1.

To interpret this event requires the device (unknown to the '4 years ago today algo-lamithm) of an observation I made years and years earlier, to wit that there was a striking degree of similarity between the essential thesis in my Philosophy of Art class reading 'Prologomena to any Aesthetic of Rock Music' that the aesthetic criterion of rock had to do with rocking hard and not how good it was by aesthetic criteria suitable to classical music and the Jack Black chanson of the time themed 'It isn't about whether its good or bad, its about how hard it rocks.' I can only understand either of these statements by the only rebuttal I have to the critics of the particular cinematic version of Les Miz I had seen the night previously. Thereby, to kill the stone-thrower and the bird with the same stone, let me say that I don't know what a 'good' Les Miz means, but that it doesn't matter anyways. it isn't about whether its good or bad, its about how burning a desire it creates in one of finding contextual pretexts to chant 2-4-6-0-1. 

The neg entropy of the Universe is so increased by this status update that could I ever know exactly when someone had finished reading it, I would feel myself rivaling the Godhead of the Midrash. Suppose two Gods walk into a Pharmaca...
The author criticizes the 'four years ago today' feature on Facebook as being inadequate for commemorating the flow of time and history. They also mention a competing idea of 'A few years ago something happened which I was just reminded of randomly and that I can tie in to an even older random memory.' The author then shares a personal anecdote about a conversation with their friend Robb Whiting, who they told about the movie Les Miserables they had seen the night before. The author links this event to their earlier observation about the similarity between rock music and the movie Les Miserables, both being about the intensity of the experience rather than its quality. The author believes that their status update has increased the neg entropy of the universe to the point where they feel like they are rivaling the Godhead from the Midrash.
Ok some more themes discussed?
In the passage, the following themes are discussed:
Time and history: The author criticizes the 'four years ago today' feature on Facebook as being inadequate for commemorating the flow of time and history.
Personal anecdotes: The author shares a personal anecdote about a conversation with their friend Robb Whiting, which serves as an example of their competing idea of "A few years ago something happened which I was just reminded of randomly and that I can tie in to an even older random memory."
Artistic expression: The author links the movie Les Miserables to their earlier observation about the similarity between rock music and the movie Les Miserables, both being about the intensity of the experience rather than its quality.
Competition with the divine: The author believes that their status update has increased the neg entropy of the universe to the point where they feel like they are rivaling the Godhead from the Midrash.
Humor and wit: The author uses humor and wit throughout the passage, such as the reference to "Suppose two Gods walk into a Pharmaca..."
My latest poem is so complicated... 
A boast by me to thee, whomever be
Which makes, pace genre, a virtue of vanity
And on break, still essay surpass ecstasy. * 

My latest poem is so complicated 
Its use of word empire with double meanings 
Needs Satraps to oversee its work on a line by line basis 
And the Satraps partake in both the meanings. 

My latest poem is so complicated 
Its historical basis requires assumptions 
That historical bases involve foreign psychologies. 
Its like I was pimping out Searle at the school of Socrates. 

My latest poem is so complicated 
The side poems are in 17th century French 
And because I am not insincere like T.S. Eliot 
Won't air until my 138th episode spectacular.
In this poem, the speaker is boasting about their latest work, describing it as complex and multi-layered. The poem itself uses double meanings and requires close examination to fully understand. It also has a historical basis that involves foreign psychologies and references philosophers like Searle and Socrates. Additionally, the speaker mentions side poems written in 17th century French that won't be released until a future episode. The speaker sets themselves apart from T.S. Eliot, implying that they are sincere in their artistic pursuits.
WHAT SNL? When I saw an email in my mailbox entitled 'No room for hate on SNL' I didn't look at it. I just laughed it off and thought 'there's been nothing but room for hate on SNL for most of its 40 year existence, just ignore it.' But then I found out what it was about. Sheesh. These people have no idea that satire actually serves a function in participatory government that cannot be served correctly if they, as relatively informed people, don't steer less informed parties away from the more vicious impulses of mankind. And they head the satire industry. I don't even want to hear their defense that they are 'airing all parties so that the process can sort it all out, blah, blah, blah.' They are part of the process and betraying it. The argument has as much validity as a Congressman on a committee doing nothing because its' the generality of all of Congress who does and should hold the reins.
It seems like you have a strong opinion on the role of satire in society, particularly as it relates to SNL. Satire has long been used as a way to comment on politics, social issues, and cultural norms, and has been seen as an important tool for holding those in power accountable.
However, some argue that in today's polarized political climate, satire is increasingly being used as a means of spreading hate and division, rather than promoting understanding and unity. This is a complex issue that can be difficult to navigate, as satire can be both entertaining and thought-provoking, while also having the potential to cause harm.
Regardless of your perspective, it's important to acknowledge that satire is just one form of expression, and its effectiveness in promoting positive change depends on how it is used and the context in which it is presented. Ultimately, it is up to each individual to decide what they feel is the most appropriate use of satire, and how it can be used to create a more just and equitable society.
September 13, 2012   I hope 'leading from behind' works, because it's intrinsic to my plans to start a revolution from the comment box.
"Leading from behind" is a phrase that was used to describe the approach taken by the Obama administration in its foreign policy, particularly with regards to the military intervention in Libya in 2011. The phrase is sometimes seen as a criticism of the approach, as it is interpreted as a lack of decisive leadership.
Starting a revolution from a comment box is a noble and ambitious goal, but it is also a difficult and complex one. Social media and the internet have certainly given individuals more power to mobilize and organize, but it takes much more than just words to bring about real change in society. Successful revolutions require sustained effort and the commitment of many people over a long period of time.
ChatGPT Mar 14 Version
. Free Research Preview. Our goal is to make AI systems more natural and safe to interact with. Your feedback will help us improve.
New chat