I was at home with my son, busting, he said,
Dad, Dad, I need $250.
He's only 12 years old, so I freaked out.
What's going on?
Is there somebody trying to kill you?
He said, no, no.
Kevin Hart's coming to town, and I wanted to see his show.
I said, well, how much are the tickets?
He said, there are $125.
I said, God damn, not only 80.
I said, well, why do you need $250 then?
He goes, because I want to go with you, dad.
Please.
There it is.
So I took him to the show, and we go,
we sit right up front, the lights go down,
and one opening act, after another goes on,
then Kevin takes the stage, crowd goes fucking nuts.
Thousands of people.
I was furious.
The long of the show went on the matter I got.
Cause this show was fucking outstanding.
It was maddening.
These people were fucking holding their stumps.
My son was slapping his knee.
Ha ha ha ha ha.
I'm like, oh, they gotta do this too.
Kevin says, good night.
The crowd goes crazy, and then everyone starts walking
towards the door, and the lights come on,
and then my son is just standing there,
looking at the empty stage.
People are pushing past me,
and nobody's recognizing me.
I'm like, man, this place fucking sucks.
I said, come on, son, let's get out of here.
And then my son looks back at me, and he says,
dad, please, please, I have to meet him.
I was like, oh my God.
So I took him backstage.
I've known Kevin for years, but can you believe I was,
I was scared to knock on his dressing room door.
I almost said, son, I haven't seen him for a long time,
but I...
And one of Kevin's goons opened the door.
Hey, what's up, Dave, what are you doing, man?
It's good to see you, brother.
What you doing in this area?
This is a terrible area.
Yeah, actually, I live around here.
Listen.
It's Kevin here.
My son just wanted to meet him real quick.
Well, I don't know,
because Kevin's about to eat dinner.
Just think Kevin came around the corner to see who it was.
Oh, shit, what's up, Dave?
Come on back, I was just about to have dinner.
I don't know if you guys ate,
but you're welcome to join me if you'd like.
And then my son pushed past me, some cold shit,
he goes, actually, Mr. Hart,
we haven't eaten in several hours.
Man, Kevin took us into his back room.
This guy had a fucking spread.
It was Tuesday night.
This motherfucker was having Sunday dinner.
It was steaks, chops, corn with butter all over it.
My son was eating old fares and berries,
and that's like, slow down, son of a...
Then I looked over in the corner and there was a box.
Custom-made jerseys for the local team.
Each one was hand-stitched,
and on the back, they stitched on the K-heart,
on all of them.
Kevin saw me staring at that box,
and he went over and grabbed one of them jerseys,
and he walked right to my son.
He said, hey, little man, I want you to have this.
And my son was like, thanks, Mr. Hart.
This is when I got mad.
He goes, if your father ever makes you mad,
put that on.
And he walked out.
Oh, that was some cold shit.
Then I realized, I looked up what Kevin made on Google.
I couldn't believe that shit.
Kevin is the first comedian that a Drake song could be about.
Kevin could walk around his house and sing all me,
and the whole song would still be true.
Got everything, I got everything.
I got everything, I cannot complain, I could die.
I don't even know how much I've really made.
I forgot, it's a lot.
Fuck that, never mind what I got.
And his wife would be like, Kevin, come to bed.
He'd be like, ho, shut the fuck up, I got way too much on.
You know how much money you have to have
to tell a girl to shut the fuck up?
I have quiet pleas money at best.
I'd have to take a loan out for shut the fuck up.
Shut the fuck up, that's Jay-Z money.
And Beyonce got, no, you shut the fuck up.
You
