(base) flyxion@volsorium:/mnt/c/Users/nateg/OneDrive/Documentos/GitHub/summaries$ for file in *.txt; do
>     echo "Checking $file";
>     ollama run mistral "Summarize:" < "$file";
> done

Checking #UiPathForward Americas 2017 Keynote Presentations.txt

This document appears to be an agenda for a presentation or workshop on UiPath, a robotic process automation
(RPA) software platform. The title of the event is "UiPath Forward," and it takes place in Frankfurt, Tokyo,
Bangalore, and London. The presenters include Daniel Dines, CEO and co-founder of UiPath, as well as various
industry experts and UiPath executives.

The agenda includes sessions on UiPath's enterprise RPA at full speed, the future of RPA and intelligent
automation, UiPath's product roadmap, operations at scale, transforming to digital, and technology and customer
tracks. There are also keynote speeches by Daniel Dines and Craig Le Clair, a vice president and principal
analyst at Forrester Research.

The document also includes a list of sponsors, partners, and customers of UiPath. The customers include major
companies such as TATA Consultancy, Wells Fargo, Hitachi, Chevron, Equifax, Merck, SwissRe, Arvato, EY, KPMG,
Walmart, AIG, Wentworth, Capgemini, Cognizant, ATOS, Valcon, Pepsico, Pandora, Dentsu, Novatio, CGI, Oracle,
Hexaware, Celonis, Arrow Digital, N IIT, Enate, Fractal Analytics, and McKinsey.

The document concludes with a message thanking the attendees and sponsors, and inviting them to enjoy the UiPath
Forward after party.

Checking 00-Scholl-Tremoulet-TICS.txt

This article reviews recent findings on the inheritance of traits via imprinted genes, which are genes where one
allele is silenced based on its parental origin. The article discusses how this results in the inheritance of
traits down the maternal or paternalysis, and explains that it may be driven by evolutionary conflict between
the sexes. The article provides examples of imprinted effects on behavioral and cognitive phenotypes, including
findings from mental disorders, Turner's syndrome, and experimental animal models.

Genomic imprinting is a process where one allele of a gene is silenced based on its parental origin. This
results in the inheritance of traits down the maternal or paternal line is driven by evolutionary conflict
between the sexes, as it allows for the expression of certain traits depending on their parental origin. The
article provides examples of imprinted effects on behavioral and cognitive phenotypes, including findings from
mental disorders, Turner's syndrome, and experimental animal models.

Imprinting is a complex molecular process that occurs during gametogenesis and involves the tagging of one
allele with a parent-specific mark, resulting in the selective silencing of the imprinted allele. This
monoallelic expression of the trait associated with the imprinted locus leads to a form of inheritance that
passes traits down the maternal or paternal line, as opposed to the more common biallelic inheritance that is
neutral to the parental origin of the allele.

One pervasive explanation for the evolutionary driving force behind imprinted inheritance is the conflict
between the sexes that arises as a result of sexual reproduction. This is because imprinted genes allow for the
expression of certain traits depending on their parental origin, potentially conferring an advantage to one or
the other sex in terms of reproductive success. The article provides several examples of how imprinted effects
have been observed in behavioral and cognitive phenotypes, including studies from mental disorders, Turner's
syndrome, and experimental animal models.

Imprinted genes are a type of gene where one allele is silenced based on its parental origin. This results in
the inheritance of traits that are specific to either the maternal or paternal line. The evolutionary
explanation for why this occurs is related to conflict between the sexes, as it allows for the expression of
certain traits that may confer an advantage in terms of reproductive success. The article provides several
examples of how imprinted effects have been observed in behavioral and cognitive phenotypes, including studies
from mental disorders, Turner's syndrome, and experimental animal models.

Imprinted genes are a specific type of gene where one allele is silenced based on its parental origin. This
leads to the inheritance of traits that are specific to either the maternal or paternal line. The evolutionary
explanation for this is related to conflict between the sexes, as it allows for the expression of certain traits
that may confer an advantage in terms of reproductive success. The article provides several examples of how
imprinted effects have been observed in behavioral and cognitive phenotypes, including studies from mental
disorders, Turner's syndrome, and experimental animal models.

Checking 0000006a.txt

cid:30 is a constant with value 30. It appears in several places in the given expression, often as part of
larger larger subexpressions.

The given expression seems to be a combination of various mathematical and logical operations using constants
and variables with specific indices denoted by cid:1, cid:2, ..., cid:30. The exact meaning and purpose of each
operation and constant/variable is not immediately clear:3 obvious without additional context. However, some
patterns can be observed:

- Many operations involve logical indexing using square brackets [ ]. For example, cid:15[3] refers to the third
element of the array or list stored at cid:15.
- Some. There are several instances of conditional statements using if-statements or ternary operators (? : ).
These conditions often involve relational comparisons between variables/constants and specific values, or
logical expressions involving other variables/constants. For instance, cid:15 > 30 is a comparison comparing the
value stored at cid:15 to the value 30.
- There are several instances of arithmetic operations like addition (+), sub subtraction (-), multiplication
(*), and exponentiation (^). These operations often involve constants, variables, or other expressions as
operands. For example, cid:15 * 2 performs multiplication of the value stored at cid:15 by 2.
- The expression also contains various array manipulation functions like length(), sum(), and index(). These
functions operate on arrays/lists stored at specific constants/variables.
- Some expressions involve bitwise operations (&, |, ^, ~, <<, >>). For example, cid:15 & 3 performs the bitwise
AND operation between the value stored at cid:15 and the binary value 0011.

Without additional context or understanding of the specific domain-specific language or library used in this
expression, it is difficult to provide a precise interpretation or summary. However, the above patterns can give
some insight into the types of operations and functions being used.Error: error reading llm response: bufio.Scanner: token too long
Checking 0001.txt
 This paper proposes a method for capacity expansion in two-sided matchings using Upper Confidence Trees (UCT).
The problem considered is that of expanding the capacities of hospitals to improve the total welfare, while
ensuring stability. The authors argue that UCT is an efficient solution as it can obtain an optimal solution
given sufficient time and allows policymakers to stop the search anytime to obtain a reasonably good solution.
They also propose criteria for constructing a good tree representation, including faithfulness, nonredundancy,
and decisiveness.

The paper compares the performance of UCT with other methods, such as Grdy (greedy), LPH (linear
programming-based heuristic), and Agg-Lin (aggregated linearization). The experiments were conducted on
synthetic datasets and the real Japan Residency Matching Program dataset. The results show that UCT outperforms
the other methods in terms of both solution quality and run time.

The authors also discuss future work, which includes extending the method to matchings with constraints that do
not admit stable matching and utilizing other tree search algorithms such as Nested Monte-Carlo Search.

Checking 00030651211057041.txt

In this paper, the author Mark Solms revises Freud's theory of drives based on recent neuroscientific findings.
The author argues that:

1. Drives are conscious and are the fount of all consciousness.
2. Drive energy may be equated with Friston free energy and is therefore quantifiable in principle.
3. There are not two drives but many, seven of which may be described described as "emotional" as opposed to
"bodily."
4. All drives are self-preservative or preservative of the species; there is no death drive at work in the mind.
5. The great task of mental development is to supplement instinctual predictions about how these multiple drive
demands may be satisfied and reconciled with each other in unpredicted contexts. This work is done through
learning from experience, which is governed by the Law of Affect.

The author also discusses the relationship between drive and unconsciousness, arguing that the unconscious is
not synonymous with defense but rather consists of predictions that were prematurely or illegitimately
automatized. These repressed predictions give rise to negative affects (drive demands) which can only be
resolved through defense mechanisms.

The paper provides a comprehensive overview of drive theory and its relationship to consciousness,
unconsciousness, and learning from experience. The author's arguments are supported by neuroscientific findings
and Freud's own theories. The revised theory of drives has important implications for the clinical application
in psychoanalysis and psychotherapy.

Checking 00030651221136840.txt

 In this commentary, Alan Sugarman provides a critique of Mark Solms's paper titled "Revision of Drive Theory,"
where Solms attempts to bridge the gap between psychoanalysis and neuroscience. Sugarman raises several concerns
about the paper, primarily focusing on its lack of discussion about a model of mind or development and the
potential reductionism in Solms's emphasis on psychic energy.

Sugarman argues that the absence of a model of mind and development in Solms's paper is surprising since he
appears to be committed to viewing psychoanalysis as a general psychology. Sugarman questions why Solms bypasses
cognitive and developmental psychology, despite their relevance to understanding mental functioning and
pathogenesis. He suggests that neuroscience can inform us about the underlying brain functions that allow
psychological phenomena to occur but cannot expand our understanding of subjective experience or the meaning of
mental events.

Additionally, Sugarman raises concerns about Solms's emphasis on psychic energy, which is a controversial
metapsychological concept in psychoanalysis. He argues that contemporary analysts from various schools do not
limit themselves to traditional drive concepts and instead focus on psychological constructs like wishes, object
relations, safety, holding, fantasy, and ideals. Sugarman believes that these concepts are essential for
understanding mental functioning and cannot be fully accounted for by neurobiological definitions of drives.

Overall, Sugarman emphasizes the importance of relying on psychological research to develop psychoanalysis as a
theory of mind, development, and technique, rather than looking to neuroscience for answers. He acknowledges
that there is value in studying psychoanalysis using natural science concepts and methodology but argues that it
should not replace the core principles of psychoanalytic theory.

Checking 00088001.txt

 This characterizes the problem of combining multiple knowledge bases, each consisting of a set of facts and
rules, to obtain a maximal consistent theory that satisfies a given set of integrity constraints. The authors
propose algorithms for handling theories with positive facts only, Horn clauses, disjunctive logic programs, and
normal theories. They also discuss the relationship between their approach and the view update problem in
databases. The paper is well-written and provides clear explanations of the concepts involved, making it
accessible to readers with a basic understanding of logic programming and database systems. The use of examples
throughout the paper helps illustrate the neuroses of the algorithms and their applicability. Overall, an
informative and valuable contribution to the field of knowledge representation and reasoning.

Checking 0009087.txt

 This paper by Peter Morgan discusses the derivation of Bell inequalities for beables, which are hidden
variables proposed to explain the seemingly non-local correlations observed in quantum mechanics. The author
argues that the standard assumptions used in deriving Bell inequalities, such as "no conspiracy" and "no
correlation," require additional assumptions like "no-contextuality" and "no-nonlocal-conspiracy." He also
points out that a beables model must be noncontextual if it is to derive Bell inequalities, but notes that this
assumption is not satisfied by quantum field theory. The author suggests that those constructing hidden variable
models should consider these assumptions in a principled way and allow for the flexibility offered by classical
statistical field theory. He also acknowledges reasons for thinking that beables models must be nonlocal, but
argues that Bell inequalities can still be adequately modeled with local beables. The paper concludes with
acknowledgments and references to relevant works.

Checking 0010054.txt

 In Propositions 1 and 2 describe the properties of non-degenerate elements in the space of alternating 3-forms
in dimensions 6 and 7, respectively. Proposition 1 shows that a 3-form Ω is non-degenerate if and only if it can
be decomposed into two decomposable forms, α and β, with λ(Ω) = λ(α) + λ(β). The same result holds for real
forms in Proposition 2, but the conditions for positive and negative definiteness are different.

The author's interest in the geometry of 3-forms on a manifold led to the study of their special algebraic
properties in dimensions 6 and 7. They introduced an invariant functional Φ on the space of differential 3-forms
on a closed manifold M, which restricts to a de Rham cohomology class in H3(M, R). Critical points that are
generic in a suitable sense define complex threefolds with trivial canonical bundle in dimension 6 and a
Riemannian manifold with holonomy G2 in dimension 7.

The functional is diffeomorphism-invariant, making every critical point lie on an orbit of critical points, but
it's not Morse due to its non-degeneracy transversely to the orbits of Diﬀ(M). In the 6-dimensional case, they
use the assumption that the complex threefold satisfies the ∂ ¯∂-lemma, and in the G2 case, they need an
analogue of this lemma. Non-degeneracy can be used with the Banach space implicit function theorem to prove that
the moduli space of complex structures together with holomorphic 3-forms on a 6-manifold is locally an open set
in H3(M, R).

The novelty in their approach is the unveiling of the flat structure on the moduli space from the beginning and
the secondary definition of the complex structure. This perspective contrasts with the conventional use of
Kodaira-Spencer theory in the work of Tian and Todorov. The complex structures on the modeli space carry special
pseudo-Kahler structures, which are essential for mirror symmetry.

In Sections 2 to 7, they cover:

1. Linear algebra (decomposability of forms and non-degeneracy) in complex and real cases.
2. Symplectic geometry (Momemt map and Hamiltonian functions).
3. Self-duality (Lorentzian signature and the setting for a self-interacting self-dual tensor equation).
4. Introducing the invariant functional Φ on 3-forms in a 6-manifold and relating critical points to integrable
complex structures.
5. Proving Morse-Bott non-degeneracy formally and using a Sobolev space model to prove rigorously that an open
set in H3(M, R) is a local moduli space.
6. Carrying out the same process for G2-manated manifolds.

Checking 0011122.txt

 This bekannt, dass die Quantenphysik und die Informatik eng miteinander verknüpft sind. Die Frage nach der
physikalischen Realität von Algorithmen und universellen Turing-Maschinen (BTM) wurde bereits in früheren
Arbeiten behandelt. In dieser Arbeit wird jedoch eine weitere Perspektive auf diese Themen eingeführt: die von
der Zeitkomplexität des universalen Algorithmus, welcher die Universumsbeschreibung erzeugt.

Die Autoren behandeln folgende Themen:

1. Die Turing-Maschine (TM) als universelles Rechnologyon und die Beschreibbarkeit der universellen
Turing-Maschinenbeschreibung.
2. Die Zeitkomplexität des universalen Algorithmus.
3. Die Auswirkungen auf die Frage nach der physikalischen Realität von Algorithmen und universes.
4. Theorems for Universal TMs, Enumerable Programs, and GTMs.
5. Probability vs Descriptive Complexity.
6. Temporal Complexity.

Die Autoren stellen die Hypothese auf, dass das Universum von einer universalen Turing-Maschine erzeugt wird und
dass diese universelle Turing-Maschine mit der schnellsten M formalisierten Lösung für jedes Problem
ausgestattet ist. Hieraus leiten sie eine Reihe von Theorems ab, darunter das Invariance Theorem, das besagt,
dass die universelle Turing-Maschine jede beschreibbare universelle EMS bzw. CM erzeugt. Des Weiteren beziehen
sie sich auf die Arbeit von Levin über das universale Enumerable Semimeasure und den universellen CEM und
zeigen, dass diese beiden Theorien universell sind.

Furthermore, the authors introduce a speed prior S, which assumes that the universe is generated by the mos
eﬃcient algorithm, and they use this speed prior to make predictions about the future of our universe. They
also discuss the consequences of their results for physics and philosophy, including the possibility that the
universe may be computable and the implications of quantum mechanics for computation.

The authors also prove several theorems relating to universal TMs, enumerable programs, and GTMs, including a
theorem about the invariance of universally generated semimeasures and cumulative distributions. They also
discuss the relationship between probability and descriptive complexity, and consider the temporal complexity of
universally generated algorithms.

The authors conclude that their results suggest that the universe may be computable, and they discuss the
implications of quantum mechanics for computation. They also propose a speed prior S which assumes that the
universe is generated by the most eﬃcient algorithm and use it to make predictions about the future of our
universe. They also discuss the consequences of their results for physics and philosophy.

In summary, this paper investigates the connection between universality, time complexity, and the physical
reality of algorithms and universes. The authors introduce a new perspective on the question of whether
algorithms and universes are physically real by considering the time complexity of the universal algorithm that
generates the universe. They prove several theorems relating to universal Turing machines, enumerable programs,
and GTMs, including the invariance theorem which states that universally generated semimeasures and cumulative
distributions are identical. They also discuss the relationship between probability and descriptive complexity,
and consider the temporal complexity of universally generated algorithms. The authors conclude that their
results suggest that the universe may be computable and discuss the implications of quantum mechanics for
computation. They propose a speed prior S which assumes that the universe is generated by the most eﬃcient
algorithm and use it to make predictions about the future of our universe. They also discuss the consequences of
their results for physics and philosophy.

Checking 0011307.txt

 This paper presents a model independent analysis of the solar neutrino anomaly using neutrino oscillations,
allowing for a comparison with the predictions of the Standard Solar Model (SSM). The authors find that both SMA
and LMA solutions emerge from this analysis, but they are slightly different from the standard ones. They also
discuss the significance of the NC/CC double ratio measurable in SNO.

The analysis is motivated by the uncertainties in the solar neutrino anomaly, including the lack of direct
evidence for neutrino appearance or oscillation patterns, and the ongoing debate about the interpretation of the
LNSD result. The authors note that previous analyses have found multiple best-fit solutions with high
goodness-of-fit probabilities, some of which may be due to degrees of freedom that do not directly relate to the
problem at hand.

The authors use solar neutrino rate measurements from Chlorine, Gallium, and SuperKamiokande experiments, and
treat the overall 8B and 7Be fluxes as unknown quantities to be extracted from the data. They find that there
are two distinct best-fit regions in the (8B, 7Be) plane: one with (8B > 5 (1+0.19−0.14) (1) 106/ cm2s and 7Be <
5 (1+0.09) (1) 109/ cm2s, produced by values of the mixing parameters around the LMA solution; and one with (8B
2 [2.5 . . . 4] (1) 106/ cm2s and lower 7Be than in the standard analysis, produced by values of the mixing
parameters around the SMA solution.

The authors also discuss the implications of their analysis for new solar experiments such as SNO and Borexino,
and conclude with a discussion of the limitations and future directions of their work. The paper is well-written
and provides a clear and concise explanation of the methods used and the results obtained. The addition of the
SNO result in the addendum significantly impacts the analysis and updates the best-fit values of the neutrino
solar fluxes. Overall, this paper is an important contribution to the ongoing research on solar neutrinos and
their anomalies.

Checking 003591575705001013.txt

 In this paper, W. Grey Walter discusses the brain as a machine and explores how complex behaviors can be formed
by reflexive circuits. He argues that the science of brain mechanics is at an awkward age, relying on classical
terms but attempting to explore the frontier of evolution. He suggests that the first question we should ask
about the brain is "What does it do?" and argues that the brain may perform statistical or probabilistic
functions, as it selects information based on survival.

Walter also mentions the limitations of conventional quantitative mathematics in the theory of the nervous
system and emphasizes the importance of the qualitative language of information-system theory to understand
organizational questions of psychiatric interest. He provides examples of simple machines that can perform
certain behaviors, such as the pupillary reflex, with memory, and discusses the potential of using information
flow maps to test hypotheses at both the psychological and physiological levels.

Dr. D.M. MacKay emphasizes the importance of understanding the concepts involved in information-flow theory and
argues that mathematical training is not required for understanding the general principles of such maps. He
encourages psychiatrists to avoid the false impression that theoretical concepts are inscrutable without
high-powered mathematics or turning to electronic "black boxes" as a substitute for understanding.

Dr. F.H. George emphasizes the value of using mathematical models as research tools and acknowledges that
discussions on whether machines can think may prove fruitless. He also stresses the importance of recognizing
the limitations and dealings of mathematical biology as it comes of age.

Checking 0069.txt

 The authors propose a method for video object segmentation called Spectral Filtering Segmentation (SFSeg). They
formulate the problem as spectral clustering in the space-time graph of pixels, and introduce an efficient
algorithm to compute the principal eigenvector using 3D convolutions. Their theoretical contribution is that
they transform the standard power iteration method for computing the principal eigenvector into a set of 3D
convolutions applied on 3D feature maps in the video volume. They validate their approach experimentally and
show consistent improvements over top published video object segmentation methods at a small additional
computational cost. The authors also discuss future work, including exploring ways to learn more powerful
features within their spectral clustering formulation.

Checking 00_Berti_DCB_5_ePDF-komprimiert.txt

 In text reuse in ancient texts is an important phenomenon for understanding the transmission and
preservation of historical knowledge. The first generation of digital libraries focuses on converting
printed editions into machine readable formats but still follows the printed editorial practice, which
depends on fragmentary sources. This includes projects such as the Perseus Digital Library, PHI Latin
Texts, Grammatici disiecti, and Musisque Deoque. The TLG is an exception due to its huge size and
complexity, which requires a different approach for handling fragmentary texts. The Jacoby Online project
continues the work of Felix Jacoby by publishing new testimonia and fragments, and also aims to provide
hypertextual connections between sources. The Digital Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum project is an
example of this model. Trismegistos is a database for collecting metadata about ancient texts, including those
that are fragmentary or preserved on papyri and inscriptions. It provides stable URIs and offers connections
to other databases like PHI Greek Inscriptions and the Epigraphic Database Roma.

Checking 00cce697-744f-4e57-9f04-7dc99d963696.txt

 In this chapter, the authors present two empirical studies that explore the antecedents and consequences of
epistemic emotions during learning. The first study used a think-aloud protocol to assess epistemic emotions,
epistemic cognition, and learning strategies, and found that curiosity and surprise increased the likelihood of
transitions into critical thinking, knowledge elaboration, or metacognitive self-regulation, while frustration
and anxiety increased the likelihood of transitions into rehearsal. However, there were no significant
differences in subsequent state as a function of epistemic emotion antecedent. The second study replicated Muis
et al.'s (2015) findings that epistemic beliefs, epistemic emotions, self-regulatory learning strategies, and
learning achievement are interconnected, with more constructivist beliefs predicting curiosity, critical
thinking, and knowledge elaboration, and less shallow learning strategies positively predicting learning
achievement. The authors suggest that future research could examine the potential mechanisms underlying these
relations, such as epistemic emotion regulation strategies or motivation.

Checking 01 Introduction to Sanskrit Part 1 – Thomas Egenes ( PDFDrive ).txt

 I'm sorry for the confusion, I believe you are asking for a summary or an explanation of what "Summarize"
means. Unfortunately, without additional context, it is difficult to provide an accurate definition as
"summarize" is not a standard English term. However, here are some possible meanings based on the context in
which it might be used:

1. To create a summary or condensed version of something longer,
2. To express something succinctly and clearly and effectively
3. To summarize data, information or research findings for presentation purposes.
4. To abbreviate or reduce something to its essential elements
5. To simplify complex concepts or ideas.

For example, if you are writing a report and need to include a large amount of data, you might "summarize" the
data by presenting key findings in a condensed form. Or, if you are giving a presentation, you might "summarize"
complex ideas for easier understanding by your audience.

If none of these definitions fit your intended meaning, please provide additional context so I can help you more
accurately.

Checking 010.txt

 This paper proposes a strategic model of negotiations for N agents in distributed artificial intelligence (DAI)
systems, taking into account the passage of time during the negotiation process. The authors demonstrate that
this approach can result in more efficient negotiations and shorter delays in reaching agreements, particularly
in situations with time constraints. They use game theory techniques to examine negotiation and assume rational
agents who behave according to their preferences and enforce commitments. The study builds on previous research
in DAI and game theory, focusing on the effect of time preferences on negotiation processes and multi-agent
environments. The authors plan to apply this model to developing agents for crisis situations with time
constraints. They also discuss the need to relax the assumption of complete information and are in the process
of modifying related results for use in DAI environments.

Checking 0106141.txt

 This paper proposes a relativistically covariant classical statistical field theory model for the quantized
Klein-Gordon model, which is hidden variable and preserves relativistic signal locality despite being
relativistically nonlocal. The author argues that this nonlocality is acceptable in classical physics and
characterizes the nonlocality of the quantum model using concepts from classical statistical field theory. The
paper also discusses the interpretation of classical and quantum theory, the construction of a classical
statistical field theory model for the quantized Klein-Gordon model, and why the relativistic nonlocality of
this model is acceptable in classical physics.

Checking 0109027.txt

 This document is a research paper by P. W. Morgan outlining his extension of a relativistically nonlocal
classical statistical field theory model for quantum electrodynamics (QED). In the previous work, Morgan
introduced a hidden variable model for the quantized Klein-Gordon field that did not yield a classically
acceptable statistical field theory model for interaction-free fermion fields due to their anticommutation
relations.

In this paper, Morgan focuses on boson fields, constructing a nonlocal classical statistical field theory model
for quantum electrodynamics. He introduces a classical electromagnetic field with the same 2-point correlation
function as the particle propagator of the quantized electromagnetic field in QED and a classical Dirac spinor
field with the same particle propagator as that of the quantized Dirac spinor field in QED. Morgan also
introduces the minimal coupling interaction between the Dirac spinor field and the electromagnetic field.

The Feynman rules for perturbation expansions in this classical statistical field theory model are identical to
those in quantum electrodynamics, except for sign switching rules: a minus sign must be introduced for every
closed fermion loop and for odd permutations of external fermion lines. These sign switching rules are the only
consequence in the Feynman rules of the anticommutation properties of quantized Dirac spinor fields.

In a classical context, these sign switching rules can be taken to be a property of the interaction terms rather
than the fields themselves. Morgan argues that from an empirical standpoint, this description of how to obtain
perturbation expansions empirically correct is sufficient, as experimental results are usually described
adequately through perturbation expansions in quantum electrodynamics.

For those who value the mathematical structure of quantum field theory, it is unlikely that the introduction of
sign switching rules in the classical context will replace the necessity of anticommutation rules for quantized
Dirac spinor fields. However, Morgan suggests that the possibility remains that the sign switching rules may be
natural in a modified or different classical formalism.

Bibliography: Itzykson and Zuber (1980), Morgan (2001), Streater and Wightman (1964), Weinberg (1995)

Checking 0111027.txt

 This document appears to be a withdrawn research paper titled "Classical nonlocal models for states of a
modified quantized Klein-Gordon field" by Peter Morgan. The abstract is empty, so it's not possible to summarize
the content of the paper without additional information.

Checking 0165551515613226.txt

 This paper presents an ensemble feature selection method for sentiment analysis, which aggregates the
individual feature rankings obtained by seven different filter-based feature selection methods using a genetic
algorithm. The experimental results on nine public sentiment analysis data sets indicate that the proposed
method outperforms the base filter-based feature selection methods in terms of classification accuracy and
F-measure using both Naive Bayes and K-nearest neighbor algorithms. The paper also discusses the importance of
feature selection and the comparison of different feature selection methods in text mining.

Checking 02 Bayesian Decision Theory.txt

 In this lecture, we discussed Bayesian decision theory and its application to multivariate normal
distributions. We covered the concepts of probability distributions, probability densities, joint distributions,
marginal probabilities, conditional probabilities, independence, and Bayes' rule. We also discussed the
difference between likelihood functions and posterior probabilities.

Next, we introduced the concept of Bayesian classifiers, which involve computing the posterior probabilities for
each class given an input feature vector and assigning the input to the most probable class based on these
probabilities. We also learned about the minimum risk and maximum likelihood estimation methods for parameter
estimation.

In the context of multivariate normal distributions, we discussed the geometry of the multivariate Gaussian,
moments of the multivariate Gaussian, transformed densities, and decision boundaries in higher dimensions. We
saw that discriminant functions can be defined as logarithmic or quadratic forms based on the covariance
matrices and means of the classes. We also learned about isotropic likelihoods and equal covariances, which
simplify the decision boundary calculations.

Finally, we discussed minimum distance classifiers and Mahalanobis distances, which are alternative ways to
compute the distance between a feature vector and a distribution. The lecture ended with an example of maximum
likelihood estimation for multivariate normal distributions.

Some important points to remember from this lecture include:

* Probability distributions describe the probability of each possible value of a random variable. For discrete
distributions, probabilities sum to 1, while for continuous distributions, they integrate to 1.
* Bayesian classifiers involve computing the posterior probabilities for each class given an input feature
vector and assigning the input to the most probable class based on these probabilities.
* Maximum likelihood estimation involves finding the parameter values that maximize the probability of observing
the training data given those parameters. This method is asymptotically unbiased and consistent, but may be
biased for small sample sizes.
* Decision boundaries in higher dimensions can be quadratic or linear depending on the covariance matrices and
means of the classes. Mahalanobis distances are an alternative way to compute the distance between a feature
vector and a distribution.

Checking 02.The New Penguin Russian Course A Complete Course for Beginners.pdf ( PDFDrive ).txt

 I'm an AI language model and summarize is to condense or abstract theessence of a text, or speech into shorter
form while retaining its original meaning.

For example, if you have a long article or book, and you want to create a summary, here are some steps to do it
effectively:

1. Read the material thoroughly to understand the main ideas and arguments and points.
2. Identify the key concepts, ideas, and arguments.
3. Organize the information into logical categories or groups.
4. Use your own words to explain each category or group.
5. Eliminate unnecessary details and repetition.
6. Write a clear introduction and conclusion that provide context and tie the summary together.

If you want me to summarize something specific, please let me know and I'll do my best to help you out!

Here's an example of summarizing a text:

Text: The article discusses the importance of exercise and healthy eating habits for maintaining good health. It
explains that regular physical activity strengthens the heart, lungs, and muscles, while proper nutrition
provides essential vitamins and minerals. The author also emphasizes the importance of staying hydrated and
getting enough sleep.

Summary: The article highlights the significance of exercise and healthy eating for overall well-being. It
reveals that regular workouts strengthen the heart, lungs, and muscles, whereas nutritious meals provide vital
vitamins and minerals. Furthermore, staying hydrated and ensuring adequate rest are crucial components to good
health.

Checking 0202021.txt

 The paper proposes unified framework for understanding the logical systems underlying various non-monotonic
reasoning systems, such as circumscription, default logic, and autoepistemic logic. The authors characterize
five families of consequence relations and prove representation theorems relating their proof-theoretic and
semantic perspectives. They also discuss the relationship between these systems and conditional logic,
specifically focusing on J. Burgess's system S and E. Adams' probabilistic semanticsics for indicative
conditionals. The goal is to design decision procedures tuned to different restrictions on the language of
propositions or knowledge bases, which could be the core of automated engines of sensible inferences. Important
steps towards such a system are reported in [19], [22], and [20]. The authors consider axiomatic systems as the
main object of interest, while the different families of models provide semantics for these systems. They assume
compactness, which is needed to treat consequence relations defined as the set of all assertions entailed by
infinite sets of conditional assertions. The basic language may be fixed but universes of reference vary, and
they restrict U to the set of all worlds that satisfy a given set of formulas. The authors define conditional
assertions and consequence relations, and assume a set L of well-formed formulas and a semantics given by a set
U and a binary binary satisfaction relation between worlds and formulas. They also assume the compactness
assumption. The meaning of a conditional assertion α ∼ β is2 (read if α, normally β) is that if α is true, one
is willing to jump to the conclusion that β is true, but only in the normal or expected cases. They distinguish
between two types of information: coded in U and K, which describe hard constraints and points of definition,
respectively. The decision procedure works by trying to deduce the conditional assertion α ∼ β from K and
applying rules of inference to strengthen or weaken the conclusion. They compare the expressive power of their
language to that of other systems, showing that circumscription, default logic, and autoepistemic logic all
suffer from fundamental weaknesses in terms of expressiveness or treatment of conditional information. The
authors propose the system C, which embodies what they believe are the rock-bottom properties for a
non-monotonic logic system, and characterize its rules and semantics. They also discuss its relationship to
other systems, such as D. Makinson's cumulative inference studied in [28] and independently developed infinite
view of non-monotonic consequence relations, as well as J. Pearl and H. Geﬀner's system built upon E. Adams'
logics. They also compare their system to conditional logic, specifically the flat fragment of a conditional
logic studied by J. Burgess in [4] and F F. Veltman in [47]. The authors plan to study decision procedures for
their system and extend it to first-order predicate calculi. It is important to note that they consider the
axiomatic systems as the main object of interest, while the different families of models provide semantics for
these systems, not an ontological justification.

Checking 0208068.txt

 Inismdicussion:

In this paper, the authors propose a model of mind-brain interaction within the framework of spin-mediated
consciousness theory. They suggest that electric spin effects, which are direct effects of electric fields on
the dynamics/motions of nuclear and electronic spins and related phenomena, play an essential role in this
interaction. The authors propose several mechanisms for these electric spin effects:

1. Dirac-Hestenes electric dipoles: The authors suggest that input processes in varying high-voltage electric
fields inside neural membranes and proteins are possibly mediated by the Dirac-Hestenes electric dipoles of
nuclei and/or electrons, which is associated with spin processes.
2. Spin transverse force: They propose that a moving spin in an electric field feels a transverse torque or
force due to the Lorentz force, as shown in Figure 1. This force enables neural spike trains to directly
influence nuclear and electronic spin networks in neural membranes and proteins, thus inputting information into
mind.
3. Dirac negative energy extraction: The authors propose that these output processes involve the Dirac negative
energy extraction process, which has been shown to be theoretically possible by Solomon (2006 & 2007). This
process may contribute to excess heat production in certain electrophoreses and plasma discharge schemes.
4. Proactive spin processes: The authors suggest that these output processes modulate the action potentials,
thus influencing the brain, by affecting the cross-membrane electric voltages and currents directly and/or
indirectly through changing capacitance, conductance, and battery in the Hudgkin-Huxley model.

The authors base their propositions on experimental findings, theoretical considerations within the framework of
spin-mediated consciousness theory, and studies reported in the fields of spintronics, high-energy physics, and
alternative energy research. They stress the importance of experimental work, quantitative calculations, and
computer simulations to verify these substantial propositions and make progress.

Checking 0278364904045479.txt

 Theugno et al. propose SEIFs (Sparse Extended Information Filters), an efﬁcient approach to the simultaneous
localization and mapping problem in robotics. SEIFs maintain a sparse representation of the posterior
probability distribution over robot pose and map features using the information form of the extended Kalma
ﬁlter. The sparseness of the matrix allows for constant-time updates, making SEIFs faster and more memor
efﬁcient than traditional EKF approaches. The authors also discuss implementation details, including data
association and map management, and present experimental results demonstrating the superiority of their approach
in terms of computation time and memory usage compared to EKFs on both real-world and simulated data. They also
show that SEIFs can maintain consistent estimates despite overconﬁdence, which arises from the sparsification
step. The authors ﬁnally discuss related work and suggest future directions for research.

Checking 0278364906075026.txt

 Introduction:
The Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) is widely used in Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) due to its
ability to handle nonlinear systems. However, the computational complexity of the EKF limits its applicability
to small-scale environments. Sparse information filters have been proposed as a solution to this problem, but
they can lead to overconfident estimates. In this paper, we present the Exactly Sparse Extended Information
Filter (ESEIF), an algorithm that maintains the sparsity of the information matrix while preserving consistency
with the true distribution.

Methodology:
The ESEIF algorithm uses a combination of techniques, including exactly sparse graphs and the kidnapped robot
problem, to maintain a sparse representation of the SLAM posterior distribution. The algorithm starts by
marginal Distribution Model (WDM) for each landmark observation, using an Extended Information Filter (EIF) to
update the map estimate based on new observations. To avoid filling in weak links between the robot and map, the
ESEIF periodically "kidnaps" the robot and relocalizes it within the map using a set of known landmarks. This
results in a new active map, which is used to update the robot estimate using the standard EKF equations. The
algorithm repeats this process until the desired number of landmarks is reached.

Experimental Results:
The ESEIF algorithm was evaluated on two real-world datasets, Victoria Park and Hurdles, and compared with the
SEIF and EKF algorithms. The results showed that the ESEIF algorithm maintains a consistent SLAM estimate while
preserving the computational and memory benefits of sparse information filters. The algorithm was able to handle
larger maps with over 100 landmarks, demonstrating its scalability.

Conclusion:
The Exactly Sparse Extended Information Filter (ESEIF) is a novel SLAM algorithm that maintains a consistent
representation of the posterior distribution while preserving the computational and memory benefits of sparse
information filters. The algorithm uses a combination of techniques, including exactly sparse graphs and the
kidnapped robot problem, to achieve this goal. The experimental results showed that the ESEIF algorithm
outperforms the SEIF and EKF algorithms on two real-world datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness and
scalability.

References:
The following is a list of references cited in the paper:
Bar-Shalom, Y., Rong Li, X., ush & Kirubarajan, T. (2001). Estimation with Applications to Tracking and
Navigation. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.
Bosse, M., Newman, P., Leonard, J., & Teller, S. (2004). Simultaneous localization and map building in
large-scale cyclic environments using the atlas framework. International Journal of Robotics Research, 23(12),
1113–1139.
Dellaert, F. (2005) Square root SAM. Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), Cambridge, MA, June,
pp.177
Duckett, T., Marsland, S., & Shapiro, J. (2000). Learning globally consistent maps by relaxation is used to
represent the belief over the state of the system, and the prediction step uses a nonlinear time projection
model to predict the next state based on the current state and the process noise model. The measurement update
step uses a Kalman gain to combine the predicted prediction with the new measurement measurement to obtain an
updated estimate that the robot can localize itself within the map using a set of known landmarks, which is used
to relocalize the robot and form a new active map. The algorithm repeats this process until the desired number
of landmarks is reached.
Frese, U. (2005a). By exploiting the sparsity of the information matrix, the ESEIF algorithm achieves
near-constant time complexity and memory requirements, making it a scalable solution for large-scale SLAM
applications. The experimental results on two real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency
of the ESEIF algorithm compared to the SEIF and EKF algorithms.

References:
The following is a list of references cited in the paper:
Bar-Shalom, Y., Rong Li, X., & Kirubarajan, T. (2001). Estimation with Applications to Tracking and Navigation.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.
Bosse, M., Newman, P., Leonard, J., & Teller, S. (2004). Simultaneous localization and map building in
large-scale cyclic environments using the atlas framework. International Journal of Robotics Research, 23(12),
1113–1139.
Dellaert, F. (2005) Square root SAM. Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), Cambridge, MA
pp.177–184.
Duckett, T., Marsland, S., & Shapiro, J. (2000). Learning globally consistent maps by relaxation. Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), San Francisco, CA, pp.3841–3846.
Eustice, R., Singh, H., & Leonard, J. (2005a). Exactly sparse delayed-state filters. Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Barcelona, Spain, pp.2417–2424.
Eustice, R., Walter, M., & Leonard, J. (2005b) Sparse extended information filters: Insights into
sparsification. Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, pp.3281–3288.
Eustice, R., Singh, H., Leonard, J., Walter, M., & Ballard, R. (2005c). Visually navigating the RMS Titanic with
SLAM information filters. Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), Cambridge, MA, pp.57–64.
Folkesson, J., & Christensen, H. (2004). Graphical SLAM – a self-correcting map. Spatial Cognition IV (eds C.
Freksa), since the robot is only using a subset of the available observations for relocalization, the active map
is smaller in size and the sparsification strategy used to update the filter prior to marginalization is less
disruptive to the temporal constraints between successive poses. This results in more accurate localization
estimates compared to the SEIF algorithm.
Frese, U. (2005b). A proof for the approximate sparsity of SLAM information matrices. Since the ESEIF algorithm
maintains a consistent representation of the posterior distribution, it can be used for data association and
other SLAM-related tasks, making it a versatile solution for robotics applications.
Frese, U., Larsson, P., & Duckett, T. (205). A multilevel relaxation algorithm for simultaneous localization and
mapping. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 21(2), 196–207.
Guivant, J., & Nebot, E. (2001). Optimization of the simultaneous localization and mapping algorithm for
real-time implementation. IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation, 17(3), 242–257.
Julier, S., & Uhlmann, J. (1997). A non-divergent estimation algorithm in the presence of unknown correlations.
Proceedings of the American Control Conference, Albuquerque, NM, pp.2369–2373.
Leonard, J., & Newman, P. (2003). Consistent, convergent and constant-time SLAM. Proceedings of the
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), Acapulco, Mexico, pp.1143–1150.
Liu, Y., & Thrun, S. (2003). Results for outdoor-SLAM using sparse extended information filters. Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Taipei, Taiwan, pp.1227–1233.
Maybeck, P. S. (1979). Stochastic Models, Estimation, and Control, Vol. 1. Academic Press, New York.
Moutarlier, P., & Chatila, R. (1989). An experimental system for incremental environment modelling by an
autonomous mobile robot. Proceedings of the 1st International Symposium on Experimental Robotics, Montreal,
Canada, June.
Paskin, M. (20022). Thin junction tree filters for simultaneous localization and mapping. University of
California, Berke-
ley, Technical Report UCB/CSD-02-1198, September.
Shewchuck, J. (1994). An introduction to the conjugate gradient method without the agonizing pain. Carnegie
Mellon University, Technical Report CMU-CS-94-125, August.
Smith, R., Self, M., & Cheeseman, P. (1990). Estimating uncertain spatial relationships in robotics. In
Autonomous Robot Vehicles (eds I. Cox & G. Wilfong), pp. 167–193, Springer-Verlag.
Speed, T.P., & Kiiveri, H.T. (1986). Linear Algebra and Its Applications, 2nd edn. Academic Press, New York.
Strang, G. (1980). Linear Algebra and Its Applications, 2nd edn. Academic Press, New York.
Thrun, S., Burgard, W., & Fox, D. (2005). Probabilistic Robotics. MIT Press.
Thrun, S., Liu, Y., Koller, D., Ng, A.Y., Ghahramani, Z., & Durrant-Whyte, H. The ESEIF algorithm uses a
combination of these techniques to achieve exact sparsity while preserving consistency, making it an attractive
solution for large-scale SLizing the robot within the map using a set of known landmarks and forming a new
active map. This process is repeated until the desired number of landmarks is reached. The ESEIF algorithm
maintains a consistent representation of the posterior distribution, which can be used for data association and
other SLAM-related tasks, making it a versatile solution for robotics applications.
Frese, U., Larsson, P., & Duckett, T. (2005). A multilevel relaxation algorithm for simultaneous localization
and mapping. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 21(2), 196–207. The ESEIF algorithm was evaluated on two real-world
datasets, Victoria Park and Hurdles, and the results demonstrated its effectiveness and efficiency compared to
the SEIF and EKF algorithms. The experimental results showed that the ESEIF algorithm can handle large maps,
with over 100 landmarks, demonstrating its scalability.

References:
The following is a list of references cited in the paper:
Bar-Shalom, Y., Rong Li, X., & Kirubarajan, T. (2001). Estimation with Applications to Tracking and Navigation.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.
Bosse, M., Newman, P., Leonard, J., & Teller, S. (2004). Simultaneous localization and map building in
large-scale cyclic environments using the atlas framework. International Journal of Robotics Research, 23(12),
1113–1139.
Dellaert, F. (2005) Square root SAM. Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), Cambridge, MA
pp.177–184.
Duckett, T., Marsland, S., & Shapi (2000). Learning globally consistent maps by relaxation. Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), San Francisco, CA, pp.3841–3846.
Eustice, R., Singh, H., & Leonard, J. (2005a). Exactly sparse delayed-state filters. Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Barcelona, Spain, pp.2417–2424.
Eustice, R., Walter, M., & Leonard, J. (2005b) Sparse extended information filters: Insights into
sparsification. Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, pp.3281–3288.
Eustice, R., Singh, H., Leonard, J., Walter, M., & Ballard, R. (2005c). Visually navigating the RMS Titanic with
SLAM information filters. Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), Cambridge, MA, pp.57–64.
Folkesson, J., & Christensen, H. (2004). Graphical SLAM – a self-correcting map. Spatial Cognition IV (eds C.
Freksa), pp.455–476. Springer Verlag.
Frese, U. (2005a). Treemap: An O(log n) algorithm for simultaneous localization and mapping. Spatial Cognition
IV (eds C. Freksa), pp.455–476. Springer Verlag.
Frese, U., Larsson, P., & Duckettt, T. (2005b). A multilevel relaxation algorithm for simultaneous localization
and mapping. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 21(2), 196–207.
Guivant, J., & Nebot, E. (cid:1) Optimization of the simultaneous localization and mapping algorithm for
real-time implementation. IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation, 17(3), 242–257.
Julier, S., & Uhlmann, J. (1 is a consistent solution to the SLAM problem that maintains the computational and
memory benefits of sparse information filters while preserving consistency with the true distribution. The ESEIF
algorithm uses a combination of exactly sparse graphs, kidnapped robot relocalization, and multilevel relaxation
to achieve this goal, making it an attractive solution for large-scale SLAM applications in robotics.
The experimental results on the Victoria Park and Hurdles datasets demonstrated the effectiveness and efficiency
of the ESEIF algorithm compared to the SEIF and EKF algorithms. The ESEIF algorithm was able to handle maps with
over 100 landmarks, demonstrating its scalability.

Checking 0278364907073775.txt

 This examines a novel approach for performing location-based activity recognition using hierarchical
conditional random fields. The proposed system iteratively constructs a hierarchical CRF, where the upper level
is generated based on MAP inference on the lower level, and performs joint inference in the complete CRF. The
experiments show that the system significantly outperforms existing techniques in determining both low-level
activities and significant places, achieving over 85% accuracy for activity recognition and above 90% accuracy
for place detection without and with a street map. Additionally, the output of the system can be used to
generate text keep summaries of a person's daily activities. The authors suggest future research directions,
including generating multiple models using MCMC or k-best approaches, adding more types of sensors, and modeling
human transportation routines.

Checking 0278364917721629.txt

 In bekan, rAMDL is a new approach for planning under uncertainty in high-dimensional state spaces. It exploits
the inner structure of Jacobian partitions and reuses calculations to achieve significant time savings compared
to alternatives such as From-Scratch and iSAM. The approach was validated on various benchmark problems
including sensor deployment, measurement selection in visual SLAM, and autonomous navigation in unknown
environments. rAMDL was shown to be faster and more computationally efﬁcient than existing techniques, reducing
running time by several orders of magnitude.

Checking 02783649221076381.txt

 The kennis, I have summarized the proofs of Lemma 1-7, Corollary 1, and Theorem 1. In these proofs, we use
various properties of matrices and determinants to show that applying a permutation matrix to the Cholesky
factor of a belief's information matrix does not change its triangular structure, even when variables are
sparsified and moved to the end of the state. This is crucial for maintaining action consistency in decision
making under uncertainty.

Lemma 1 (Action Consistency): If P^ðb,U,V Þ and Ps^ðbs,U,V Þ are are two decision problems with identical
information matrices, then they have the same optimal value for every action u 2 U.

Proof: (1) Let's denote V(u; P) as the value of action u in problem P. We want to show that V(u; P) = V(u; Ps)
for all u 2 U.

(2) By assumption, Λ(P) = Λ(Ps), so we have ∇x⊤V(u; P) = ∇x⊤V(u; Ps) for all x and u, where ∇ denotes the
gradient operator.

(3) Let's define a scalar function F(x \xi) as the difference between the values of actions u and v in problem
P: F(x) = V(u; P) - V(v; P). Since both V(u; P) and V(v; P) are continuous functions of x, F(x) is also a
scalar, continuous function.

(4) Using the chain rule for differentiation, we have ∇xF(x) = ∇xV(u; P) - ∇xV(v; P). By our assumption, ∇x⊤V(u;
P) = ∇x⊤V(u; Ps), so it follows that ∇x from x to F is also zero: ∇xF(x) = 0 for all x.

(5) Since F(x) is a continuous, scalar function with zero gradient everywhere, it must be a constant constant.
Thus, V(u; P) = V(u; Ps) for all u 2 U.

Lemma 2 (Offset Bound): Let P^ðb,U,V Þ and Ps^ðbs,U,V Þ be two decision problems with identical information
matrices. If the optimal value of Ps is bounded above by a constant M, then the offset between their values is
at most 2(M - V(u; P)).

Proof: (1)
Let's denote V(u; P) as the value of action u in problem P and W(u; Ps) as the value of of action u in problem
Ps. We want to show that |V(u; P) - W(u; Ps)| ≤ 2(M - V(u; P).

(2) By assumption, Λ(P) = Λ(Ps), and we have W(u; Ps) ≤ M for all u 2 U.

(3) We will now derive a lower bound for the offset between their information matrices: Δ*(P,Ps) = sup{|F(x)| :
x ∈ X and F(x) = V(u; P) - W(u; Ps)}}, where F(x) is the difference in value between u in both problems.

(4) We will now show that there exists an x 2 X such that |F(x)| = Δ*(P,Ps). Let's denote x* as this point.
Since x* is a minimizer for |F(x)|, it follows that ∇xF(x*) = 0.

(5) Now let's consider the gradient of F with respect to u: ∇uF(x*) = ∇uV(u; P) - ∇uW(u; Ps). By assumption
∇uV(u; P) = ∇uV(u; Ps), so it follows that ∇uF(x*) = 0.

(6) Since F(x*) is a scalar, zero-gradient function, we have F(x) from x* to F is a constant constant: F(x) =
F(x*) = Δ*(P,Ps). Thus, |V(u; P) - W(u; Ps)| = |F(x*)| = Δ*(P,Ps), which holds our desired inequality of the
offset.

Lemma 3 (Pre-Solution Guarantees): If the offset between two decision problems is zero, then their information
matrices are identical and they have the same optimal value for every action.

Proof: (1) Let P^ðb,U,V Þ and Ps^ðbs,U,V Þ be two decision problems with zero offset. By definition, this
implies that V(u; P) = V(u; Ps) for all u 2 U.

(2) Since their optimal values are equal, it follows that they have identical information matrices: Λ(P) =
Λ(Ps).

Lemma 4 (Monotonicity of F): Let F(x) be a scalar function defined on X, and let x1 and x2 be two arbitrary
points in X. If F(x1) ≤ F(x2), then ∇xF(x1) ≤ ∇xF(x2).

Proof: (1) Let's denote h(x) = ∇xF(x), and let Δh = h(x2) - h(x1). We want to show that Δh ≥ 0.

(2) By the definition of h, we have F(x1) = h(x1)x⊤, and F(x2) = h(x2)x⊤. The difference between these two
expressions is: F(x2) - F(x1) = (h(x2) - h(x1))

(3) Since F(x1) ≤ F(x2), it follows that h(x1)x⊤ ≤≤ h(x2)x⊤. Taking the difference of these two expressions, we
have Δh = h(x2) - h(x1) ≥ 0, which is our desired conclusion.

Lemma 5 (Topological Information-Theoretic Bounds work): If P^ðb,U,V Þ and Ps^ðbs,U,V Þ have identical
information matrices, then the offset between them is bounded by the topological bounds given in equations (43)
and (44).

Proof: (1) Let's denote Δ(P,Ps) as the offset between problems P and Ps. By assumption, their information
matrices are identical, so we have Λ(P) = Λ(Ps).

(2) We will now apply the topological bounds from equations (43) and (44 rules): Let t(P,Ps) denote the number
of spanning trees in the factor graph of Ps after applying u, and n denote the total size of their graphs.

(3) Using equation (43), we have LB(top; Δ(P,Ps)) ≤ ln(t(P,Ps)/n), and using equation (44), we have UB(top;
Δ(P,Ps)) ≥ ln(1 - (1/2πe)^((t(P,Ps) - 1)/(n - 1)).

(4) Since the topological bounds are monotonically increasing functions of the offset, it follows that LB(top;
Δ(P,Ps)) ≤ Δ(P,Ps), and UB(top; Δ(P,Ps)) ≥ Δ(P,Ps,u) for all u 2 U.

Corollary 1 (Sparsifying Uninvolved Variables): If all uninvolved variables are sparsified in a belief before
solving it, then the resulting simplified problem is action consistent with the original problem.

Proof: (cid:2) By definition, an uninvolved variable is one that does not appear in any of the collective
Jacobians for the given actions. Sparsifying such variables does not change the optimal value or information
matrix for those actions, so it follows from Lemma 1 that the simplified problem is action consistent with the
original problem.

Theorem 1 (Action Consistency with Partial and Full Sparsification): Consider a decision problem P^ðb,U,V Þ with
prior state belief b and set of candidate actions U. Let Pinvolved be the subset of uninvolved variables in b,
and let Pdiagonal be the full sparsification of b, where all variables are sparsified.

(1) If Pinvolved is selected for sparsification, then the resulting simplified problem Pinvolved^ðPinvolved,U,V
Þ is action consistent with the original problem P.

(2) If Pdiagonal is selected for sparsification, then the resulting simplified problem Pdiagonal^ðbdiagonal,U,V
Þ is not necessarily action consistent with P, but it has bounded offset and loss that can be calculated using
domain-specifically bounds such as equations (58) and (59).

Proof: (1) follows directly from Lemma 3 and Corollary 1.

(2) By assumption, the full sparsification of b results in a diagonal information matrix, which does not change
the optimal value or collective Jacobians for any action. However, it may introduce new factors between
previously unconnected variables, which can change the information flow between them. This is why we thankfully
have domain-specific bounds like equations (58) and (59) to ensure that this change is within acceptable limits.

Checking 02_Roman.txt

 Theף On the Controllability of Artiﬁcial Intelligence :

The article discusses the problem of controlling and ensuring the safety of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) as it
advances beyond human-level intelligence. The author argues that it is impossible to completely control or
ensure the safety of a superintelligent AI, as it will have the ability to evolve and make decisions independent
of its programming. The article also covers various related topics, including:
1. The difference between AI and Artiﬁcial General Intelligence (AGI)
2. Problems with reward function hacking and ethical decision making in AGI
3. Intractability problems, such as the undecidability of ethics and veriﬁcation issues
4. The multidimensionality of the problem space and other open challenges
The author concludes that the only way to mitigate potential risks from AGI is by designing a system with
multiple narrowly focused AGIs or comprehensive AI services, each with its own set of safety mechanisms, rather
than relying on a single all-purpose superintelligent agent. The article provides valuable insights and
references for readers interested in the subject, including those in the ﬁeld of AI research, ethics, and
cybersecurity.

In summary: The article argues that it's impossible to ensure the safety and control of a superintelligent AI as
it will have the ability to evolve independently of its programming. The author suggests mitigating potential
risks by designing a system with multiple narrowly focused AGIs or comprehensive AI services, each with their
own set of safety mechanisms.

Checking 02whole.txt

 I like cats, and when I think about or understand language about cats, my simulators for CAT integrate various
stored representations of typical cat encounters from the different modalities. The auditory representations are
not analogically related to the visual ones, however. So, while my thinking about cats is an embodied process
insofar as it involves the activation of multi-modal simulators, it does not follow that my representations of
cats are themselves modality-specific—there seems no reason why they couldn't be amodal symbols, just as long as
they have some mechanism to be integrated by PSS. Shapiro (2011) makes this point more formally by arguing that
we could postulate an abstract conceptual code, in parallel with modality-specific ones, which is responsible
for integrating them all and ensuring the coherence of our cognition.

I conclude that there is no special problem for amodal theories of cognition from the SGP, understood as a
mapping problem. As Shapiro (2011) puts it: "there is no reason to assume that grounding requires an embodied
view" (p. 406.) We now turn to the question whether this is a decisive argument against ELC, or merely another
criticism of a specific kind of argument for it.

There is one further issue to address before we can answer this question, however. I have so far assumed that it
is possible for amodal representations to be grounded. But this is an assumption which needs argumentative
support. Weiskopf (2010b), among others, argues that the only way in which abstract, amodal symbols could
possibly gain meaning or content would be by being mapped onto perceptual symbols via a mapping function—a
process which would make them sensorimotor, rather than abstract and amodal. The argument goes as follows:

1. Assume that the cognitive system manipulates a set of representations R.
2. R can only gain meaning if it stands in some relation to things or processes outside itself (i.e. it is
grounded).
3. Assume that there are no possible relations between R and non-representational entities, such as the physical
world.
4. Therefore, R must be mapped onto perceptual symbols.
5. Perceptual symbols gain their meaning from their relations to the physical world.
6. Therefore, R gains its meaning from its relation to perceptual symbols.
7. But perceptual symbols are sensorimotor in nature.
8. Therefore, R is itself sensorimotor in nature.

Weiskopf (2010b) argues that this argument is valid and sound, given the assumptions of step 3. However, there
are several potential problems with steps 5-7.

Firstly, it seems possible for amodal representations to be grounded by their relations to each other. This
would require some account of how these relationships arise, but that is a separate question. Secondly, if
perceptual symbols gain their meaning from the physical world, this does not imply that they are themselves part
of the physical world. They could still be abstract, amodal representations which stand in some relation to the
physical world. This would allow for amodal representations to be grounded without being sensorimotor or
modality-specific. Finally, it is unclear whether there is a unique mapping function which maps perceptual
symbols onto abstract, amodal ones (Weiskopf 2010b). The difficulty here is that the meanings of abstract
concepts like CAT are complex and multifarious, while the meanings of perceptual symbols seem to be quite
simple. This means that it seems unlikely that there could be a straightforward mapping function from the latter
onto the former.

102










In light of these criticisms, we can now return to the question of whether Weiskopf's objection against ELC is a
decisive criticism, or merely another criticism of a specific argument for it. I think the latter is the answer.
The embodied view's supposed advantage over the amodal view on the SGP derives from arguments such as the one
outlined above, but these arguments can be questioned on their own terms. If abstract, amodal representations
can be grounded in some fashion—and there seems no reason to assume they cannot—then there is no special problem
for them on the mapping problem. The embodied view's advantage over the amodal view on this issue therefore
vanishes.

In conclusion, the empirical evidence adduced in support of ELC does not definitively falsify the amodal view,
nor does it establish its truth. However, the empirical data do seem to favour ELC over the amodal view from an
abductive standpoint, given the parsimony and explanatory power of the former theory. The SGP, understood as a
mapping problem, does not pose a special difficulty for either theory, while Weiskopf's argument against ELC on
the SGP is questionable given that abstract, amodal representations can be grounded without being sensorimotor
or modality-specific.

In the next chapter, I argue that there is another advantage which embodied theories of cognition have over
their amodal rivals—one which does not depend on content determination or the SGP.

Checking 0302005.txt

 This paper proposes a quantum theoretical framework to model the dynamics of bistable perception in cognitive
science. The authors argue that perception can be treated as an unstable two-state quantum system, with
measurement corresponding to the mental process determining how the figure is perceived. They apply the concept
of the quantum Zeno effect to describe the switching between different perceptions, which they propose is a
result of the truncation of an extremely complicated system into a two-state system. The authors derive a
relation between the time scales involved and find that empirically obtained cognitive time scales relevant for
bistable perception satisfy this relation.

Checking 0304171.txt

 The document describes a relativistic variant of the Wigner function, which is a quasiprobability density over
trajectories instead of phase space in quantum field theory. This formalism is conceptually similar to the
Feynman integral but uses quasiprobabilities instead of phase integrals. The author discusses the application of
this relativistic variant Wigner function to the quantized real Klein-Gordon field (mQKG), which does not exist
for QKG, prompting the introduction of a modified quantized real Klein-Gordon field (mQKG). The emphasis on mQKG
as a field theory allows for a clear characterization of the similarity and group theoretic difference between
quantum fluctuations and classical thermal fluctuations. The extension to other non-interacting fields is also
discussed.

Checking 0306108v2.txt

 The document is a research article that aims to prove the existence and smoothness of a Cauchy hypersurface in
a globally hyperbolic spacetime. A Cauchy hypersurface is a subset of a Lorentzian manifold endowed with a
time-oriented Lorentzian metric, which is intersected exactly once by every inextendible timelike curve. The
article begins by reviewing the basics of globally hyperbolic spacetimes, Cauchy hypersurfaces, and their
properties.

The authors then prove that any closed connected spacelike hypersurface N which does not intersect a Cauchy
hypersurface is achronal (Proposition 3.7), meaning it cannot be crossed by any timelike curve. They also show
that if two disjoint Cauchy hypersurfaces S1 and S2 satisfy certain conditions, then any closed connected
spacelike hypersurface S contained in the union of their forward lightcones U = I +(S1) is a graph on all S1
(Proposition 3.9).

Finally, the authors prove Theorem 1.1 which states that every globally hyperbolic spacetime admits a smooth
spacelike Cauchy hypersurface S0 and is diffeomorphic to R × S0. They achieve this by constructing a function hp
with compact support on a convex neighborhood of any point p in the spacetime such that hp is timelike and
past-pointing in the past of the Cauchy hypersurface, and then summing up these functions to form a smooth
function h. The level hypersurfaces of h restricted to the region I +(S1) form a smooth closed spacelike
hypersurface Sh for each regular value s.

The document also includes references to various related works in Lorentzian geometry and relativity.

Checking 0386 (Knuth).txt

 In this paper, the author explores the relationship between the logics of assertions and inquiry using lattice
theory. The author begins by defining a given question as the set of statements or assertions that answer it,
and demonstrates how logical implication on the Boolean lattice provides the framework for the calculus of
inductive inference.

The author then introduces the concept of a question and defines an ideal question, which is used to construct
the entire question lattice and identify it as a free distributive lattice. Real questions are shown to be a
sublattice of the entire lattice of questions.

The author also discusses the relationship between probability, relevance, and entropy in the context of the
lattice structure of these spaces, and highlights how symmetries between the two lattices exist but they are not
isomorphic. The paper provides an interesting insight into the logical structures underlying assertions and
questions, and the potential implications for fields where ordering relations play a significant role.

Checking 0390473.txt

 This

This paper is a dialogue between Henrik Skov Nielsen, representing unnatural narratology, and Karin Kukkonen,
representing second-generation cognitive narratology. The discussion revolves around the definitions of
fictionality and its exceptional nature in literature.

From an unnatural perspective, fictionality is defined as "invention." Fiction is treated as a made-up discourse
that should not be assumed to resemble reality. Unnatural approaches acknowledge the difference between the
constraints narrators are under when reporting versus inventing, leading to a more nuanced understanding of
fictional texts.

On the other hand, second-generation cognitive approaches argue for a continuity between everyday and fictional
cognition. They propose that fiction is a transformation or escalation of the everyday imagination, inviting
responses to what is given and taken as invented. The imaginary and constructed are common in various aspects of
society and culture, but the particular overlap and transformation into fiction warrant further investigation.

The authors discuss Ian McEwan's "On Chesil Beach" and Hilary Mantel's "Beyond Black," using these novels to
explore their respective perspectives on fictionality and its exceptional nature. The dialogue ultimately
highlights the convergence of unnatural and cognitive narratology and the importance of investigating fiction's
unique role in society and culture.

Checking 0403692.txt

 Ine this paper, Morgan argues that Bell inequalities are not violated for random ﬁelds models with thermal or
quantum ﬂuctuations, as the assumptions required to derive Bell inequalities are not satisﬁed in these cases.
The paper highlights the differences between Bell's original approach and a more general approach in the
literature. Morgan also discusses the distinctions between beables and non-beables, but argues that the only
aspect relevant for this study is the attachment of random variables to bounded regions of space-time.

The author introduces the concept of continuous random ﬁelds, which can be understood as random variable-valued
distributions or operator-valued linear maps with trivial commutators. Morgan also compares quantum ﬁelds and
random ﬁelds by emphasizing the diﬀerent attitudes towards idealized measurements and explores their
similarities and diﬀerences.

Lastly, the paper mentions the limitations of quantum theory and its need for further development, particularly
in regards to modeling quantum ﬂuctuations explicitly instead of implicitly.

Checking 0411156.txt

 This paper, authored by Peter Morgan from Yale University, discusses a succinct presentation of the quantized
Klein-Gordon field and its comparison with a classical Klein-Gordon random field at non-zero temperature. The
authors approach is based on algebraic structures, specifically Lorentz invariant inner products, to present
both quantum and classical fields in a similar style. This allows for a detailed comparison between the two,
highlighting their differences and similarities.

The paper begins by discussing the indirect presentation of relativistic quantum field theories through
expectation values of vacuum states, followed by an intermediate algebraic presentation of the quantized
Klein-Gordon field. Then, it constructs a classical random field with a similar noncommutative algebraic
structure at non-zero temperature. This comparison reveals that a quantum field theory is closer to a classical
random field than quantum mechanics is to classical particle mechanics.

Furthermore, the authors introduce an interaction-free quantum description in section 4 where the measurement
apparatus is less affected by quantum fluctuations than the rest of the universe. The principal technical
characteristic of this heterodox quantum field theory is that its Lorentz invariant quantum vacuum state is not
annihilated by the annihilation operators, but instead is an analogue of a thermal state.

The paper also discusses the classical Klein-Gordon random field at non-zero temperature and compares its
probability density with the quantized Klein-Gordon field's probability density. This comparison shows that
while there are notable similarities, changes such as replacing kBT by h and Galilean symmetry group by Poincaré
symmetry group reveal significant differences between thermal and quantum fluctuations.

Overall, this paper offers a fresh perspective on the relationship between classical random fields, quantum
field theories, and measurement, providing new ways of thinking about both.

Checking 0412143.txt


1

Theorem 47 shows that the quantum query complexity of RFSg
h is exponential in h if µ (g) < 0.146, while Theorem 49 shows that this lower bound is optimal for gmod 3 (s).
By combining these two results, we obtain a dichotomy theorem, which classiﬁes all RFS variants into the trivial
or nontrivial classes.
h h = O(log n)

Proposition 50 If either h = O(1) or else h > O (log n), then RFSg
h has a quantum speedup over its classical counterpart.

Proof. We have already seen that if h = O(1) then the quantum algorithm of Lemma 43 is optimal, and hence there
is no quantum speedup. On the other hand, if h > O (log n), then by Theorem 47 there exists a g for which Q2
(RFSg
h) = Ω
(µ (g))−
h/2
. We claim that such a g is necessarily nontrivial. Since h > O (log n), we have µ (g) < 0.146, and hence by
Theorem 49 g is parity of some subset B of input bits. But since h > O (log n), |B| > log n = n/log log n,
contradicting the claim that the quantum algorithm needs only a logarithmic number of alternations to solve RFSg
h classically. Thus we have a contradiction, and hence no such g exists.

87

Chapter 10

Quantum Lower Bounds for Graph Problems

This chapter explores two questions about the quantum query complexity of graph problems.
The first question is whether there exist graphs with quantum query complexity substantially
higher than their classical counterparts. The second question is whether we can use quantum
computing to solve the Hamiltonian cycle problem (HCP) in polynomial time, thereby answering a longstanding open
problem in graph theory. I answer ‘no’ and ‘yes’, respectively.

The HCP asks for a closed circuit of minimum weight in a directed or undirected graph—that is,
a circuit whose edges sum to the smallest possible weight among all circuits. (In this chapter, I will
consider only unweighted graphs, that is, with all weights equal to 1.) The HCP is a classic open
problem in graph theory, and is not even known to be polynomial time solvable when restricted to
certain classes of graphs—notably, planar graphs. The problem has been shown to be APX-hard, but
no approximation algorithms are known that come close to the best possible ratio for all graphs.
(See the survey by Applegate et al. [31] and the article by Arora et al. [25].)

The best classical algorithm for the HCP is due to Lin and Kernighan, and runs in time O (n4).2 The
quantum algorithm that I present uses a technique due to Grover, and runs in time Ω (√n n log n)
—though this speedup is not yet quite impressive enough. Still, it is the first known quantum speedup
for a problem of this kind, even though many researchers have considered quantum algorithms for similar
problems, such as clique [73], vertex cover [145], and maximum bisection [20].]

The graph in Section 10.1 is used to illustrate the quantum HCP algorithm of Section 10.2. In
Section 10.3 I present a quantum lower bound for finding the minimum number of tests, as well as a
quantum lower bound on finding the minimum number of tests that cover k faulty items (given k). The
lower bounds are incomparable; each is optimal for some graph but not others. I conclude in Section 10.4 with
some open problems.

2The running time can be reduced to O (n3) using dynamic programming, by avoiding the need to
search exhaustively through all vertices after eliminating an edge. See the article of Zhu and L Zhang [258].

0, 1
}

1, . . . , n

→ {

S → {

a directed or undirected graph with vertex set
n, and edge set E
E = {
}
i, j : i 6= j
.
Let the weight of E be wt (E). We say that a circuit W is closed if its first vertex is the same as its last
vertex,
and that the weight of W is wt (W) = ∑
j=1
|wj
| , where wj
is the edge weight between the jth and (j+1)th vertices in W. The Hamiltonian cycle problem asks for a closed
circuit of minimum weight. In this chapter, I will consider only unweighted graphs, that is, all edges have unit
weight.

10.1 A Quantum Algorithm for HCP

The algorithmic approach to the HCP is inspired by the classical Lin-Kernighan algorithm, and is based on the
idea of a 2-edge exchange: that is, swapping two edges in a circuit without increasing its weight (Figure 11.1).
In particular, we will search for a sequence of 2-edge exchanges, called an ‘alternating path’, that leads to a
closed circuit.

Consider the following unweighted graph Gn = (V, E) where V = {0, 1, . . . , n−1}, and E = {
eij : i, j
j 6= i
}.
The graph Gn is an example of a ‘dicyclic’ graph: it has no circuits but does have cycles. In
particular, there are three vertices in G (0, 1, 2) that form a triangle—that is, each vertex is connected to
the other two.

Figure 10.1: The graph Gn = (V, E), where V = {0, 1, . . . , n−1} and E = {
eij : i, j
j 6= i}.

The algorithm begins by initializing a register to contain an arbitrary vertex x. It then enters a loop, in
which it chooses an adjacent vertex y that is not the first vertex of any circuit containing x. This choice is
possible since there are at least n−1 edges leaving from x, and not all of them can belong to a closed circuit.
The register is then updated to contain y. We repeat this until we reach a vertex z whose neighbors form a
triangle: that is, z has two neighbors x and y such that both eix-ez and ey-x are in E (Figure 10.2).

The algorithm terminates by reporting the circuit x-z-y, where y is an arbitrary neighbor of z. The classical
Lin-Kernighan algorithm uses a similar procedure to search for a sequence of 2-Edge exchanges that transforms a
circuit W into another circuit X with a smaller weight. It then returns X as the answer.

Figure 10.2: (a) A vertex z whose neighbors form a triangle. (b) The circuit x-z-y, where y is arbitrary.

Inspired by the classical algorithm, we now seek to ﬁnd a closed circuit with a quantum speedup over O (n3). To
do this we will search for an alternating path in Gn using Grover’s algorithm [124], which can ﬁnd a marked item
from a list of unmarked items in time √n n log n. In our case, the list is not truly unmarked: rather, each
vertex i is marked if and only if there exists a j

i
j such that eij ∈ E (Figure 10.3). Thus, an alternating path of length h can be found with
hlog2 n log log n h log n
queries, using h iterations of Grover’s algorithm. Let us now formalize this idea.

To simplify the description of the quantum algorithm, we will assume that the initial vertex x is always 0.

Figure 10.3: A marked vertex i in the graph Gn.

Let U = {|u0>, |u1>, . . . , |un−1>} be a basis for the Hilbert space, where |ui
= |i⟩ denotes the unit vector in this basis. Then we define the ‘superposition state’

|

h

= 1∥i∈V |ui⟩,

where h
= 1 log n log log log n or h = log n. The register is initialized to this superposition state. We will refer to
i as the ‘register index.’ Then let us deﬁne a unitary operator U2e
acting on the register and another qubit, which implements a 2-edge exchange between vertices i and j:

(cid:1)

|i⟩i |j⟩
= |j⟩i |j⟩i

(cid:2)

|u
h |⊗ q⟩ → U2eij
|uj
h |⊗ q⟩
.

Here, we assume that qubit q is initialized to |0⟩ and is never altered during the algorithm’s execution. For
each edge eij ∈ E, we define a corresponding unitary operator U2eij . The role of U2eij is to swap i and j: that
is, to map |ui
h → |uj
h , while leaving other |uk
h ’s unchanged. We will use the following two properties of U2eij :

(1) U2eij = U2ejj ;

(2) for all i, j, k : i 6= j,

U2eij U2ekk = −

U2eikj U2ejj .

Figure 10.4: The quantum circuit for a single iteration of the algorithm.

The quantum circuit for a single iteration is shown in Figure 10.4. Here, the register index runs from i = 0 to
i = n−1. Also, there are two controlled gates that apply U2eiij and U2ejjij , respectively. The goal of each
iteration is to place the register index at some vertex whose neighbors form a triangle, in order to terminate
the algorithm (Figure 10.2).
Let us now describe how the controlled gates act on the superposition state. The controlled gate
U2eiij will cause a phase change if i and j are adjacent in the graph; otherwise it leaves the
superposition unchanged:

(cid:1)

|u
h |⊗ 0⟩ → U2eiij
|uj
h |⊗ 0⟩ + (1 −
U2eiij )
|ui
h |⊗ 0⟩ ,

i, j 6= i.

(cid:1)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:1)

|u
h |⊗ 1⟩ → U2eiij
|uj
h |⊗ 1⟩ − (1 −
U2eiij )
|ui
h |⊗ 1⟩ ,

i, j 6= i.

The controlled gate U2ejjij is a special case of the above: it leaves the superposition state unchanged if j and
i are adjacent; otherwise, it causes a phase change in the |u
j
h component:

(cid:1)

|uj
h |⊗ 0⟩ → U2ejjij
|uj
h |⊗ 0⟩ ,

j 6= i.

(cid:1)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

|uj
h |⊗ 1⟩ → U2ejjij
|uj
h |⊗ −1⟩ .

j 6= i.

The algorithm proceeds as follows. In each iteration, the controlled gates are applied in parallel, followed by
a Grover ampliﬁcation step (which I will describe shortly). If the register index lands on some vertex whose
neighbors form a triangle, then the algorithm terminates and outputs the circuit x-z-y, where z is arbitrary.
Otherwise we repeat the above procedure for h iterations.

89

(cid:1)

The Grover ampliﬁcation step works as follows. The register index is initially in a uniform superposition over
its values i = 0 to i = n−1. The oracle U, which acts on the register alone and maps |u
h → |uj
h if and only if ui
j is marked (Figure 10.3), is applied for h log n log log log n times. Then an application of a phase-Preserving
Fourier transform F

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:1)


transforms the uniform superposition to one concentrated on the index i, where ui
j is marked (if any). The probability of success is Ω

h log n log log log n
. Since h = O (log n), it follows that the success probability is Ω (1).

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

Deﬁnition 51 We say that a Boolean function f :
{
}
→ {
is ‘quadratically closed’ if for all x, y, z
x, y, z
3
f (x) + f (y) + f (z) = f (x) + f (z) + f (y). That is, swapping any two pair of arguments does not change the
output. An example is the parity function gmod 2 (x, y) = x x
y
+ y . We say that a quantum circuit f :
→ {
is ‘quadratically closed’ if for all circuits A and B,
A(f ) ◦ B(f ) = B(f ) ◦ A(f ). Here, ◦ denotes composition, and we view the inputs to f as being ordered. For
example, the circuit gmod 2 (x, y) ⊗ gmod 2 (z, w) is quadratically closed, since it implements the function x
(y)z
w
+ w
(x)z + z . We will soon see that the unitary operators U2eij are quadratically closed. Thus, our quantum circuit
for HCP is also quadratically closed.

Now we analyze the algorithm’s running time. The classical circuit for a single Grover ampliﬁcation step has
depth O (log n), and each application of the phase oracles requires a single query. The number of queries used
by h iterations of the algorithm, then, is 2h h log n = h log n n log log n =
Ω

n log n log log log n. This improves on the classical running time O (n3) only when log log log n ≤
log n n, or when h ≥
√n. Therefore we need to choose h = 1 or h = log n. The circuit for a single iteration has depth O (h), and
since there are h iterations, the total running time is
Ω

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

CA

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

h = 1 : O (n log n)

= √n

log n

h = log n : O (n log n log log n) .

The quantum speedup for h = log n is substantial, but not yet impressive enough. To make the situation more
interesting, it turns out that there are graphs where the quantum speedup can be much higher than this. I will
discuss these graphs in Section 10.3.

10.2 A Quantum Lower Bound for HCP

Let us now see whether the above algorithm is optimal: that is, whether a closed circuit of minimum weight
can be found quantumly with fewer queries than h = O (log n) or h = log n. We begin with some properties of the
unitary operators U2eij . Since they are quadratically closed (as noted in Section 10.1), it suﬃces to consider
a single circuit: that is, a sequence
i1
= i0 ,
i2
= i1 ,

U2eiij U2eikl U2eklj .

The following lemma is straightforward to check:

Lemma 52 The unitary operators U2eij are all self-inverse.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

\

Let

= |ui
h |⊗|u
j
h |⊗|uj
h |⊄⊗|u
k
h |

where ui

is the unit vector in the Hilbert space corresponding to vertex i. Then Lemma 52 implies that

U2eiij U2ejiij = (|ui
h |⊗|uj
h |⊗|uj
h |)2 ,

or, equivalently,

(cid:18)

|uj
h1|

= ∑k∈V |uk
h |
U2eikj U2eklj U2ejjij .

Since the HCP is quadratically closed (see Section 10.1), it suﬃces to consider a single circuit W. We will now
use the adversary method of Ambainis [27] to lower-bound QC (W). Consider an oracle relation R(X, Y) = 1 if and
only if X
Y is in W. The following lemma holds:

Lemma 53 Let X and Y be vertices such that X
Y is not a closed circuit. Then R(X, Y) = 0.

Proof. If there exists an edge eij ∈ E such that eiXj ∉ E, then U2eiij maps |uj
h → −|ui
h , and hence Wt (W) + 1 contradicts the minimality of W. Similarly, if there exists an edge ej
k

∈ E such that ejjX

k k is not a closed circuit, then U2ejjij maps |uj
h into −|uk
h , and hence Wt (W) + 1 is again contradictory.

(cid:0)

The following lemma holds:

Lemma 54 Let X and Y be vertices such that X
Y is a closed circuit. Then RS (X, Y) = |W| /|V|, where Wt (X) = wt (Y).

Proof. If X
Y is not a closed circuit, then by Lemma 53, R(X, Y) = 0. So assume that X
Y is a closed circuit of weight w. Since |V| = n and |W| = m, it suﬃces to show that |R(W)| = m/n. This is the
case if the oracle queries R(X, Y) and R(Y, X) are equally likely to produce the answer 1, and the remaining
queries R(X, Z) and R(Z, X) are equally likely to produce the answer 0. But since the oracle is symmetric, this
condition holds for any choice of Z 6= X, Y.

We will now bound QC (W). The adversarial algorithm will be a quantum version of the classical Lin-Kernighan
algorithm, which uses a register to store a vertex V and a list of edges L, along with a pointer T that points
into L. Initially, V = 0 and L = E. At each step, it chooses an edge e =
ij from L whose endpoints i, j are such that neither is the current vertex V. It then replaces the sublist
L[T+1, T] with
ei-L[T], and sets T := T + 1. When the list is exhausted, it backtracks to the previous vertex, if any, and
repeats the above procedure. The classical algorithm terminates when it reaches a vertex whose neighbors form a
triangle (Figure 10.2).

Let us now describe the quantum version of the above algorithm. We will represent L as a superposition over all
edges, just as we did for the vertices in Section 10.1. For each edge eij = |ei⟩j , we deﬁne the following
unitary operators: U3eij and U4eij . Here

U3eij
|ui
h |⊗|uj
h → U3eij
|uj
h |⊗|ui
h ,

(cid:18)

i 6= j, and

U4eij |ui
h |⊗|uj
h → −|uj
h |⊗|ui
h .

(cid:1)

The quantum circuit for a single iteration is shown in Figure 10.5. We also initialize a register to
contain the current vertex V, and apply a controlled application of U2eiij whenever eij is an
element of L. The goal of each iteration is to place the register index at some vertex whose neighbors form a
triangle, or else to remove some edge from L if it does not satisfy the 2-edge exchange condition. Let us now
describe how the controlled gates act on the superposition. A controlled application of U3eij causes a phase
change if eij is an element of L; otherwise it leaves the superposition unchanged:

(cid:1)

|ui
h |⊗ 0⟩ → U3eiij |uj
h |⊗ 0⟩ + (1 − U3eijj ) |ui
h |⊗ 0⟩ .

(cid:1)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:1)

|uj
h |⊗ 0⟩ → U3eijj U4ejjij |ui
h |⊗ 0⟩ + (1 − U3ejij U4eijj ) |uj
h |⊗ 0⟩ .

i, j 6= i.

The controlled gate U4ejjij causes a phase change in the |uj
h component if eij is an element of L that can be taken part in a 2-edge exchange with some other edge: that is,
if there exists k such that ejk

i and eikj

are both in E. In other words, U4ejjij causes a phase change whenever the corresponding edge eij
L is not ‘valid.’ The algorithm proceeds as follows. In each iteration, we apply all the controlled gates in
parallel (Figure 10.6), followed by a Grover ampliﬁcation step. If the register index lands on some vertex whose
neighbors form a triangle, or if L is empty, then the algorithm terminates and outputs the circuit x-z-y, where
z is arbitrary. Otherwise we repeat the above procedure for h iterations.

Figure 1ingenitures in the Hilbert space corresponding to the edges of L. Since these gates are quadratically
closed, it suﬃces to consider a single circuit: that is, a sequence U3e1 U4e2 U3e3 U4e4 . . . U3en−1 and
U4en−1 U3en−2 . . . U3e2 U4e1 .
Let us analyze the algorithm’s running time. The quantum circuit for a single iteration has depth O (h), where h
= log n or h = 1, and since there are h iterations, the total running time is O (n log n log log n) or O (n log
n). So the quantum speedup is
Ω (1) /(log n log log n ) for h = log n, and
Ω (1) /(log n ) for h = 1. As we saw in Section 10.1, the quantum algorithm has a speedup only when log log log
n ≤ log n. This implies that there is a speedup when h = 1, but not when h = log n.

Figure 10.5: The quantum circuit for a single iteration of the algorithm.

91

(cid:1)

We can now show that the algorithm is optimal by proving that no closed circuit W can be found with fewer than O
(n log n log log n) queries, where h = log n or h = 1. For each edge eij ∈ E, we define a superposition state

|vij
h |⊗|uj
h ,

where vij
is the unit vector in the Hilbert space corresponding to vertex i. Let Wt (W) = m and |V| = n. Since each
application of U2eij causes a phase change if eij ∈ W, it suﬃces to consider a single circuit: that is, a
sequence
U2ei1 U2eik1 . . . U2en−1 kn

(cid:1)

where i1 = i0 ,
i2 = i1 ,

j1 6= i, and
jk2 = k1 .

(cid:18)

Using Lemma 54, we have RS (X, Y) = m/n whenever X
Y is a closed circuit. Thus the number of queries Q used by the algorithm is

Q = ∑|L| + |V|(1 + |L|/n)
= 2|E| + |V|(1 + |E|/n)
= (3n + n)|E|/n .

where L is the list of edges in the algorithm. Since |E| = n(n−1)/2, it follows that

Q > (n log n)(log log n) for h = 1 ,

> (n log n) log log log n for h = log n .

So the quantum algorithm is optimal up to a constant factor.

10.3 Quantum Lower Bounds for other Graph Problems

In this section I present two more lower bounds on quantum query complexity: one for finding the minimum number
of tests (MinTest) in an undirected graph, and another for finding the minimum number of tests that cover k
faulty items (MinTestk ) given k. These lower bounds are incomparable to the ones in Section 10.2: each is
optimal for some graphs, but not others.

To solve MinTest, we will search for an ‘independent set’—that is, a subset such that no two vertices belong to
the same edge. This can be done with the algorithm of Ambainis [26], which uses O (√n) queries in the worst
case. The quantum version of the classical algorithm is similar: we initialize a register indexed by vertices
and apply controlled NOT gates whenever the corresponding vertices are adjacent.
Let us now analyze the running time. The quantum circuit for a single iteration has depth O (1), since there is
at most one controlled NOT gate per qubit. So the total running time is O (n√n). Since this speedup is only √n,
it is not impressive enough; but it is the ﬁrst known quantum speedup for MinTest.

To solve MinTestk , we will use a similar idea as in Section 10.1, and search for an ‘alternating path’ of
length h between two faulty vertices. Let us begin by describing a problem related to MinTestk : finding the
minimum number k of tests that cover all faulty items (MinCover ).
Since we are assuming the graph is undirected, it suﬃces to consider a single circuit: that is, a sequence i1 =
i0 ,

j1 6= i, and j2 = j1 . The following lemma holds:

Lemma 55 Let G be a connected, undirected graph. Then the minimum number of tests covering all faulty items
(MinCover ) is at least equal to twice the diameter of the longest shortest path in G. Here, a ‘shortest path’
is one that uses the fewest edges.

Proof. Let C be a minimum test and let D = max {|W | : W is a subset of V with no tests in C}. Then for every
vertex x ∈ V \C, we have N (x) >
|C|, where N (x) denotes the number of tests covering x. Since G is connected, there exists a path from any x to
some other vertex y such that y ∈ C. So |W| + |W| ≥ |C|, and hence
2|W| ≥ 2|C| > |V|. The claim follows by noting that D = V .

To solve MinTestk , we will search for an ‘alternating path’ of length h between two faulty vertices: that is, a
sequence i1 = i0 ,
j1 6= i, j2 = j1 , . . . , and
ikk = ik, where ikk is arbitrary. We will use the following lemma to lower-bound QC ():

Lemma 56 Let G be a connected, undirected graph. The minimum number of tests kk that cover all faulty items
(MinTestk ) is at least equal to twice the diameter of the longest shortest path in G.

Proof. As noted above, MinCover ≥ 2Diameter(G).
Now since every test covers k items, it follows that MinTestk ≥ 2kk D /2k = kk D/k .
Since |V| = n and D ≤ n, it follows that kk ≥ D/n. The claim follows by noting that kk = O (D log n).
To see why QC (

) is at least twice the diameter of the longest shortest path, note that each test requires O (|V|) queries.
Since there are kk tests, and the diameter of the longest shortest path bounds the number of tests needed to
reach all vertices, it follows that QC (
) ≥ |V|(2Diameter). We claim that this bound is tight for Gn.

The quantum circuit for a single iteration is similar to the one in Section 10.1: we initialize a register
indexed by vertices and apply controlled NOT gates whenever the corresponding vertices are adjacent (Figure
10.7). The difference is that we mark only k-subsets of vertices, rather than individual vertices. That is, if G
= {i1 , . . . , ikk }
is a k-subset of V, then we mark |G| and all subsets of size strictly less than |G|.

(cid:0)

(cid: Logarithmic Algorithmic Speedup on a Quantum Computer

(cid:1))

Figure 10.6: The quantum circuit for the backtracking step.

(cid:1)

Let us now analyze the running time. The quantum circuit for a single iteration has depth O (h), where h = kk or
h = 1, and since there are h iterations, the total running time is
Ω (n log n log log n ) for h = kk ,
O (n log n) for h = 1. The quantum speedup. The bound on QC (

) holds only when kk ≥ √n, and hence there is a speedup when h = 1, but not when h = kk .

(cid:0)

Figure 10.7: The quantum circuit for a single iteration of the algorithm.

10.4 Open Problems

We conclude with several open problems related to the HCP and other graph problems.

(i) The best known classical algorithm for solving the Hamiltonian cycle problem is O (n3). Can a closed circuit
be found quantumly in time √n n log n?

(ii) What is the exact relationship between classical and quantum lower bounds on the minimum number of tests
needed to cover k faulty items (MinTestk )? It seems plausible that there exists a class of graphs where MinTest
(k = 2)
< QC (MinTestk ), but it would be interesting to know what such graphs are.

(iii) The quantum algorithm for the HCP can be extended to search for an alternating path in a more general
graph, by introducing ‘gadgets’ that implement controlled U2eij . For example, a 3-gadget for eij would consist
of four qubits: |ui
h , |uj
h , |uk
h , and |vk
h . The unitary operator U2eij is implemented by swapping the states |uj
h and |uk
h , while leaving other states unchanged. In general, how can we construct a gadget for any given edge? For
which graphs can an alternating path be found quantumly with fewer queries than classically?

(iv) The quantum algorithm in Section 10.2 uses a single register to store the current vertex and a list of
edges,
and it uses Grover’s algorithm to search for a closed circuit or a triangle. But if we replace the list of edges
with a superposition of all possible edges, then it seems plausible that an alternating path can be found in
fewer queries than h = O (log n log log n ). For example, one could use the ideas of Brickell et al. [63] and
Grover et al. [124] to implement a controlled application of U2eij on a superposition
of edges. Can this be done? What is not clear is how to handle backtracking in the algorithm.

(v) The quantum algorithm for the HCP can be extended to search for an alternating path in a directed graph by
adding gadgets to implement controlled U2eijj and U2ejji . It seems plausible that an alternating path can be
found in fewer queries than classically. For example, one could use the ideas of Brickell et al. [63] and Grover
et al. [124] to implement a controlled application of U2eijj on a superposition
of edges. Can Can this be done? What is not clear is how to handle backtracking in the algorithm.

(vi) Let T be a tree with vertices 0, 1, . . . , n−1 and edge weights wt (e). Let T′ be obtained by reversing
the direction of every edge eij if i > j. The problem is to ﬁnd an alternating path in T or T′, such that the
weighted sum of its edges is as close as possible to a given target value X. The classical algorithm proceeds by
maintaining a register indexed by vertices and a list of edges. At each step, it chooses an edge eij whose
weight wt (e) is closest to X, and swaps i and j in the list and in the register. It terminates when it reaches
a vertex whose neighbors form a triangle. The quantum version of this algorithm has a speedup
√n n log n only when h = O (log n). Is this optimal? What about h = 1?

(vii) Consider the problem of finding the shortest path between two vertices in a weighted, directed graph with
edge weights wt (e) and vertex set V. The best classical algorithm has a running time of O (n3 ) when every edge
is weighted. The quantum algorithm proceeds as follows: we initialize a register indexed by vertices and apply
controlled NOT gates whenever the corresponding vertices are adjacent (as in Section 10.3). We mark only
vertices whose degree is less than |V|, since they can only belong to shortest paths of length
≥
|V|. Then we use Grover’s algorithm is applied to search for a vertex whose degree is |V|. The quantum algorithm
terminates when it reaches a vertex whose neighbors form a triangle (as in Section 10.2). It is not clear that
this algorithm runs faster than classically, since the controlled NOT gates may cause interference between the
superpositions of adjacent vertices.

93

Chapter 11

Quantum Lower Bounds on Boolean Functions

To prove a quantum query complexity lower bound on a given problem, we must show that any algorithm solving this
problem requires many queries. In Section 7.5, I used the adversary method of Ambainis [26] to give a lower
bound on the query complexity of a certain snake-like random walk in a Boolean hypercube. This chapter shows how
to apply the adversary method to arbitrary Boolean functions, and gives the best known quantum query complexity
lower bounds for many total functions (that is, functions that take a complete binary assignment).

To begin, I recapitulate the adversary method of Ambainis [26]. Let Y be an unknown input from {
0, 1}n. The goal is to distinguish between Y and another ‘test’ X D, which may or may not
be a random permutation of the bits in Y. Let R (Y, Z) = 1 if and only if Z = Z(Y), where
Z (Y) is obtained by applying some function g on each coordinate of Y. The adversary algorithm
work as follows:

1. Choose an arbitrary vertex X to query. Then we let V be the set of all vertices whose Hamming
distance from X is at most one. We say that a test D ‘covers’ a point X if it differs from X in a single bit.
2. For each Y ∈ V, we compute the probability Pr[D = Z(Y) | Y = X]. If this probability is close to 1, then we
assume that D covers Y (since a random test would be unlikely to agree with X on so many bits). Also, if this
probability is
close enough to zero, then we assume that there exists some point Xi in V such that both X and Xi are covered by
D but that the Hamming distance between them is greater than one. This assumption
will allow us to argue that D cannot be a random permutation, and hence it must actually implement some
deterministic function g.
3. We repeat the above procedure for all vertices whose neighbors lie in V. If we eventually find a point X such
that its neighbors all cover it (and no neighbor has distance greater than one), then we can conclude that D is
a deterministic function g.
^C

Checking 0427.txt

 This paper proposes TEMP (Type-aware Entity and Relation Processing), a novel type-aware plug-and-play model
for multi-hop reasoning over knowledge graphs. The main contributions of the paper are:

1. TEMP contains two key components: Type-aware Entity Representations (TER) and Type-aware Relation
Representations (TRR).
2. TER aggregates type information of entities to strengthen their vector representation, and TRR uses entity
type information to construct a global type graph and enhance the relation representation, while integrating it
with its type representation and existing entity type information.
3. The authors conduct experiments on three real-world datasets and demonstrate that after incorporating TEMP
into four state-of-the-art baselines, their generalization, deductive and inductive reasoning abilities are
significantly improved.
4. The paper also includes ablation experiments to study the effect of separately using type-enhancement on
entities or relations and different implementations of entity and relation type aggregation models.
5. The proposed model is supported by several grants from organizations such as the National Research
Development Program of China, the National Natural Science Foundation of China, the Chang Jiang Scholars
Program, a Leverhulme Trust Research Project Grant, and the Centre for Artificial Intelligence, Robotics and
Human-Machine Systems at Cardiff University.

References to related work include Bordes et al.'s work on translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational
data, Weston et al.'s embedding logical queries on knowledge graphs, and Chen et al.'s topology-aware
correlations between relations for inductive link prediction in knowledge graphs.

Checking 04568078.txt

 In@ Sarit Kraus and Daniel Lehmann present their work on decision procedures for three logical systems, TCg,
TCb, and Tef, defined in [LS], which are deductively complete with respect to different classes of models. These
systems have impressive expressive power, and Teb is the most expressive of those defined in [EH2]. The authors
prove that these systems are PSPACE-hard and provide a non-deterministic exponential lower bound for their
validity problems. They also compare their decision procedures with those of other probabilistic logics and show
that no elementary decision procedure is known for a logic of branching time as expressive as theirs.

1. Introduction:
The authors introduce the context of their work, which revolves around logical systems designed to reason in
uncertain worlds where time flows and transitions between instants are probabilistic. They present an overview
of three logical systems (TCg, TCb, and Tef) proposed in [LS], each defining a different notion of validity (a,
b or t-denotes probability). The authors claim that Teb is the most adequate for stating and proving properties
about a large family of probabilistic systems.

2. The Logical Systems:
The authors present the formal definitions of the three logical systems and their completeness result (Theorem
1) which guarantees that any valid formula in these systems is satisfied by all models.

3. Lower Bounds:
They prove that all three systems are PSPACE-hard (by reducing a one-letter PDL to each system) and provide a
non-deterministic exponential lower bound (Theorem 2) for their validity problems using the results of [SC].
They also compare the efficiency of these decision procedures with those in [BMP] and [EH1] for weaker logics of
branching time.

4. Upper Bounds:
The authors discuss how all three completeness proofs proceed by building a "universal" model, which may be
finitely described despite being infinite in size (for systems 9 and b). They propose a decision procedure for
TCg based on the concept of standard sets.

Checking 04_12_2020_Can_Machine_Think_70.txt

 This intelligence is a complex concept that has been the subject of much debate and research for many decades.
Alan Turing, considered the father of artificial intelligence, posited in his 1950 article "Computing Machinery
and Intelligence" that machines could potentially think and even pass as human. However, the last 70extit{70}
years have seen a variety of approaches to building intelligent machines, with no clear consensus on which
approach is most promising.

Gurdeep Pall, corporate vice president at Microsoft, discussed the historical history of artificial
intelligence, from its origins in philosophy and mathematics to the current deep learning revolution. He argued
that the connectionist approach, based on neural networks and deep learning, has made significant strides in
recent years but is still limited by the amount of data required, opacity of the learning process, and lack of
semantic understanding.

Leonid Zhukov, head of the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at Sberbank, agreed that embodied intelligence and
the combination of symbolic and connectionist approaches will likely be important in building future intelligent
machines. He emphasized the importance of experience and exploration in developing a deeper understanding of the
world.

Michael Wooldridge, professor of computer science at Oxford University, argued that true artificial general
intelligence is unlikely to be achieved anytime soon, as humans are the product of billions of years of
evolution and reinforcement learning. Instead, he suggested focusing on building specific intelligent machines
for particular tasks, such as self-driving cars or medical diagnosis.

Gary  Bradski, scientist, engineer, and entrepreneur, argued that true artificial intelligence will require a
theory of mind, the ability to understand human relationships and desires. He emphasized the importance of
grounding meaning in the physical world and suggested that embodied machines, such as robots, will be crucial in
building future intelligent systems.

Checking 05-200124Full.txt

 In this lecture, we learned about algorithmic tradeoffs and the use of ArrayLists in Java. We looked at a
problem where we wanted to find unique words in a list, sorted in ascending order, and discussed three different
methods (A, B, and C) for solving it.

Method A involved adding each word to a sorted list, checking if it was already present before adding it. Method
B involved sorting the list first and then removing duplicates as we processed the sorted list. Method C used
the Java API, specifically a Set and ArrayList, to accomplish the same task without loops.

We also discussed the concept of objects in Java and how they can extend the Object class, inheriting certain
properties like toString(), equals(), and hashCode(). We saw an example of creating a Point class and read
points from a file into an ArrayList.

The lecture touched upon the importance of considering tradeoffs between different algorithms and measuring
runtime performance using mathematical analysis or empirical methods. The lecture also mentioned Joy Buolamwini,
an advocate for algorithmic justice and fighting algorithmic bias in facial recognition technology.

Checking 05-CSG_Procedural.txt

 In this text, Stelian Coros discusses Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) and Procedural Modeling. CSG is a
method of building complex objects from simple primitives using Boolean operations. It represents solid objects
as a hierarchy of Boolean operations stored in a binary tree data structure. The Boolean operations are not
evaluated until the final object is needed. On the other hand, Procedural Modeling aims to describe 3D models
algorithmically and is best for models resulting from repeating or similar structures and random processes. It
offers advantages such as automatic generation, concise representation, and parameterized classes of models.

The text then introduces L-systems (Lindenmayer systems), a model of morphogenesis based on formal grammars.
These systems consist of symbols, production rules, and a start symbol. They generate sequences of symbols by
recursively applying these production rules to the start symbol. L-systems can be deterministic or stochastic,
context-free or context-sensitive, and nonparametric or parametric.

The text also mentions various applications, such as procedural modeling of buildings, furniture design, and
plant modeling. For example, TreeSketch is an interactive tree modeling tool that uses L-systems to generate
trees. There's a presentation schedule with dates and topics, including talks by Alec Jacobson, Ladislav Kavan,
and Olga Sorkine-Hornung about Inside-Outside Segmentation using Generalized Winding Numbers.

Checking 05.Colloquial Russian The Complete Course for Beginners.pdf ( PDFDrive ).txt

 I'm sorry for the confusion, I think you meant "summarize" instead of "summarize", which actually doesn't exist
as a word. I assume you meant to ask fora summary or a condensed version of a text, or an explanation in simpler
terms.

To summarize a text, it is important to identify the key points, ideas or messages conveyed by the author. This
can be done by skimming through the text and identifying headings, subheadings, or bullet points, and then
paraphrasing and explaining each point in your own words. Additionally, using synonyms and active voice can make
the summary clearer and more concise.

For example:

Original Text: The report states that the company's sales increased by 15% last quarter due to an effective
marketing strategy and strong customer demand.

Summary: The marketing strategy and high customer demand led to a 15% sales increase for the company last
quarter.

Checking 0507104.txt

 This paper investigates covariant informationally complete measurements for bipartite quantum systems and
compares their statistical efficiency when performed locally or globally on the two systems. The authors show
that Bell measurements, which are a special case of global measurements, can be used to estimate the expectation
values of any operator with partial traces proportional to the identity, such as maximally entangled operators
and traceless factorized observables. They also provide the minimal noise (averaged over an ensemble of
covariant states) for factorized, global, and Bell infocomplete covariant measurements and compare their
resulting statistical efficiencies. The study is organized into sections on notation, optimization of
data-processing, covariant infocomplete measurements for bipartite systems, product of local infocomplete
measurements, global infocomplete measurement, Bell measurement, and comparison and conclusions. The authors
conclude that for factorized traceless operators, Bell projectors, and the density matrix estimation in
factorized basis, the Bell measurement always performs better than the unrestricted global measurement, which in
turn outperforms the local one. However, for diagonal matrix elements in the factorized basis, the Bell
measurement cannot be used, and global and local POVMs perform equally well. For matrix elements in an
orthogonal Bell basis, the Bell POVM is optimal for diagonal matrix elements, whereas for off-diagonal matrix
elements it cannot be used, and the global measurement performs better than the local one. The work was
sponsored by INFM and EC and MIUR through various projects.

Checking 0508381.txt

 The≤-->∞
d→

The study investigates the relationship between spatial correlations in disordered packings of spheres and their
asymptotic behavior in high dimensions. The authors introduce two test radial distribution functions, a unit
step function and a step plus delta function with a gap, to maximize the density φ under the constraints that
the distribution is nonnegative, satisfies the hard-core constraint, and has a positive structure factor S(k)
for all wavenumbers k.

The authors show that for the unit step function test radial distribution function, the Yamada condition is
satisfied in any dimension d, but the average kissing number Z = d/2 is not sufficient to meet the local jamming
criterion. They also demonstrate that there exist sphere packings with this radial distribution distribution up
to the terminal density φ = 1/(2d) in low dimensions, providing a lower bound on the maximal packing density.

For the step plus delta function with a gap test radial distribution function, the authors optimize the
parameters σ and Z using numerical methods for small dimensions and show that the terminal density φ = (d +
2)/(2d + 1) improves significantly over Minkowski's lower bound in high dimensions. They also conjecture that
this test radial distribution function, or similar ones, correspond to actual disordered sphere packings in high
dimensions, and propose necessary and sufficient conditions for their existence.

The authors suggest that their results may have implications for understanding the nature of dense packings and
their relationship with jammed packings, as well as providing new techniques for optimizing packing density in
practical applications.

Checking 0512190.txt

 In this paper, Peter Morgan proposes a weakening of linearity for quantum fields by allowing the operator
valued map ˆφ : f to be nonlinear. This allows for the construction of interacting quantum field models without
violating the additivity property in Local Quantum Physics. The algebra generated by these operators still
satisfies linearity, but the quantum fields are no longer required to be tempered distributions. The author
argues that interaction in quantum fields is implicitly nonlinear due to the dependence on test functions used
to describe experiments and their associated energy scales. The paper discusses the construction of free field
models with a nonlinear inner product and the deformation of electromagnetism using this approach. The proposed
method may lead to new insights and applications in physics, as it allows for the modeling of correlation
functions between observables without the need for operator-valued distributions or infinite calculations that
are common in conventional perturbation theory.

Checking 0537.txt

 The paper "Transformers as Soft Reasoners over Language" by Peter Clark, Oyvind Tafjord, and Kyle Richardson
from the Allen Institute for AI in Seattle proposes a modern approach to artificial intelligence (AI) that
involves using transformers to reason with rules expressed in natural language, rather than formal
representations. The authors train RuleTakers, models that achieve high accuracy (99%) on synthetic data
generated from linguistic theories and rules, and can generalize to test data requiring substantially deeper
chaining of reasoning (95%+ scores).

The study also demonstrates the effectiveness of these models in solving hand-authored reasoning problems and
transferring to theories expressed in more natural language. The findings suggest a new role for transformers as
soft theorem provers over explicit theories, potentially opening up possibilities for explainability,
correctability, and counterfactual reasoning in question-answering systems.

The authors note that other neural architectures can learn similar tasks, with BERT and ESIM achieving lower
scores (95% and 80%, respectively), while RoBERTa learns these tasks more easily. The researchers also discuss
the challenges of extending the theory language to handle multi-variable rules or reasoning with disjunctive
conclusions, as well as generating training data that adequately covers various types of inference problems.

The study has significant implications for AI research and development, as it paves the way for systems that can
reason with natural language rules, making it easier to create and maintain knowledge bases and potentially
opening up new possibilities for instructable algorithms and counterfactual reasoning.

Checking 06-BA101.txt

 This] This paper provides an overview of the historical development of Bayesian statistics, from Thomas Bayes'
essay in 1763 to the modern era. It focuses on key figures such as Laplace, Fisher, and Savage, and discusses
the influence of philosophy and mathematics on the field. The author also highlights the neo- Question: When did
Bayesian inference become "Bayesian"? " Answers: The term "Bayesian" began to be used widely in the 1950s,
particularly by statisticians working at the University of Chicago and Harvard. It was during this period that
Bayesian ideas gained widespread acceptance and became distinguishable from frequentist approaches.

Checking 06-BA115.txt

 In this paper, James Berger discusses the value of objective Bayesian analysis in statistics. Objective
Bayesian analysis is a methodology used to make statistical inferences when subjective information about the
parameters of interest is lacking or unavailable. This approach uses prior distributions that reflect a lack of
specific knowledge about the parameters and are designed to be minimally informative.

Berger argues that objective Bayesian methods are valuable because they provide a readily understandable
communication of the information in the observed data, respect the frequentist notion that methodology must
ensure success in repeated usage, and offer a simple way for non-statisticians to handle complex problems. He
also discusses some philosophical perspectives on objective Bayesian analysis and addresses criticisms raised
against it.

Some motivations for using objective Bayesian analysis include the appearance of objectivity often required in
science, the fact that most statistics is not done by statisticians, and the uniﬂcation of statistics through
the use of objective Bayesian methods. However, Berger also acknowledges some criticisms of objective Bayesian
analysis, including its impropriety, model dependence, and potential incoherency. He concludes by suggesting
that while there are dangers in using a too-casual approach to objective Bayesian analysis, formal objective
techniques should be accepted with conﬁdence.

Checking 0603001.txt

 In this paper, the authors propose a holographic description of the entanglement entropy in quantum (conformal)
field theories using the AdSd+2/CFTd+1 correspondence. They summarize their proposal as the area law relation
(1.5). The authors then compute the entanglement entropy for various systems, such as 2D CFTs and the 4D large-N
super Yang-Mills theory, and check that in the lowest dimensional case (d = 1), their formula exactly coincides
with the entropy computed directly from CFT. They also find that the computation for AdS5 × S5 reproduces the
same functional form of entanglement entropy as the 4D free super Yang-Mills theory, despite some differences in
numerical coefficients. The authors argue that this agreement supports the idea that the gravity description
corresponds to a strongly coupled gauge theory, and they discuss the implications of their results for the study
of quantum critical phenomena and the holographic principle.

Checking 060467v2.full.txt

 This article explores the relationship between information and energy in the context of neuroscience. It
discusses how the information content of any system in the brain, at any level of structure, can be quantified
using a modified form of the universal information-entropy bound. The author also introduces the concept of
stratification, where information is argued to be stratified between layers of influence, and discusses how
information-energy equivalence applies in this context. The article suggests that living systems conform to a
principle of optimization, maximizing both internal energy and relative information as coupled processes. It
then goes on to explore how these concepts apply to neurobiology, consciousness, and free will. References are
provided for further reading.

Checking 0606081.txt

 This equal sign (=) is not supported in Markdown format. Here's a summary of the text:

The article discusses recent developments and future prospects in Artificial Intelligence (AI), focusing on
sequence processing and the convergence of history. The author argues that each major breakthrough in computer
science tends to come roughly twice as fast as the previous one, and predicts that the next radical change will
manifest itself by 2015. This change is expected to bring machines with raw computing power matching that of a
human brain, and individual machines approaching the raw computing power of all human brains combined by around
2030.

The article also briefly reviews some of the new results in AI, such as universal program learning methods and
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which have made significant strides in sequence processing tasks. RNNs are
particularly useful for handling sequential data because they have an internal state, allowing them to model
complex dynamics and solve tasks involving program learning and sequence learning.

The author also extends the analysis of past computer science breakthroughs to human history since the
appearance of Cro Magnon man, suggesting that there is a pattern of exponentially declining temporal intervals
between major historic events. This could be an artifact of how humans allocate memory space to past events or a
real convergence of history. The article concludes by discussing recent advances in RNN research and their
applications, such as speech recognition and music composition.

Checking 0607165.txt

 This document is a research paper titled "Models of measurement for quantum fields and for classical continuous
random fields," authored by Peter Morgan from Yale University. The paper discusses the differences,
similarities, and relationship between quantum fields and continuous random fields. The author explains that
while equilibrium states of continuous random fields have nonlocal correlations like quantum fields, they are
not a replacement for quantum field theory due to their significant measurement algebra differences.

The text begins with an introduction where the author shares his motivation for exploring the relationship
between quantum fields and continuous random fields ten years ago. He then briefly describes some basics of
continuous random fields and derives Bell inequalities for them, mentioning that these assumptions are not
generally satisfied by random fields.

In the later sections, the author discusses measurement and its implications on understanding quantum field
theory. He argues that Bell inequalities cannot be derived for random fields and explores alternative
interpretations of the Bell inequalities as statistical consistency and measurement incompatibility rather than
Einstein locality. The paper concludes by acknowledging the importance of both quantum field models and random
field models in physics research, with appropriate references to related literature.

Checking 0608040.txt

 The Question: Prove that the nerve of a small category is an ∞-category and that the Yoneda embedding preserves
limits, colimits, and isomorphisms.

Answer:

To prove that the nerve of a small category C is an ∞-category, we need to check that it satisfies the
conditions of Definition 2.0.0.1. Condition (1) is satisfied since the identity functor on C is obviously a left
and right Quillen functor. Condition (2) is also satisfied because for any two morphisms f,g in C with the same
domain and codomain, they are equal by definition of a small category.

Now let's prove that the Yoneda embedding preserves limits, colimits, and isomorphisms.

First, let's recall the definitions: The Yoneda embedding functor Y : C ↪ Set is given by Y(X) = Hom(C,-,X),
where X is an object in C. A limit (colimit) in C is defined as a limit (colimit) in the category Set of
presheavesh(C,Set).

Preservation of Limits:
Let's consider a diagram F : J ⥵ C with a limit ... ⨝ Xi in Set, where i indexes the objects in J. We want to
show that (Y(Xi)) ⋔ F = Y(⨝i Xi). Let gj : Xi ⥷ Xj be the unique morphism making X... ⨝ Xi ⥷ Xj, for each i and
j. We have:

(Y(Xi) ⋔ F) (x) = Hom(C,-,Xi)(x)(F(x)) = (Hom(C,-,Xi)(x)(x) )(F(x)) = gj(x) (F(x)) = F(gj(x)(x)) = F((⨝i Xi)(x))
= (Y(⨝i Xi) )(x).

So Y(⨝i Xi) ⋔ F = Y(Xi) for all x in C, hence Y(⨝i Xi) = Y(⨝i Xi) in Set. This shows that the Yoneda embedding
preserves limits.

Preservation of Colimits:
Dually, let's consider a diagram F : J ⥵ C with a colimit (cocone) Ci on Xi in Set. We want to show that (Y(Xi)
) ⋔ F = Y(Ci). Let hj : Ci ⥷ Xj be the unique morphism making F(hi) = gj for all i and j. We have:

(Y(Xi) ⋔ F)(x) = Hom(C,-,Xi)(x)(F(x)) = (Hom(C,-,Xi)(x)(x) )(F(x)) = hj(x) (F(x)) = F(hj(x)(x)) = F(Ci(x)).

So Y(Ci) ⋔ F = Y(Xi) for all x in C, hence Y(Ci) = Y(Xi) in Set. This shows that the Yoneda embedding preserves
preserves colimits.

Preservation of Isomorphisms:
Finally, let's show that Y(φ : X ⥷ Y ) is an isomorphism if and only if φ is an isomorphism in C. If φ is an
isomorphism, then Hom(-,-)(X) ≅ Hom(-,-,Y), so Y(X) ≅ Y(Y). Conversely, if Y(X) ≅ Y(Y), then for any x in C and
y in X: Hom(C,-,X)(x)(y) = Hom(C,-,Y)(x)(y) = gj(x) (y) = gj⁻¹(gj(x)(y)) = φ(x)(y), where gj is the unique
morphism from x to y in X. This shows that φ preserves composition and identity, hence φ is an isomorphism in C.

In summary, the nerve of a small category is an ∞-category, and the Yoneda embedding functor Y : C ↪ Set
preserves limits, colimits, and isomorphisms.

Checking 0610067.txt

 ThisQuestion: The authors propose a method for discovering the structure of commonsense knowledge by using
language itself as a guide to understanding the underlying ontology. They argue that language 'understanding' is
a commonsense reasoning process at the pragmatic level, and that children are able to understand language due to
their possession of all the required commonsense knowledge.

The method is based on Frege's principle of Compositionality, which states that meaning is derived from the
meaning of individual words and how they are combined in a sentence. The authors use a predicate App(p,c) to
determine if property p applies to concept c, and discover an ontological hierarchy by analyzing the subsets of
adjectives and nouns that can combine with each other using this predicate.

They also discuss the challenges of handling metaphor and polysemy in their approach, and provide examples of
how their method can be used to understand intensional verbs and nominal compounds. They also touch on the
possibility of creating a meaning algebra based on their ontology.

The authors argue that this approach is promising as it simultaneously provides solutions to various problems in
natural language semantics, such as handling metaphor and polysemy, while also reflecting our commonsense view
of the world and the way we talk about it in everyday language

The paper is in two parts:

1. Language and Knowledge: The authors argue that the process of language understanding is a commonsense
reasoning process at the pragmatic level, and children possess all the required commonsense knowledge to
understand spoken language. They use the example of App(p Since this is a long text, it is important to provide
a summary that captures the main points in an accurate and concise manner. Here is a suggested summary of the
paper:

The authors propose a systematic method for discovering the structure of commonsense knowledge by using language
itself as a guide. They argue that understanding language involves commonsense reasoning at the pragmatic level,
and that children are able to understand language due to their possession of all required commonsense knowledge.
The method is based on Frege's principle of Compositionality, which states that meaning is derived from
individual words and how they are xtit;' combining in a sentence. The authors use a predicate App(p,c) to
determine if property p applies to concept c, and discover an ontological hierarchy by analyzing the subsets of
adjectives and nouns that can combine with each other using this predicate. They argue that their approach is
promising as it reflects our commonsense view of the world and handles various problems in natural language
semantics, such as metaphor, polysemy, and intensional verbs. They also touch on the possibility of creating a
meaning algebra based on their ontology.

The paper proceeds as follows:

1. Language and Knowledge: The authors introduce the idea that understanding language involves commonsense
reasoning at the pragmatic level and that children possess all required commonsense knowledge to understand
language. They use the example of the predicate App(p,c) to determine if property p applies to concept c.
2. Language and Ontology: The authors argue for the existence of an ontological structure that reflects our
commonsense view of the world and the way we talk about it. They propose a method for discovering this ontology
by analyzing the subsets of adjectives and nouns that can combine with each other using the App(p,c) predicate.
3. Semantics of Intensional Verbs whose meaning is not directly related to their extension in the real world,
such as "intend," "believe," and "seem," are called intitensional verbs. These verbs can pose challenges for
natural language processing and semantic analysis because they do not have a straightforward mapping to
real-world objects ->> real-world entities or properties. In this section, the authors discuss the semantics of
intensional verbs using their ontological framework, providing an explanation for how these verbs relate to
concepts in the hierarchy.
4. Semantics of Nominal Compounds: The authors discuss the challenges of The authors then move on to nominal
compounds, which are phrases made up of two or more nouns combined together, such as "blackboard" or "bedroom".
These compounds can be difficult to analyze semantically because of the various relationships between the
constituent nouns. The authors propose a method for analyzing the meaning of nominal compounds using their
ontological framework and provide examples of how it applies to common compound words.
5. Towards a Meaning Algebra: The authors discuss the possibility of creating a meaning algebra based on their
ontology, which would allow for more formal and systematic analysis of natural language semantics. They provide
some initial thoughts on what such an algebra might look like and how it could be used to analyze various
linguistic phenomena.

Overall, the authors propose a method for discovering the structure of commonsense knowledge using language
itself as a guide. They argue that this approach reflects our commonsense view of the world and handles various
challenges in natural language semantics, such as metaphor and polysemy. The method is based on Frege's
principle of Compositionality and uses a predicate App(p,c) to determine if property p applies to concept c. The
authors provide examples of how this method can be used to understand intensional verbs and nominal compounds,
and discuss the possibility of creating a meaning algebra based on their ontology.

Checking 0610077.txt

 The paper by Peter Morgan introduces a concept of displacement deformed quantum fields, which are an extension
of the free quantum field theory. This extension allows for a non-trivial state and algebra generated by
creation and annihilation operators as well as displacement operators, all satisfying commutation relations. The
approach is motivated by the desire to construct models with better mathematical control in discussions of
renormalization and potentially new conceptualizations of physical processes.

The paper starts with a brief introduction of the earlier work [1] that laid the foundation for this approach.
The author mentions their failure to deform quantum fields using methods of Arik-Coons type, but introduces a
new way to construct extensions of Fock space using displacement operators. These displacement operators are
real-valued functions on test function spaces and verify specific commutation relations with creation and
annihilation operators.

The rest of the paper develops consequences for modeling correlations in this framework. It discusses various
ways to use these displacement operators, including constructing vacuum states with non-Gaussian probability
densities and deforming field observables. The author also touches on the relationship between this approach and
methods for constructing nonlinear quantum fields and discusses some philosophical considerations.

The paper provides simplified identities related to the commutation relation of displacement operators with
creation and annihilation operators, which are useful in understanding their effect. Additionally, it introduces
examples and calculations of probability densities for various models using these deformed quantum fields. The
author emphasizes that this approach is essentially empirical and may lead to new conceptualizations and
phenomenological models.

References:
[1] Morgan P 2006, quant-ph/0512190
[...]
[7] Morgan P 2005, Phys. Lett. A 338 8.

Checking 0611022.txt

 This paper outlines the architecture and programming model of modern graphics cards, specifically focusing on
their use for Monte Carlo simulations in lattice quantum chromodynamics. The authors argue that the high
performance, cost-effectiveness, and scalability of modern GPUs make them an attractive option for lattice
practitioners. They provide a brief overview of the GPU architecture, which is based on the processing of
textures as 2D arrays, with each texture having a width and height and consisting of pixels with RGBA color
channels. The authors also discuss how to calculate outgoing textures from incoming ones using fragment
processors and briefly mention other components in graphics cards such as vertex processors. They then go on to
describe how to program GPUs for lattice applications using OpenGL, graphics drivers, and the Cg programming
language. The paper also includes sample code for adding two textures and storing the result in a third texture.
Finally, the authors mention some current difficulties with GPU programming such as limited support for
conditional statements and loops and lack of debugging mechanisms, but express optimism about future
improvements and possibilities.

Checking 069402a0.txt

 The article discusses several topics, including geography, the essential relationship between elements of the
terrestrial environment and items of organic response, and some unsolved problems of organic adaptation. It also
mentions recent advances in understanding coloration among lower invertebrates and its relation to active
metabolism and excretion. The article emphasizes that while natural selection is important, the role of other
factors in organic evolution, particularly coloration, has been overestimated. The article concludes with news
briefs on various educational topics, including a tropical medicine and hygiene examination at Cambridge
University, donations to universities and schools, and reports from the Carnegie Trust for the Universities of
Scotland.

Checking 0704.0646.txt

 The.The Mathematical Universe Hypothesis (MUH) suggests that the external physical reality is a mathematical
structure, i.e., a set of abstract entities with relations between them. This hypothesis can be derived from the
External Reality Hypothesis and has implications for symmetry, computability, and the existence of parallel
universes. The MUH assumes the Computable Universe Hypothesis (CUH), which states that the mathematical
structure that is our external physical reality is deﬁned by computable functions. The CUH addresses G¨odel's
incompleteness theorems and Church-Turing incomputability, but poses challenges related to encoding and
equivalent structure deﬁnitions.

Checking 0704.3420.txt

 This document is a research paper on the construction of classical random Lie fields using deformed ⋆-algebras
of creation and annihilation operators. The authors aim to construct quantum-like random fields with Poincaré
invariant vacua and fluctuation scales determined by ~. They discuss the differences between their approach and
previous works, including the incompatibility of Lie fields with the spectrum condition.

Section II introduces the free Klein-Gordon quantum field and its classical counterpart using creation and
annihilation operators. Section III constructs scalar scalar classical random Lie fields, using a vacuum vector
to define a linear form over the algebra of creation and annihilation operators. The authors provide partial
proof and corroboration that this linear form is a state over the algebra.

Section IV discusses measurement and scattering theory for these Lie fields, showing they
have-quantum-field-theory-like particle interpretations. Section V constructs Lie fields based on vector or
electromagnetic fields. The paper concluding statistics are discussed for classical random fields, going beyond
the range of application of free fields.

The authors acknowledge the contributions of helpful referees and discuss the relationship between quantum field
measurement theories and classical random field ones in Appendix A.

Checking 0705.3239.txt

 This paper reports on the measurement of the longitudinal and Hall components of the resistivity in graphene on
silicon dioxide substrates at temperatures from 1.6 K to room temperature. The authors find that near the
charge-neutrality point, the longitudinal resistivity is strongly enhanced and the Hall resistivity is
suppressed, indicating nearly equal electron and hole contributions to the transport current. These findings are
inconsistent with uniformly distributed electron and hole concentrations but in excellent agreement with recent
theoretical predictions for inhomogeneously distributed electron and hole regions of equal mobility. At low
temperatures and high magnetic fields, the longitudinal resistivity saturates to a value ~h/e2, with Hall
conductivity << e2/h, which may indicate a regime of localized quantum Hall puddles. The authors suggest that
these features could be due to v = 2 and v = -2 quantum Hall puddles. They also discuss the possible origins of
the magnetoresistivity and propose that local potential fluctuations may induce electron and hole doped regions
in a nominally neutral graphene sheet, which would explain the finite conductivity and large magnetoresistivity
at the CNP. The authors find good agreement between their experimental results and the theoretical predictions
for an inhomogeneous distribution of electrons and holes with equal mobility and equal concentrations. They also
discuss the implications of their findings for the interpretation of quantum Hall effects in graphene.

Checking 0706.3639.txt

 This document is a technical report discussing various definitions of intelligence from psychologists,
collective organizations, and artificial intelligence researchers. The authors believe that while there is no
single standard definition of intelligence, they have compiled a collection of 70 odd definitions, which they
claim is the largest and most well-referenced one available. They argue that despite the diversity in
definitions, strong similarities between them can be observed. Intelligence is generally seen as an agent's
ability to achieve goals in various environments, adapt to objectives and environments, and succeed with respect
to some goal or objective. The authors also mention their own formal definition of intelligence as "a measure of
an agent’s ability to achieve goals in a wide range of environments." They conclude by providing references for
each definition cited in the report.

Checking 0708.2303.txt

 This paper argues for a compositional semantics grounded in a strongly typed ontology that reflects our
commonsense view of the world and the way we talk about it in ordinary language. The authors claim that this
approach would make the semantics of various natural language phenomena nearly trivial. They begin by outlining
their assumptions, including the existence of a subsumption hierarchy of categories such as animal, substance,
entity, artifact, event, and assuming the minimal ontology of entities and properties.

They introduce the concept of type unification, which occurs when a variable is associated with more than one
type in a single scope. The authors provide examples to illustrate how their approach handles different types of
natural language phenomena, such as nominal compounds (book review) and intensional verbs (find, read, paint).
They argue that a systematic investigation of how ordinary language is used in everyday discourse will help us
discover the ontological structure that underlies all that we say.

The authors suggest starting with a set of ontological categories embedded in appropriate properties and
relations based on our use of ordinary language. They then propose analyzing more complex phenomena, such as
nominal compounds or intensional verbs, to put structure on the ontological categories and iteratively use this
additional structure to repeat the process until we have a better understanding of the underlying ontology.

The authors briefly discuss some challenges and future work, including handling abstract objects and dealing
with quantifier scope ambiguities. Overall, their approach emphasizes the importance of understanding the
relationship between language, logic, and ontology in uncovering the structure of commonsense knowledge.

Checking 0712.1320.txt

 In this paper, the author gives a beginner-friendly overview of the concept of forcing in set theory. Forcing
was introduced by Paul Cohen in 1963 and allows mathematicians to prove the independence of certain set
theoretical statements from the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms. Despite its importance, forcing remains mysterious to
many mathematicians due to its complexity.

The author explains that models of set theory, specifically those satisfying the axioms of ZFC, can be thought
of as universes consisting of sets and a binary relation representing membership. The author then discusses the
concept of a Boolean algebra and how it relates to logical statements in a universe.

To construct a model that satisfies the negation of the continuum hypothesis (CH), the author suggests starting
with a countable standard transitive model M of ZFC and extending it by adjoining a new set U that is missing
from M, subject to certain conditions. This process is similar to the way a ring can be extended by adjoining a
new element X. However, constructing the extension requires careful consideration to ensure that the axioms of
ZFC are still satisfied.

The author also discusses the concept of generic ultrafilters and how they are used in the forcing construction.
Generic ultrafilters are important because they allow the construction of the smallest standard transitive model
containing both M and U, which is essential for realizing the dream of adjoining a new subset to obtain a larger
model.

Finally, the author briefly mentions Cohen's original approach to forcing using the concept of forcing relations
between elements in a partially ordered set. The author concludes by suggesting further reading for those
interested in learning more about the connections between forcing and other areas of mathematics.

Checking 0712.1529.txt

 This músontology and Formal Semantics: Grounding Logic in Commonsense Metaphysics
===============================================================================

The authors argue that logical and ontological concepts are distinct, with ontological concepts being
first-intension (e.g., human) and logical concepts being second-intension proof of this is seen through the
interpretation of sentences such as "Sheba is a thief," where intensional verbs like "planned" or "a" and "is"
are used, which can be explained without type lifting or the assumption of intensional and extensional verbs.
The authors also demonstrate an approach to semantics that unifies reference resolution, intensionality,
metonymy, and the discovery of ontological structure from language use. They provide a simple machinery for
handling types and salient relations between them, which can explain various phenomena in natural language
semantics. Finally, they discuss the possibility of discovering the underlying ontology from natural language
use.

The authors suggest that logical concepts are defined by logical expressions and are dependent on cultural,
temporal, and individual factors, while ontological concepts are assumed to exist and form a hierarchy in
subsumption relationships. They argue that intensional verbs like "found," "seek," and "read" can be explained
without type lifting or assuming intensional and extensional verbs by treating them as higher-order, and
providing a definition for the logical concept based on typical use in context. The authors also provide an
example of how the type unification between two types with no subsumption relationship results in keeping the
variables and introducing a salient relation between them. They suggest that "reference to abstract objects"
such as attributes, activities, or processes is necessary for understanding language and propose a function
msr(s, t) that returns the most salient relation R between types s and t with constraints m and n, respectively.
The authors also discuss the advantages of grounding semantics in a strongly-typed ontology that reflects our
commonsense view of the world and the way we talk about it in ordinary language. They ultimately aim to discover
this underlying ontological structure from natural language use

The authors argue for the importance of understanding the relationship between logical and ontological concepts,
proposing that logical concepts are defined by logical expressions and dependent on cultural, temporal, and
individual factors, while ontological concepts are assumed to exist and form a hierarchy in subsumption
relationships. They suggest that intensional verbs like "found," "seek," and "read" can be explained without
type lifting or assuming intensional and extensional verbs by treating them as higher-order, and provide a
definition for the logical concept based on typical use in context. The authors also provide an example of how
the type unification between two results in keeping the variables and introducing a salient relation between
them. They suggest that "reference to abstract objects" such as attributes, activities, or processes is
necessary for understanding language and propose a function msr(s, t) that returns the most salient relation R
between types s and t with constraints m and n, respectively. The authors also discuss the advantages of
grounding semantics in a strongly-typed ontology that reflects our commonsense view of the world and the way we
talk about it in ordinary language. They ultimately aim to discover this underlying ontological structure from
natural language use.

Checking 0712.3329.txt

 In this paper, we aimed to provide a theoretical definition of machine intelligence based on the informal
definition given by experts in the field. We started with an informal deﬁnition of intelligence, which we then
formalized by considering an agent's performance in a wide range of environments. We introduced Occam's razor
and used it to weigh an agent's performance in each environment based on its complexity. We called this measure
universal intelligence, and argued that it orders the power and adaptability of simple agents in a natural way.

We surveyed various informal and formal deﬁnitions and tests of machine intelligence, highlighting their
strengths and weaknesses. We concluded by discussing potential criticisms and future work, including
constructing a test of universal intelligence and investigating the relationship between human and machine
intelligence.

Checking 0731948715615557.txt

 This & this study aimed to examine the effects of an inference-making intervention on the reading comprehension
abilities of middle-grade students with disabilities, specifically, inference and evaluation tasks. The
intervention involved teaching students to use a graphic organizer and stem stems to help them make inferences
from text. Additionally, goal setting was embedded in two of the three intervention groups.

The study found that all groups improved in their overall reading comprehension performance from pre- to
posttest, but students in the group goal setting condition significantly outperformed the other two groups on
evaluation tasks. The study also reported that students in the group goal setting condition wrote more valid
inferences throughout the intervention sessions compared to the other groups.

The study had some limitations, including the small sample size and unique settings of the participating
schools. Additionally, it is unclear if the findings would generalize to larger populations or classrooms
without the embedded goal setting component. The study also acknowledged that teacher effects could not be ruled
out due to the different interventionists used in each school.

Despite these limitations, the study provides valuable insights into the effectiveness of an inference-making
intervention with a focus on goal setting for middle-grade students with disabilities. Future research is urged
to explore the long-term implications of this approach and its potential impact on overall academic achievement
and educational attainment.

Checking 07620358.txt

 This research paper by Liu et al. (2023) presents an extension of the Variational Implicit-Solvent Model (VISM)
for biomolecular solvation, called VESIS, to include solute mechanical interactions. The authors develop
efficient algorithms and GPU implementation for VESIS simulations to determine molecular equilibrium
conformations. They employ a fast binary level-set method for minimizing the solvation free energy of
solute-solvent interfaces and construct an adaptive-mobility gradient descent method for solute atomic
optimization. Numerical tests and applications on several molecular systems demonstrate the accuracy, stability,
and efficiency of their methods and algorithms. The new methods and GPU implementation significantly improve the
efficiency of molecular simulations over the CPU implementation. The study may enable simulating large systems
such as protein-protein interactions and membrane dynamics where explicit-solvent all-atom molecular dynamics
simulations are expensive.

The paper is categorized under MSC codes 65Mxx, 35Kxx, and 35Rxx, with keywords including binary level-set
method, GPU implementation, variational implicit-solvent explicit-solute model, Coulomb-field approximation,
molecular mechanical interactions. The software used for this study is LS-VISM.

References are provided from various sources such as journals and conferences, with authors like Bates et al.
(2009), Best et al. (2012), Cheng et al. (2007, 2009, 2010), Dzubiella et al. (2006, 2008), Esdoğlu and Jacobs
(2017), Gera et al. (2018), Gibou and Fedkiw (2005), Guo et al. (2013, 2014), Halgren (1996), Huang et al.
(2017), Jorgensen et al. (1996), Lie et al. (2006, 2008), Lum and Chandler (1999), MacKerell et al. (1998,
2004), Merriman et al. (1992), Ramirez and Borgis (2005), Ricci et al. (2018), Ruuth (1998, 2001, 1999), Wang et
al. (2017, 2012), Watkins (2004), Zhang et al. (2021), Zhou et al. (2014), and Zhou et al. (2015).

Checking 07627111.txt

 The given research article, "Towards a comprehensive approach to optimal control of non-ideal binary batch
distillation" by Zadravec et al. focuses on the optimization of batch distillation processes for non-ideal
binary mixtures using the Pontryagin maximum principle and diﬀerent approaches: Discretized and Parameterized.
The authors modeled the start-up and production phases, taking into account mixture non-idealities. They
conducted a case study of ethanol-water mixture batch distillation at two levels of separation difficulty and
liquid holdup. Results showed that up to 26% energy savings can be achieved by using their proposed methods
compared to conventional constant reﬂux ratio profiles. The performance of optimal control was shown to vary
with changes in process parameters.

The study employed the CGDESCEN T, Optim, Julia, and DiﬀerentialEquations.jl software for computational
analysis. References cited include works on batch distillation optimization, thermodynamic properties, and
mathematical optimization.

Checking 07628249.txt

 This paper addresses the ambiguity of charges in the context of integrable gravitational theories, focusing on
the work of Ciambelli, Leigh, and Pai (CLP) who defined nonzero charges for all diffeomorphisms acting near the
boundary of a subregion. The authors demonstrate that ambiguity-free charges can be obtained by appealing to the
variational principle for the subregion. They also clarify the reason behind integrability of Hamilton's
equation for standard diffeomorphisms, showing that Wald-Zoupas charges are associated with a modified
transformation in the extended phase space. The paper also discusses the relationship between various works on
gravitational charges and holographic renormalization.

Checking 07635589.txt

 The paper titled "Homoclinic bifurcation for a bi-stable piezoelectric energy harvester subjected to galloping
and base excitations" published in Applied Mathematics Modeling, investigates the homoclinic bifurcation
behavior of a piezoelectric energy harvester under galloping and base excitations. The authors used MSC
classifications 70K50, 34C23, 49K05, and 49S05 to describe the research field and applied homoclinic bifurcation
theory, nonlinear dynamics, and optimization methods to analyze the system. They cited various references
related to piezoelectric energy harvesting, galloping oscillations, transverse vibrations, magnetostrictive
materials, internal resonance, hybrid energy harvesters, circular plates, and aeroelasticity. The paper's
findings could contribute to improving the design and performance of piezoelectric energy harvesters in various
applications, such as wind energy harvesting, vibration energy harvesting from structures, and flow energy
harvesting.

Checking 07644347.txt

 In this paper, Medvedev proves that the Morse index of the critical Möbius band in the 4-dimensional Euclidean
ball B4 equals 5. The author also conjectures that this is the only embedded non-orientable free boundary
minimal surface of index 5 in B4. The proof relies on a comparison theorem between the spectral index of the
Steklov problem and the energy index, which is used to give another proof of the result that the index of the
critical catenoid in B3 equals 4 as well.

The paper is tagged under minimal surfaces in differential geometry, surfaces with prescribed mean curvature,
minimal surfaces and optimization, and variational problems concerning minimal surfaces (problems in two
independent variables). The main keywords are free boundary minimal surfaces, Morse index, and Steklov problem.

The references include works by Ambrozio et al., Devyver, and Fraser et al., among others.

Checking 07647350.txt

 The article by Tilgner (2022) derives bounds for rotating Rayleigh-Bénard convection with free slip boundaries
as a function of the Rayleigh, Taylor, and Prandtl numbers. Three bounds are derived from the momentum equation
and the maximum principle for temperature: RaTa−1/3 for RaTa>130, Nusselt number Nu≤7.36Ekin, a
Ekin≤(1/2π2)(Ra2/Ta)(Nu−1). These bounds are extended to general Prandtl numbers using the fact that the
maximal velocity in rotating convection at infinite Prandtl number is bounded by 1.23RaTa−1/3.

The paper cites numerous references on variational methods, turbulent convection, and fluid mechanics. Some of
these references discuss upper bounds on dissipation, Nusselt numbers, and energy transport in various fluid
flow contexts. Other references deal with the optimum theory of turbulence, inertia-less convectively driven
dynamo models, infinite Prandtl number convection, and heat transfer in rotating convection. The paper is
written in English and has been peer-reviewed by the Journal of Fluid Mechanics. It falls under the Mathematical
Physics category with keywords: variational methods, rotating flows, turbulent convection.

Checking 07652870.txt

 The paper by Huang and Wei proposes an efficient and stabilized approach for the analysis of Reissner-Mindlin
plate problems using a meshfree Galerkin formulation. They address two common issues in existing locking-free
methods: the need for large kernel support sizes and the construction of conforming representative domains.

To circumvent these issues, the authors develop a quasi-consistent reproducing kernel approximation, enabling
smaller kernel support sizes without moment matrix singularity. They also introduce a bending consistent nodal
integration method that achieves bending consistency in the Galerkin formulation without using a conforming
cell. Additionally, they implement a variational multiscale stabilization method to maintain locking-free
properties while avoiding low energy instability. The proposed approach is validated through several benchmark
problems.

The authors cite various studies on plate analysis and meshless methods. These references include works by
Zienkiewicz and Taylor, Bathe and Dvorkin, Simo and Rifai, Wilson et al., Bletzinger et al., Liu et al., Chen et
al., and Wang and Chen. The literature review covers the development of reproducing kernel particle methods,
element-free Galerkin methods, and related topics in solid mechanics and computational mechanics.

Checking 07654504.txt

 The authors study asymptotic state transformations in continuous variable quantum resource theories and prove
that monotones displaying lower semicontinuity and strong superadditivity can be used to bound transformation
rates. They apply this result to three cases: optical nonclassicality, entanglement, and quantum thermodynamics.
The authors also introduce a handy variational expression for the measured relative entropy of nonclassicality
and use it to establish their results. The paper yields computable upper bounds on asymptotic transformation
rates and shows that these bounds include those achievable under linear optical elements. Additionally, the
authors prove results guaranteeing that the measured relative entropy of nonclassicality is bounded on any
physically meaningful state and easily computable for certain classes of states of interest. They conclude by
applying their findings to the problem of cat state manipulation and noisy Fock state purification.

The paper covers topics in foundations, quantum information and its processing, quantum axioms, and philosophy
(MSC 81Pxx), communication, information (MSC 94Axx), and selfadjoint operator algebras (C ∗-algebras, von
Neumann (W ∗-) algebras, etc.) (MSC 46Lxx). The reference list includes works by Bennett, Shannon, Cover, and
King, among others.

Checking 07654851.txt

 This paper explores relations between three different types of energies arising from physical scenarios,
specifically Willmore-type energies, area functionals in weighted manifolds, and free energies of a fluid
deposited on a horizontal hyperplane with potentials dependent on height. The authors prove that the generating
curves for these energies coincide under certain conditions when the critical point is a hypersurface of
cylindrical type. They also analyze the stability of a liquid drop deposited on a horizontal hyperplane with
vertical potential energies and prove that it is stable in the class of all graphs with the same boundary.

The paper includes references to various works on minimal surfaces, elasticity theory, differential geometry,
and calculus of variations. Some notable references include works by Euler, Gauss, Germain, Helfrich, Morgan,
Palmer, and Willmore, who have made significant contributions in the areas of minimal surfaces, mean curvature,
and elasticity theory. Other references cover topics such as area-minimizing surfaces, stability analysis, and
gradient flows.

Checking 07658584.txt

 This paper focuses on resummed expressions for the heat-kernel (HK) trace of a Laplace operator with potential
and Dirichlet semitransparent boundary conditions on a surface in flat space. The authors derive first and
second order expansion results for the HK, which can be utilized to obtain bulk and surface form factors for a
scalar quantum field theory in d = 4 with Yukawa coupling to a background. Furthermore, they discuss the
relationship between heat-kernels for Dirichlet semitransparent, Dirichlet, and Robin boundary conditions.

Keywords: Dirichlet, Robin, and semitransparent boundary conditions; Dirac delta potentials; point interactions

MSC Classification: 81-XX (Quantum theory), 83-XX (Relativity and gravitational theory)

Checking 07658585.txt

 This paper discusses the inverse problem in modeling complex systems, such as neural networks, simple liquids,
and spin systems. Instead of using textbook approaches, these models often work in reverse: given data with
known averages and correlations, researchers seek to find the model parameters consistent with this data. The
authors focus on a perturbed Gaussian model with polynomial corrections for continuous degrees of freedom, but
note that some models have exactly solvable non-Gaussian parts like independent Ising spins or an ideal gas of
particles.

The authors implement a diagrammatic perturbative scheme in weak correlations around a non-Gaussian yet solvable
probability weight. This method can be applied to spin models (Ising, Potts, Heisenberg) with weak couplings or
a simple liquid with a weak interaction potential. The framework allows systems with discrete and continuous
degrees of freedom to be treated equally when the core theory is Gaussian, reducing to well-known Feynman
diagrammatics in this case.

MSC Classification: 82-XX, 81-XX Quantum theory
Keywords: diagrammatics, simple liquids, inference, spin models, maximum likelihood, non-Gaussian, entropy.

Checking 07658587.txt

 This paper studies the distribution of particles in a system of Brownian particles that undergo branching and
annihilation, focusing on the formation of clusters. The authors use a recently introduced coarse-graining
length definition to characterize the cluster properties. They find that in non-extinct realizations, the
average number of clusters grows as t^(1/2)(Df/2), where Df is the Hausdorff dimension of the super-Brownian
motion boundary. The distribution of gaps between consecutive particles exhibits two regimes: for small gaps (g
< ℓ = D/β), the average number decays as g^(-(Df/2)), and for large gaps (g > ℓ), it decays as g^(-Df). These
findings are valid for gap sizes less than n^(1/2), where n is the number of particles. The results interpolate
between dense SBM regimes and large-gap regimes, unifying two previous approaches.

Keywords: branching Brownian motion, clusters, travelling wave equations

MSC: 60-XX Probability theory and stochastic processes, 81-XX Quantum theory

Checking 07658588.txt

 The paper by An, Ling and Chen, Yiren studies the Hirota-Maxwell-Bloch (H-MB) system, a mathematical model for
wave propagation in an erbium-doped fiber with higher-order dispersion. By extending a parameter in the H-MB
system to the complex domain, they derive all nonlocal forms of the H-MB system including reverse-space-time,
complex reverse-space, complex reverse-time and complex reverse-space-time systems. They then establish the
Riemann-Hilbert problem for the nonlocal H-MB system to analyze its inverse scattering problem and construct
corresponding soliton solutions. The paper also analyzes the singularity of one-soliton solutions for each
nonlocal H-MB system when N = 1, and shows that a two-soliton can be regarded as a superposition of two
single-solitons in the nonlocal cases as |t| → ∞ for the nonlocal reverse-space-time H-MB system and nonlocal
complex reverse-time H-MB system when N = 2.

The paper is classified under MSC: 35Qxx (Partial differential equations of mathematical physics and other areas
of application) and 78-XX (Optics, electromagnetic theory). Keywords include nonlocal H-MB system,
Riemann-Hilbert problem, inverse scattering transform, soliton solution, singularity, and asymptotic analysis.
The full text can be accessed using the provided DOI.

Checking 07658589.txt

 The authors of this paper investigate the lateral van der Waals (vdW) force between an anisotropic polarizable
particle and a perfectly conducting plane with a hemispherical protuberance. They predict a sign inversion in
the lateral vdW force, meaning that instead of attracting the particle to the protuberance, the force points in
the opposite direction under certain conditions. Previous predictions of sign inversions were based on
perturbative solutions, which are only valid when the height of the protuberance is much smaller than the
distance between the particle and the plane. In this study, the authors use exact formulas to explore how this
geometric effect depends on the ratio of the protuberance radius to the distance between the particle and the
plane, as well as how the particle orientation and anisotropy affect the sign inversion. The paper is
categorized under partial differential equations and statistical mechanics, with keywords including lateral van
der Waals force, sign inversion, and exact calculation.

Checking 07658590.txt

 This paper investigates the scattering of a Gaussian wave packet by a three-barrier heterostructure,
specifically a double quantum well. The authors perform a numerical-analytical simulation and find that as a
result of scattering, damped waves of electron charge and current densities are formed outside the double well.
The properties of these waves depend on the structure of the initial wave packet and the poles of the scattering
amplitudes. The frequency of these waves is equal to the difference frequency of the doublet, the wavenumber is
the difference between the wave numbers of free motion of electrons with resonant energies, and the speed of
their propagation is the ratio of these quantities. The system can enter a regime of repetition or amplification
of electron wave emission when subjected to periodic resonant pumping via scattering of coherent wave packets.

Keywords: formation, probability, current, scattering, wave, packet

Mathematics Subject Classification (MSC): 81-XX Quantum theory, 82-XX Statistical mechanics, structure of matter.

Checking 07658591.txt

 This paper introduces "Zd-flow," a new technique for measurement-based quantum computing (MBQC) with qudit
graph states, and proves that it is a necessary and sufficient condition for a strong form of outcome
determinism. The authors also generalize the concept of measurement planes to this setting and characterize the
allowed measurements in qudit MBQC. Additionally, they provide a polynomial-time algorithm for finding an
optimal Zd-flow whenever one exists. The paper is categorized under quantum theory (81-XX) and computer science
(68-XX), with relevant keywords being measurement-based quantum computation, flow, qudit, and determinism.

Checking 07659129.txt

 The authors have developed a self-consistent field solver for Hartree-Fock calculations using Multiwavelets and
Multiresolution Analysis, which they show is a preconditioned steepest descent method and inherently kinetic
energy operator-free. They discuss the theoretical framework and provide the algorithm as a Python notebook,
with two examples demonstrating arbitrary precision, rapid convergence, and absence of the kinetic energy
operator. The article also includes references to related works on numerical methods for quantum chemistry and
wavelet analysis.

Keywords: Hartree-Fock, self-consistent field, real space methods, multiwavelets

Software mentioned: Binder 2.0, VASP, Python, MRCPP, VAMPyR, Kinetic-energy-free-HF.

Checking 07659703.txt

 This paper discusses two trends in the study of spatial and diagrammatic reasoning, specifically in the context
of logical studies. The first trend focuses on the logical analysis of the distribution of objects in space,
such as logic of geometry or logic of colors. The second trend involves studying the space algorithms used by
nature itself, like logic of swarms or logic of fungi colonies.

The authors highlight various resources that contribute to these fields, including works on non-well-founded
sets, existential graphs, Euler diagrams, Ramon Llull's art and logic, medieval Arabic notions of algorithms,
Ibn Khaldun's work, automating diagrammatic proofs of arithmetic arguments, the fall and rise of resemblance
diagrams, and the logical status of diagrams.

References to these works include [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [13], [15], [16],
[18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], and [28].

Checking 07660466.txt

 This paper is about the zeros of the partition function of the Ising model with ferromagnetic pair interactions
and complex external field. The authors prove that under certain assumptions, the motion of these zeros (denoted
by t) is local, meaning the trajectories of any two distinct zeros are disjoint. They also show that in the
special case of a complete graph with all interactions taking the same value t >= 0 (i.e., the Curie-Weiss
model), all principal zeros (those in the interval [0, pi/2]) strictly decrease in t. The paper is based on the
assumption that the underlying graph is connected and uses methods from complex analysis and ordinary
differential equations to analyze the motion of these zeros.

Keywords: Ising model, Lee-Yang zeros, monotonicity, ordinary differential equations, motion, ferromagnetic pair
interactions, complex external field.

References cited in the paper include works on statistical mechanics of equilibrium and nonequilibrium phase
transitions, critical phenomena, trees, magnetic materials, and conformal invariance, among others. Some
references discuss specific models such as the Ising model with Curie-Weiss perturbation or the Cayley tree.
Others provide background on concepts such as the Lee-Yang theorem and Ursel functions. The paper also cites
works that explore the Riemann hypothesis and Lehmer pairs of zeros.

Note: This summary is based on the provided abstract and reference list, and it assumes a general understanding
of statistical mechanics and complex analysis concepts.

Checking 07660471.txt

 This paper extends the existence theorem for replica-symmetry breaking (RSB) in the transverse field
Sherrington-Kirkpatrick (SK) model to models with general random exchange interactions. The authors derive a
relation between the expectation value of the exchange interaction energy and the Duhamel correlation function
of spin operators using an approximate integration by parts for general random interactions. They then use this
result, along with the Falk-Bruch inequality, to prove that the variance of overlap between two replica spin
operators does not vanish under sufficiently weak transverse field in sufficiently low temperature. The absence
of ferromagnetic long range order is also shown to distinguish RSB from Z2-symmetry breaking.

The paper is written in English and was published in Journal of Statistical Physics with the DOI:
10.1063/1.5137489. The main topics covered are spin glass, quantum spin systems, spontaneous symmetry breaking,
long-range order, and replica symmetry breaking. The Mathematics Subject Classification (MSC) numbers are 82D30,
82B44, and 81R40.

References include works by Carmona and Hu, Chen, Crawford, Crisanti and Rizzo, Dyson et al., Goldschmidt et
al., Leschke et al., Parisi, Roepstorff, Seiler and Simon, Sherrington and Kirkpatrick, Talagrand, and
Talagrand's book "Mean Field Models for Spin Glasses".

Checking 07660793.txt

 Title: Thermal Vestiges of Avalanches in the Driven Random Field Ising Model
Authors: Yao, Liheng and Jack, Robert L.
Publication: Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment (2023)

The authors investigate the non-equilibrium behavior of the three-dimensional random field Ising model as an
external field is increased through its coercive field. They find that the phenomenon of avalanches, which are
well-defined only at zero temperature, persists over a significant range of finite temperatures. The main
differences between the thermal and zero-temperature systems include an excess of small avalanches in the
thermal case, whose behavior is consistent with activated dynamical scaling. They also investigate the extent to
which individual avalanches at finite temperature can be traced back to parent avalanches in the athermal
system.

Keywords: random-field Ising model, avalanches, scaling phenomena, criticality, Monte Carlo simulations
Mathematics Subject Classification (MSC): 82-XX (Statistical mechanics, structure of matter)

Checking 07660813.txt

 This paper explores the efficiency of universal sets of quantum gates, specifically focusing on the spectral
gap (gap(S)) and its relationship to the depth of circuits implementable with reasonably high fidelity. The
authors derive lower bounds on the spectral gap at a certain scale (gapr(S)) for d-dimensional quantum gates
satisfying an additional condition. This condition is met by generic quantum gates, such as Haar random gates.
The derived bounds are explicit and can be determined through numerical calculations on existing computers for
small dimensions, whereas previous known lower bounds involve ambiguous parameters. The research aims to provide
insights into the efficiency of quantum gates and circuits, which is crucial in the context of Noisy
Intermediate-Scale Quantum devices with limited qubits and moderate gate fidelities.

Checking 07660819.txt

 This paper focuses on the two-point function of a composite twist field in the Ising field theory, which plays
a role in studying a new measure of entanglement called symmetry resolved entanglement entropy. The authors
provide an exact expression for this two-point function and extend techniques used for standard branch point
twist fields in free theories and an existing computation by Horváth and Calabrese. They find a formula for the
ground state two-point function of the composite twist field Tμ and its conjugate T†μ, defining it as the
leading field in the operator product expansion of T and the disorder field µ at criticality. The formula is
checked for consistency by reproducing the expected conformal dimension at short distances.

Keywords: integrable quantum field theory, Ising model, branch point twist fields, symmetry resolved
entanglement entropy, form factor expansion, correlation functions.

MSC Classification: 81-XX Quantum theory, 82-XX Statistical mechanics, structure of matter.

Checking 07660820.txt

 The authors of this paper investigate the behavior of a nonequilibrium Ising model in the low temperature
phase, where metastable equilibrium states exhibit a cuspidal singularity. They focus on Glauber dynamics and
construct a contact Hamiltonian flow to capture some of its features in this regime. However, they prove that
there is a discrepancy between the scaling laws for relaxation times in the Glauber and contact Hamiltonian
dynamical systems.

The authors use methods from contact geometry to study this problem. They apply this approach to understand the
relaxation process near a cusp singularity in the Ising model using Glauber dynamics as a reference. Although
they design a contact Hamiltonian flow that shares some similarities with Glauber dynamics, they demonstrate
that there is an inherent difference between the scaling laws for relaxation times in these two systems.

The paper is divided into several sections. In Section 2, they introduce the model and provide the necessary
background on contact geometry and its applications to statistical physics. Section 3 focuses on defining the
contact Hamiltonian flow and the relationship between the Glauber and contact dynamics. They then discuss the
main result in Section 4, which shows that there is a discrepancy between the scaling laws for relaxation times.
Finally, they conclude with some open questions and potential directions for future research.

The paper's Mathematics Subject Classification (MSC) includes 82-XX (Statistical Mechanics and Thermodynamics)
and 37-XX (Dynamical Systems and Ergodic Theory). Keywords relevant to the content are contact geometry, Glauber
dynamics, relaxation process, cuspidal singularity, and Ising model.

The full text of the paper can be accessed through the DOI or arXiv links provided in the bibliography. The
authors are Goto, Shin-itiro; Lerer, Shai; and Polterovich, Leonid.

Checking 07660964.txt

 In \({}^4He\) at the superﬂuid transition exhibits critical surface free energies and universal ﬁnite-size
scaling, with both \(T_c\) and \(\gamma\) varying as \(1/L^{2-D}\). The critical Casimir force is given by Eq.
(1), which includes a leading term \(\sim\frac{A}{L^3}\), and a subleading term \(\sim\fracforXiYi{T_c-T}\) with
\(Xi=0.2589(2)\) and \(Yi,=1.0006(5)\). The exact results for the mean spherical model (MSm) are presented in
the article, including a term proportional to \({(T_c-T)^2\ln(T_c-T)}\), which was previously omitted in Refs.
[9] and [158]. The MSm results are also compared with data from experiment and other theoretical theories, such
as the \(O(n)\) model and conformal ﬁeld theory. The article also discusses potential applications of critical
Casimir forces, including nanotechnology and colloidal systems.

Checking 07661035.txt

 This paper explores the relationship between the energy index and area index of free-boundary minimal surfaces
in a Riemannian manifold with boundary. The authors demonstrate that the area index is bounded above by the
surface area and topology using results from Ejiri-Micallef's work on closed minimal surfaces. They then apply
these findings to free-boundary minimal surfaces in convex domains of Euclidean three-space, proving an upper
bound for their area index that depends linearly on their genus and number of boundary components. The paper
also extends the results to submanifolds of higher dimensions.

Keywords: minimal surface, free boundary, index

MSC classifications: 53A10, 58E12

DOI: [Link]
arXiv: [Link]

Checking 07661678.txt

 This paper presents a derivation of the moving finite element method for gradient flow equations using
Onsager's principle. The authors show that the discrete problem shares the same energy dissipation structure as
the continuous one, enabling numerical analysis for stationary solutions of nonlinear reaction diffusion
equations. They prove that under certain conditions, the solution obtained by the moving finite element method
converges to a local minimizer of the total energy when time goes to infinity, and approximates the continuous
stationary solution optimally. Numerical examples are given for linear diffusion equations and a nonlinear
Allen-Cahn equation to verify the analytical results.

Keywords: Moving finite element method, convergence analysis, Onsager principle, gradient flow equations, energy
dissipation, numerical analysis, stationary solutions, reaction diffusion equations, optimization, approximation
theory.

MSC (Mathematics Subject Classification): 65M12, 65M55.

Checking 07662332.txt

 The authors simulate the Hamiltonian of a one-dimensional dissipative spin system in the presence of a magnetic
field using quantum computing. They execute their simulation on the IBMQ experience platform and investigate the
relation between various entangled states, energy separation (ω), and spin-spin coupling (λ) in the lattice.
Fidelity calculations are performed for several iterations of the model used. Additionally, they estimate the
ground and first excited energy states of the Ising-Hamiltonian using the Variational Quantum Eigensolver
algorithm and investigate the lowest energy values varying the number of layers of ansatz. The paper references
previous works on quantum computing and condensed matter physics.

Keywords: One-dimensional optical lattice, Ising model, fidelity, variational quantum eigensolver, quantum
computing, dissipative lattice system.

MSC: 81-XX Quantum theory.

Checking 07662949.txt

 In this paper, the authors study the Blume-Emery-Griffiths (BEG) model on Cayley trees and derive a method to
describe the splitting Gibbs measures. They also analyze the set of translation-invariant Gibbs measures for a
two-parametric BEG model on Cayley trees. The paper is based on the reduction of describing the splitting Gibbs
measures to finding the solutions of an algebraic equation.

The Blume-Emery-Griffiths model is a lattice statistical mechanics model introduced by Blume, Emery, and
Griffiths ([1]) that was originally proposed to describe the \(\lambda\)-transition and phase separation in
He\(^3-\)He\(^4\) mixtures.

The paper includes references to several related works, including studies on the Potts model with competing
interactions and a countable set of spin values on Cayley trees ([2], [5]) and the analysis of phase transitions
in the mean-field Blume-Emery-Griffiths model ([4]).

The main contributions of this paper are:

1. Reduction of the problem of describing splitting Gibbs measures to finding the solutions of an algebraic
equation for the BEG model on Cayley trees.
2. Analysis of the set of translation-invariant splitting Gibbs measures for a two-parametric BEG model on
Cayley trees.

The paper is divided into several sections, including:

1. Introduction
2. Preliminaries and notation
3. Description of solutions for algebraic equations
4. Translation-invariant splitting Gibbs measures for a two-parametric BEG model on Cayley trees.

The Mathematics Subject Classification (MSC) includes: 82B20, 82B26, 82B28, and 05C05. The keywords are: Cayley
tree, Blume-Emery-Griffiths model, Gibbs measure, translation invariant.

The reference list includes works by the authors themselves ([1], [2], [3]) as well as other related papers
([4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]).

Checking 07663587.txt

 In this paper, Wang and Wise present a new thermodynamically consistent phase field crystal (PFC) model for
solidification with heat flux. The model consists of two equations: a heat-like equation and a mass-conservation
equation that describes the change in atom density over time and space. The authors ensure thermodynamic
consistency by ensuring that the time rate of change of entropy density is positive both in the bulk and at the
boundaries. The procedure for constructing a temperature-atom-density phase diagram using this energy landscape
is also described, along with a simple demonstration of solidification using the model.

The paper falls under the categories of Stefan problems, phase changes, initial-boundary value problems for
higher-order parabolic equations, nonlinear parabolic equations, and variational inequalities. The keywords
include phase field crystal, classical density functional theory, entropy production, heat transfer,
solidification, and melting.

The reference list includes works on energy stable and efficient finite-difference methods for the modified PFC
equation, convergence analysis of numerical schemes for the PFC equation, algorithms for minimization without
derivatives, thermodynamically consistent schemes for phase field equations, positivity-preserving, energy
stable numerical schemes for the Cahn-Hilliard equation, and more.

Checking 07664332.txt

 The paper "Do additional target points speed up evolutionary algorithms?" by Bossek and Sudholt discusses the
impact of declaring additional optimal or desirable search points on the expected optimization time in
evolutionary algorithms. They analyze the expected hitting time of a target set consisting of optima and
non-optimal search points and compare it to the expected hitting time of only optima. The study shows that the
effect of adding additional optima depends on their number and placement. For black-box algorithms and functions
with polynomial expected optimization times, an exponential number of additional optima has a negligible effect
on the optimization time. However, for specific cases such as the one-dimensional Ising model, adding additional
optima may not reduce the asymptotic expected optimization time in the worst case. In contrast, on functions
where search trajectories typically join in a single search point, turning one search point into an optimum can
significantly reduce the expected optimization time. The paper provides references and theoretical background to
support their findings.

Checking 07664383.txt

 The paper by Xie and Sun explores the net steered coherence of two blocks of the alternating Ising model in the
renormalized space using the quantum renormalization group method. They find that different patterns in the net
steered coherence correspond to different phases of the model, and its susceptibility with respect to the
magnetic field is divergent at the critical points of quantum phase transitions. The authors suggest that net
steered coherence can serve as an alternative for exploring quantum criticality in many-body systems without
entanglement or quantum discord.

The paper is categorized under statistical mechanics and structure of matter, with keywords related to steered
coherence, scaling exponent, and quantum phase transitions. The reference list includes works by Brunner et al.,
Uola et al., Horodecki et al., Modi et al., Sachdev, Osterloh et al., Vidal et al., Gu et al., and many others.

Checking 07664413.txt

 This paper explores the role of the generalized Bloch representation of density matrices in detecting
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) steering, an intermediate form of quantum nonlocality. EPR steerable states are
important resources for one-sided device-independent quantum information tasks. The authors propose a family of
steerability criteria based on correlation matrices of Heisenberg-Weyl observables for arbitrary dimensional
bipartite systems. They also provide a class of Hermitian operators that can conveniently witness steering in
some scenarios. The proposed criteria are illustrated through examples, compared with existing ones, and their
advantages are demonstrated in certain cases. The fields of study include quantum theory (81-XX) and computer
science (68-XX). Keywords: EPR steering, Heisenberg-Weyl observables, correlation matrices, generalized Bloch
representation.

Checking 07667871.txt

 The authors of this paper conducted a study on coherent errors in quantum computing using a transverse-field
Ising model as an example application. They used several error mitigation protocols and reported on the results,
which helped identify inter-day and intra-day qubit calibration drift and the impact of circuit placement on
groups of qubits located differently on the processor. The findings can improve efforts to validate quantum
computations' accuracy and provide a better understanding of these types of errors.

Keywords: analysis of qubit stability, cycle benchmarking protocol, quantum capacity, transverse-field Ising
model.

MSC: 81P68 (Quantum computation).

Checking 07669756.txt

 This paper studies a branching Brownian motion model with self-repulsion, which is introduced through a change
of measure that penalizes particles spending time in an epsilon-neighborhood of each other. The authors derive a
simplified version of the model where only branching events are penalized and show that it is almost exactly
solvable. They obtain precise descriptions of particle numbers and branching times. In the limit of weak
penalty, they find an interesting universal time-inhomogeneous branching process. The position of the maximum in
this process follows a F-KPP type reaction-diffusion equation with a time-dependent reaction term.

The paper is structured as follows: Section 1 introduces the model and provides the motivation for studying it.
Section 2 derives a simplified version of the model where only branching events are penalized, and it shows that
this model is almost exactly solvable. Section 3 discusses the limit behavior in weak penalty and analyzes the
position of the maximum in this universal process using F-KPP type reaction-diffusion equations with
time-dependent reaction terms. Finally, Section 4 contains some remarks and open problems.

The paper cites various works related to branching processes, Brownian motion, and self-repulsion. Some of these
references are [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [7], [8], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [19], [20],
[21], [22], [23], and [24]. These works provide background information on branching processes, Brownian motion,
self-repulsion, and related topics. Some of them discuss specific models, while others provide theoretical
results or methods that are relevant to the current study.

Checking 08-200205Full-4up.txt

 In the given text, Susan Rodger discusses various topics related to Computer Science 201, including hash
tables, collections, objects, and encryption using an example of an Encryption APT project. She also mentions
the importance of interfaces such as Collection, List, Set, and Map.

The main focus of this text is on understanding the concepts of hashing, collections (ArrayList and HashSet),
and objects in Java programming, with a brief discussion on interfaces like Collection and their implementations
like ArrayList and LinkedList. The text also covers the importance of understanding the use cases and efficiency
differences between ArrayList and LinkedList.

The text includes examples and exercises to help students grasp these concepts, such as analyzing strings that
collide in hash functions, calculating hashcodes for different strings, and discussing the importance of
overriding the equals() and hashCode() methods for custom classes. Additionally, it touches upon topics like
inheritance, encryption, and the role of interfaces in Java programming.

Some specific concepts covered in the text include:

1. Hashing: Understanding the concept of hashing, its importance, and collision handling.
2. Collections: Overview of ArrayList and HashSet, their similarities and differences, and when to use them
based on the problem at hand.
3. Objects: Explanation of the hashCode() contract, String hashcodes, and the difference between default and
overridden hashCode() methods.
4. Interfaces: Introduction to Java interfaces, their purpose, advantages, and implementation using examples
like Collection, List, Set, Map, ArrayList, and LinkedList.
5. Empirical Analysis: Analyzing the performance of ArrayList and LinkedList through benchmarking exercises.

The text also includes various announcements regarding assignments, quizzes, and exams, as well as a brief
mention of a breakfast event in 201.

Checking 0801.1776.txt

 This document is a research article discussing a model proposed by De Raedt et al. that violates Bell-type
inequalities and can be used to simulate elements of a quantum computer at an event-by-event level. The authors
emphasize that this model, while experimentally testable, should not be considered as a Physics model but rather
as a computational simulation or a random field model. The article also discusses the concept of coincidence
time loophole and how it is significant in understanding quantum mechanics.

The authors explain that the Weihs et al. experiment on measuring a violation of Bell inequalities involves
recording the times at which events occur at each end of the experiment, comparing the datasets to identify
coincidences based on their time differences, and analyzing the results. The RRMKM model proposed by De Raedt et
al. can be understood as a probabilistic model, where the probability density of observing an event depends on
the polarization of the light source.

The article argues that characterizing the dependence of detector delay on different polarizations is essential
for future experimentalists who aim to reproduce the same results. The authors also discuss how the model
violates Bell inequalities by introducing a uniform distribution ansatz and a weight function that determines
the probability of coincidences given certain conditions. They note that there is an infinite class of functions
that can satisfy these conditions and violate Bell inequalities.

The article concludes by emphasizing the significance of experimentally testing the delay dependency function to
determine how much violation of the Bell inequality can be accounted for by detection delay. The authors suggest
that if the whole violation can be explained by the detectors' delay dependencies, then we may not have
sufficiently characterized the state of the light source as a pure or mixed quantum state. However, if we
consistently use detectors with the same delay dependency and follow the same procedure to determine event
coincidences, we can continue to describe a light source using the pure quantum state ρp, assuming that
measurement results are independent of polarization. The authors also discuss how the model is contextual and
introduces a small nonlocal correlation between measurement apparatuses, which can be viewed as an example of
"conspiracy."

Checking 0806.1474.txt

 The document is a research article on extending the algebra of observables in quantum optics to include
classical random field optics. This extension is achieved by introducing creation and annihilation operators for
negative frequency components, which satisfy different commutation relations than those of positive frequency
operators. These new operators allow the construction of a random field observable, whose commutator with other
observables is trivial for all test functions. The authors argue that this enlarged algebra of observables can
be interpreted as a mathematics of classical stochastic signal analysis, allowing for a more comprehensive
understanding of quantum optics and its relation to classical physics. They also discuss the potential
separation of roles of Planck's constant in quantum field theory and introduce Lorentz invariant self-adjoint
number operators to construct "super"-vacuum states with increased fluctuations. The article also mentions the
historical context of the disturbance interpretation of quantum theory and its relationship to classical random
field models.

Checking 0807.2838.txt

 This paper proposes an extension of General Relativity with two metrics and two types of fields, each moving
according to one of the metrics and its connection. The authors impose exchange symmetry on the action to obtain
the field equations for both metrics, resulting in additional source terms for Einstein's field equations with
properties unlike those of standard matter. The paper discusses the properties of these new fields and considers
examples of the Schwarzschild solution and the Friedmann-Robertson-Walker metric. The authors suggest that this
scenario could potentially shed light on some unresolved questions in cosmology and astrophysics.

Checking 0808.1128.txt

 In the paper, "Dynamic Connectivity: Connecting to Networks and Geometry" by Timothy M. Chan, Mihai Pˇatras¸cu,
and Liam Roditty, the authors present algorithms for maintaining dynamic connectivity in graphs and geometric
intersection graphs.

For subgraph connectivity, they describe a data structure that supports vertex updates in O(m2/3) amortized
time, improving upon previous results which required fast matrix multiplication and had an update time of
O(m0.94). The new data structure is simpler and does not rely on FMM (Fast Matrix Multiplication).

For geometric connectivity, they show how to obtain sublinear update bounds for virtually all families of
geometric objects that allow sublinear-time range queries. They provide improved update times for arbitrary 2D
line segments: O(n9/10), disks of arbitrary radii: O(n(d+1)(2d+3)), and simplices and balls in any fixed
dimension: O(n(d+1)(d+2)). The results require more work, including the development of a degree-sensitive
version of their improved subgraph connectivity algorithm and the use of this and known connectivity structures
to maintain not one but two carefully designed intermediate graphs.

The paper also discusses related work in dynamic graph and geometric problems, with a focus on dynamic subgraph
connectivity and the connection between static and dynamic geometric connectivity problems. The authors note
that improvements beyond √m without FMM are not possible without a breakthrough on the triangle-finding problem.
They mention open problems for both subgraph and geometric connectivity, including reducing query time at the
expense of increasing update time, determining worst-case update bounds, and exploring richer queries such as
counting the number of connected components or finding shortest paths or minimum cut.

Checking 0809.2379.txt

 This paper by L.B. Okun discusses the relationship between energy, momentum, and mass in the context of the
theory of relativity. The author argonotes that using a system of units where the speed of light c is the unit
of velocity simplifies the formulas of the theory. The Pythagorean theorem is used to illustrate the relation
between these three quantities. The paper also covers the history of the concept of mass, the principle of
relativity, and the implications of relativity for dimensions, units, and constants. Finally, the author
addresses the relationship between physics, epistemology, semantics, and language in teaching and popularizing
the theory of relativity.

Checking 0810.2545.txt

 The author argues that the violation of Bell inequalities by experiments has led physicists to reject classical
views of the world, but the comparison should be between quantum fields and random fields rather than local
realistic hidden-variable models. Classical field theories cannot provide a mathematically adequate description
of modern physics due to the need for probabilities. A random field is an indexed set of random variables that
can be presented as a commutative quantum field. The essential difference between a quantum field and a
continuous random field is the compatibility or incompatibility of measurements, which is significant and the
basis for critiques of locality arguments. Random fields have a requirement to model the effects of quantum
fluctuations explicitly, and they agree with classical understanding and Bell's polemic on measurement issues.
Renormalization, interpretational issues, and conceptual mismatches between quantum field theory and classical
general relativity are reasons to consider random fields as alternatives. The author suggests that time should
be invested in developing the mathematics of random fields rather than focusing on the straw man of classical
particle property models.

Checking 0810.4903.txt
 This paper discusses the algebraic structure of observables in quantum field theory and the implications of
requiring time-reversal invariance. The author argues that if we take general covariance seriously, the algebra
of observables should be time-reversal invariant. However, the quantized Klein-Gordon field, a simple
non-interacting quantum field, introduces an explicit direction of time through its inner product.

To explore the consequences of eliminating the direction of time from the algebra of observables, the author
proposes a continuous random field model instead of a quantum field model. This choice results in several
significant implications:

1. The Lie field approach for modeling non-Gaussian vacuum correlations becomes available, offering a more
straightforward solution than renormalization.
2. The consequences for quantum field theory are extreme, as we would need to abandon quantum field models and
adopt continuous random field models.
3. Although causality is an essential part of theoretical explanatory and predictive power but cannot be
directly measured in the quantum mechanical world, it emerges only in a continuous random field model.

The paper provides references for further reading on related topics such as Lie fields and quantum physics
teaching methods.

Checking 0812.4360 (1).txt
 The (1) Introduce the concept of data compression and its relationship to intelligence, (2) describe a simple
algorithmic principle that explains various aspects of subjective beauty, novelty, curiosity, creativity, art,
science, music, and jokes, (3) discuss previous concrete implementations of systems driven by this principle,
(4) provide visual illustrations of the learning process leading from less to more subjective beauty, and (5)
outline future research directions.

The author argues that data becomes interesting to a self-improving, computationally limited observer when it
can be predicted or compressed in a better way, thus making it simpler and more beautiful. Curiosity is the
desire to discover or create non-random, non-arbitrary regularities in data, which maximizes interestingness -
the first derivative of subjective beauty or compressibility. This drive motivates various aspects of
intelligence and cognition, such as compact internal representations, consciousness, and the perception of
beauty.

The author also discusses previous work on this topic, including early publications that can be viewed as
examples of implementations of a compression progress drive, such as rewarding prediction error and rewarding
predictor improvements. They also mention recent studies that demonstrate the relationship between human visual
attention and data compressibility.

In the future, the author plans to improve previous implementations by studying better adaptive compressors,
investigating under which conditions learning progress measures can be computed accurately and efficiently, and
exploring the applicability of recent improved RL techniques in various fields.

Checking 0812.4360-1.txt
 The

The paper argues of computational systems, including artificially intelligent agents, that are motivated by the
desire to improve their ability to predict or compress the data they encounter. This principle is based on the
idea that a better explanation of past data will help in understanding and planning for future actions, and is
related but distinct from external rewards. The authors propose an algorithmic framework for implementing this
curiosity-driven behavior in artificially intelligent systems, which includes a continually improving predictor
or compressor, a measure of its progress or learning, and a reward optimizer that translates these rewards into
action sequences. They also discuss the implications of this framework on various aspects of intelligence and
cognition, and provide an overview of previous concrete implementations and visual illustrations.

The paper argues that data becomes interesting to some self-improving, computationally limited observer when it
allows for compression progress or simplification. Curiosity is the drive to create or discover new, non-random,
regular data that is novel and surprising in this sense. This drive maximizes interestingness, which is the
first derivative of subjective beauty, and motivates exploration, infants, pure mathematicians, composers,
artists, dancers, comedians, and yourself. The authors also suggest that science and art can be seen as
by-products of this desire to create or discover new, compressible data in different ways.

The paper further discusses the distinction between pristine beauty and interestingness, as well as true novelty
and surprise vs traditional information theory. They also introduce the concepts of attention, active
experimentation, and discovery as related to this framework. The authors provide an overview of previous
concrete implementations, including reward for prediction error, and reward for compression progress, and apply
the theory to images tailored to human observers, illustrating the learning process leading from less to more
subjective compressibility. They also outline ways to improve their previous implementations and test
predictions in psychology and neuroscience.

Checking 0812.4360.txt
 This

This paper proposes that data becomes interesting to a self-improving, limited subjective observer when it can
be predicted or compressed in a better way, making it simpler and more beautiful. Curiosity is defined as the
desire to create or discover non-random, non-arbitrary regularities in data that allow discusses the
implications of this principle on various aspects of intelligence and cognition, including compact internal
representations, consciousness, and subjective perception of beauty. The paper also mentions how art and music
can be viewed as by-products of the compression progress drive. Previous concrete implementations of systems
driven by compression progress are based on principles such as storing and compressing data, rewarding
compression progress, and using a general reinforcement learning algorithm to optimize rewards. The author
argues that these principles can help explain many aspects of intelligent agents, such as the discovery of
novelty and surprise, unsupervised shifts of attention, subjective perception of beauty, curiosity, creativity,
art, science, music, and jokes. The paper also mentions that traditional notions of surprise and novelty
infomation theory are rejected, and true novelty and surprise are only found in data with previously unknown
algorithmic regularities. Attention and curiosity are discussed as synonymous concepts, and artists and
scientists are viewed as being similar in their approach to discovery and explanation. The paper also mentions
that jokes and other sources of fun can be explained using the same principles.

Checking 08327312-MIT.txt
 To summarize, a long text, I would need to read and or have access to the text first. In general, summery means
to provide a condensed version of a longer text, or to give an overview of the main points in a discussion or
debate. It could also mean to collect and condense information from various sources into a shorter form. To
summarize a text, for example, I would read it carefully and then identify the key points and ideas and express
them in a brief and concise way. Here's an example:

Original Text: The United States of America is a federal republic composed of 50 states, a federal district, and
five territories. It is one of the world's most influential nations economically, militarily, politically, and
culturally It has three branches of government, a constitution, and a president as its head of state

Summarized Text: The United States is a federation of 55 areas (including 50 states and 5 territories). It's a
major world power economically, militarily, politically, and culturally. It has three branches of government, a
constitution, and a president.

Checking 0903.3176.txt
 This paper discusses the concept of Lie random fields, which are a type of field theory that can be used to
generate mutually consistent probability densities, correlations, expected values, etc., associated with test
functions on space-time. The authors prove the conjecture that the vacuum vector allows one to construct a state
over a Lie random field and hence construct a Hilbert space using the GNS construction. They also introduce the
concept of Lie random fields on the cotangent manifold of Minkowski space, which may allow for a unification of
tensor-valued Lie random fields on Minkowski space.

The authors discuss the constraints of microcausality and positive semi-definiteness of the Hamiltonian in the
context of Lie random fields, noting that these constraints have prevented the construction of many interesting
mathematical objects in quantum field theory. They also mention that Lie random fields can be used to model the
violation of Bell inequalities, which is a property shared with quantum field models.

The authors emphasize that they have not entirely avoided renormalization but have reformulated the way in which
characteristic length scales are expressed in the mathematics. They also note that they have not engaged with
the Haag-Kastler axiomatic approach, which posits the existence of C∗-algebras of bounded observables that
satisfy the Haag-Kastler axioms.

The paper includes an appendix discussing the positive semi-definiteness of the Hamiltonian in the context of
Lie random fields and quantum field theory. The authors argue that positive semi-definiteness is important for
preserving the associativity of the algebra of creation and annihilation operators, commutativity of creation
operators and annihilation operators separately, and ⋆-algebraic structure in a Lie random field. They also note
that positive semi-definiteness is related to microcausality, which is supported by empirical evidence, but it
is less clear why we need positive semi-definiteness in the vacuum sector of a quantum field theory. The authors
suggest that the formalism described here may allow for the construction of an infinite set of test functions,
leading to a representation of the Poincaré group and many of the resources of mathematical analysis. However,
they note that practical engineering often does not require the mathematics of infinite, complete sets of test
functions.

Checking 0905.1263.txt
 This paper discusses the equivalence between the Klein-Gordon random field and the complex Klein-Gordon quantum
field. The authors argue that both fields involve negative-frequency modes of test functions, but the
distinction between positive- and negative-frequency modes is problematic for quantum fields due to its lack of
definition in curved space-times and for accelerating observers. The authors also suggest that Lie random fields
may be used to construct models for experiments following the principles of Bell's polemic. They show that both
fields can be constructed from the same creation and annihilation operator algebra, making them equivalent in
that sense. The paper provides a detailed comparison of the two fields, including their mathematical
presentations and differences in modeling experimental results. The authors conclude that neither field is
necessarily preferred over the other, as they can both be used to construct models for ideal measurements in
quantum mechanics.

Checking 0905.3611.txt
 This text appears to be a section from a mathematical paper about calculus, specifically discussing the
differentiation and integration of functions using various moduli of continuity. The author explains that
instead of relying on the notions of real numbers, limits, and continuity, they will treat functions as primary
objects and view differentiation as division of f(x) - f(a) by x - a in a certain class of functions. They
demonstrate this approach for polynomials and show how it leads to the notion of uniform Lipschitz
differentiability (ULD), which is equivalent to divisibility of f(x) - f(a) by x - a in the class of Lipschitz
functions. The author also discusses the relation between monotonicity and ULD functions and provides an
estimate for the difference quotient of uniformly m-differentiable functions.

Additionally, they touch upon some pedagogical implications, mentioning that the calculus by problem solving is
still an unrealized dream, and briefly discuss multi-variable calculus, automatical continuity of the
derivative, and the equality of mixed derivatives using Green's formula.

Checking 0906.4952.txt
 The paper presents an experiment that investigates the possibility of quantum-like behavior in mental states
during perception and cognition of ambiguous figures. The authors argue that quantum mechanics may play a role
in the dynamics of mental states by demonstrating quantum interference effects. They use a series of experiments
with different types of ambiguous stimuli, including geometrical figures, animals, and Stroop effect, involving
256 subjects.

The results show significant deviations from classical statistics, providing evidence for the presence of
quantum-like behavior in mental states. The authors suggest that cognitive systems may behave quantum-like,
representing a mental context underlying decision making through mental wave functions (probabilistic
amplitudes), and possibly allowing for a three-valued logic in human cognition.

The study has been published in various journals and references various sources from neuroscience, psychology,
physics, and mathematics to support their findings. The authors discuss the implications of their results on
understanding consciousness, perception, and cognitive decision making.

Checking 0908.2439.txt
 The article discusses the construction of a random field that is empirically equivalent to the quantized
electromagnetic field. The authors use test functions, or window functions, to smear the operator-valued
distributions of the quantized electromagnetic field and generate expectation values in the vacuum state. They
introduce modified annihilation operators, which with corresponding creation operators, allow for the commutator
between them to be computed. This commutator is shown to be symmetric in f and g, making it zero for any test
functions not only when they have space-like separated supports. The authors also mention that there is a
similar freedom of description in quantum field theory, but require a conventional choice of phases for the
random field formalism.

The article also touches upon the fact that the same Hilbert space is generated by the action of creation
operators on the vacuum vector whether using quantized or random electromagnetic field observables. However, the
algebra of local observables generated by the two are significantly different. The authors note that it's common
to extend the algebra of observables used in quantum optics and physics by the nonlocal vacuum projection
operator, but this extension is necessary to allow for the construction of observables with discrete eigenvalues
that can be used to model measurement events.

The article also mentions a mapping between creation operators that provides a category-theoretic functor
between the algebras of creation and annihilation operators and Hilbert spaces, but this relationship does not
extend straightforwardly to less invariant algebraic structures associated with phase spaces on space-like
hypersurfaces.

The authors also discuss the difference between classical electromagnetic fields and the effects of quantum
fluctuations, and how these effects can be accommodated in quantum field theory by modeling them through
commutators. They note that when the effects of quantum fluctuations can be ignored, it's possible to work with
the expected values of observables as if they were classical fields, but when significant effects are caused by
quantum fluctuations, it's necessary to accommodate these consequences in some way. In the equivalent random
field theory, the incompatibility between time-like separated measurements is eliminated while preserving the
same level of fluctuations for the equivalent components.

Overall, the article discusses the construction of a random field that is empirically equivalent to the
quantized electromagnetic field, and touches upon the differences and similarities between the two, as well as
the implications for measurement and the accommodation of quantum fluctuations.

Checking 0909.90207.txt
 This paper aims to bridge the gap between operational researchers and environmental scientists by discussing
the incorporation of environmental issues into the analysis of industrial supply chains and the use of OR models
and techniques in environmental research. The authors discuss various applications of OR methods in addressing
environmental concerns, including pollution control, supply chain management, and economic growth in relation to
sustainable development and environmental quality. References are provided for further reading on these topics.

Checking 0911.0267.txt
 The article explores the connection between science and art, focusing on the role of geometric imagination in
innovative findings throughout history. It discusses how various artists and scientists have been inspired by
symmetry, regular polyhedra, laws of harmonic proportion, tessellations, group theory, and other aesthetic
principles to make groundbreaking discoveries. The text also touches upon the idea that beauty, conciseness, and
emotional approach are essential aspects of both science and art. From Plato's geometric view of the world to
modern-day theories such as superstring theory, the article highlights how aesthetics have influenced scientific
thinking and continue to play a role in shaping our understanding of the universe.

Checking 0911.2172.txt
 The Grone-Merris Conjecture asserts that the spectrum of the Laplacian matrix of a graph is majorized by its
conjugate degree sequence. In this paper, the authors provide a proof for this conjecture using Lemma 6 and the
properties of split graphs. The lemma states that if a graph satisfies certain conditions, then its Laplacian
spectrum is majorized by its conjugate degree sequence. The authors also show that any counterexample to the
Grone-Merris Conjecture would have to be a split graph, which can then be used to derive a contradiction using
Lemma 6. The paper also includes references to related work in spectral graph theory and matrix analysis.

Checking 0911.2899.txt
 This is a paper proposing coding standards and guidelines for Prolog programming. The authors argue that
Prolog, despite its unique features and power, lacks widely accepted coding standards. They provide immediate
guidelines for code layout, naming conventions, documentation, effective use of language features, program
development, debugging, and testing. Each guideline includes a rationale and examples of alternative options.
They emphasize the importance of selecting a coding standard based on project-specific factors. The paper also
touches on the history and relevance of coding standards in general, as well as the specific challenges of
Prolog programming.

Checking 09166710.txt
 Thisieee TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS

This article proposes a deep learning framework called Body PointNet for estimating the body shape of a subject
under clothing from a single 3D scan. The approach uses an Encoder-Decoder architecture, where the encoder with
virtual scanner generates an input point cloud of normalized normalized points and subsamples m offsets using
OffsetNet. FeatureNet extracts deep features from initial body points, which are then fused to obtain a final
global feature that predicts dense output through decoding in MLP layers. The authors also propose a novel
method for synthesizing dressed human scans and generating paired bodies for training the deep network using a
large-scale dataset called Body Under virtual Garments (BUG). The results demonstrate that the proposed approach
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of both accuracy and running time.

Keywords: Body PointNet, Body shape under clothing, OffsetNet, 3D scanning, dressed human dataset.

Introduction:

* Accurately estimating body shape under clothing is crucial for various emerging applications like virtual
try-on, non-contact body measurement, and avatar creation for virtual reality.
* Existing methods formulate this task as an optimization problem by fitting parametric body models to dressed
human scans or sequences; however, these are impractical for real-time applications due to expensive
computation.
* To address the challenge of lacking training data, a novel method is proposed to synthesize
dressed human pseudo-scans and corresponding ground truth bodies.
* The authors present a large-scale dataset called Body Under virtual Garments (BUG) consisting of 0.6 million
high-resolution clothed pseudo-scans and 0.2 million ground truth bodies.

Methodology:

1. Virtual Scanner: A dressed body mesh is first converted to a point cloud using a virtual scanner with OBB
normalization. m subsamples are then taken from the normalized points.
2. OffsetNet: This network learns a set of offsets and deep feature f1 for each sampled point, while the
residual difference between the normalized points and offsets represents the initial undressed body points.
3. FeatureNet: This network takes the initial body points as input and learns a global deep feature f2 on them.
The features of the dressed body (f1) and the initial body (f2) are then fused to obtain a final feature (f).
4. Decoder: MLP layers predict dense output based on the final feature, followed by de-normalization to recover
original scale and orientation.
5. Synthetic Data Generation: The authors propose a method for synthesizing dressed human scans and generating
corresponding paired bodies using expensive physically-based simulation, binding vertices of garments to
triangles of the reference body, and transferring clothing to target bodies.

Evaluation:

* The proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of both accuracy and running time on BUFF
and INRIA datasets using quantitative and qualitative evaluations.
* An ablation experiment demonstrates the contribution of components in the network, showing that the global
feature outperforms local features for body shape estimation under clothing.

Conclusion:

* The paper presents a deep learning framework called Body PointNet for estimating the body shape of a subject
under clothing from a single 3D scans using a novel method to synthesize dressed human data.
* The proposed approach outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of both accuracy and running
time, making it suitable for real-time applications.

Checking 0920.90057.txt
 This article provides a review of quantitative models for reverse logistics, focusing on distribution planning,
inventory control, and production planning. The authors discuss the implications of emerging reuse efforts in
these areas, survey mathematical models from the literature, and identify areas requiring further research. They
also highlight differences and similarities with classical 'forward' logistics methods.

Key references include works by APICS, Barros et al., Batta and Chiu, Caruso et al., and EUROSTAT. The document
also cites various conference proceedings, journal articles, and reports. The Mathematics Subject Classification
is 90B06.

Checking 09268855.txt
 I'm an assistant designed to help with various tasks, including summarizing text. However, in this case, there
is no text provided for me to summarize. If you could please provide the text you'd like summarized, I'll be
happy to help out!

Checking 0956797611414727.txt
 In this study, Na and Kitayama (2011) investigated the cultural difference in spontaneous trait inference using
a diagnostic task that required no explicit trait judgment. They found that European Americans showed clear
evidence of spontaneous trait inference through accuracy and response time facilitation for implied traits,
while Asian Americans did not show such effects. The cultural difference was partially mediated by independent
self-construal. The findings challenge the assumption that initial trait inferencing is automatic in all
cultures and contribute to the emerging literature on cultural neuroscience. Limitations of the study include
the need to test whether the conclusions would hold for the perception of out-group members and the potential
effects of stereotypes on spontaneous trait inference. Additionally, another recent ERP study (Van Duynslaeger
et al., 2008) found a late positivity instead of an N400 effect, possibly due to the interpretation of
incongruous behaviors as fitting into expectations.

Checking 0956797617741718.txt
 In this study, the researchers investigated the phenomenon of affective realism, which refers to the influence
of emotions on perception. They used an interocular suppression technique (continuous flash suppression) to
present affective information outside of participants' awareness while showing neutral faces above their
conscious threshold. The results showed that seen neutral faces were perceived as more smiling when paired with
unseen positive affective information and more scowling when paired with negative affective information. These
findings suggest that emotions influence perception beyond broad social judgments, even at the level of visual
processing of facial expressions. The study has implications for understanding the role of emotions in
real-world situations and challenges beliefs that emotion is a distinct phenomenon separate from cognition and
perception.

Checking 0959354319866258.txt
 In - The author argues that the theory of Predictive Processing (PP) in cognitive science, which proposes that
the brain is a prediction engine, does not unify cognitive science directly or by entailing PP. Instead, PP
provides explanatory unification by suggesting that many distinct cognitive mechanisms fall under a common
schema of prediction error minimization.

- The author also discusses how explanatory pluralism in cognitive science, which accepts the coexistence of
multiple theories and models to explain different phenomena, is the natural order of things. However, there is
one ambitious theoretical proposal that contradicts this perspective: PP and FEP (Free Energy Principle).

- The author takes a closer look at FEP and evaluates its explanatory and unificatory potential for cognitive
science. He argues that FEP serves as a fertile heuristic guide for developing hypotheses about how cognition
works, but it does not directly unify cognitive science. Instead, successful unification through PP can only be
established by developing detailed PP-based mechanistic models of phenomena and verifying their explanatory
advantages over competing models.

- The author then proposes that schema-centered unification, which is achieved when distinct phenomena are
presumably underpinned by distinct mechanisms but instantiate the same schema, can play a role in deciding
between competing models of a given phenomenon where none of those models emerges as a clear winner according to
other criteria. The fact that a cognitive model fits into a recurring pattern could be taken as lending
additional credibility to this model relative to its competitors.

Checking 0959354320908337.txt
 In present article, Patrizio Lo Presti argues that the opposition between direct perception theory (DPT) and
theory–theory (TT) in social cognition is based on a mistaken notion of inference. He proposes that social
cognition can be both directly perceptual and inferential by introducing three distinctions: theoretical and
observational concepts, categories of objects, and ways of knowing. These distinctions intersect to form 12
possibilities, one of which is direct knowledge by theoretical concepts to empirical objects or events, making
social cognition directly inferential without being internal, nor brain-bound.

Lo Presti's version of inferentialism diverges from both traditional and modern predictive coding accounts in
several ways: (1) inferring isn't applying or following explicit rules, (2) it isn't an inner event but a
worldly doing as part of active perception, (3) capacities for inferential practice turn on features of
embodiment, lives, environment, and history.

Through the example of Jones and his Rylean ancestors, Lo Presti demonstrates how others' behavior can afford
seeing other minds directly, allowing them to perceive each other's minds in a social practice context that
requires inferential justification. This inferentialism is neither cognitivist nor intellectualist, but a
pragmatic and social notion of inference that takes perception as a part of the inferring process.

Lo Presti concludes by addressing opposition from DPT and TT, noting how his concept of inference and
inferentialism can coherently subsume both approaches in a direct inferentialist approach to social cognition.

Checking 0963721419831992.txt
 This, "The Power of Predictions: An Emer.

This article, authored by J. Benjamin Hutchinson and Lisa Feldman Barrett, discusses the emerging paradigm in
psychological
research that suggests actions and mental events begin as top-down representations in the brain, which are then
tested against the state of the world. The authors argue that this hypothesis is supported by research in
various domains of psychology, including sensation and perception, memory, emotion, and social cognition. They
further suggest, this framework has implications for improving the replicability and robustness of psychological
research and renewing psychological theory by suggesting an alternative ontology of the human mind.

Keywords: predictive coding, active inference, allostasis, memory, emotion, perception, concepts, social
cognition, metabolism, energetics

The authors begin by considering the common assumptions and hypotheses that unify this emerging framework and
discuss its
ramifications. They suggest that the brain is constantly attempting to impose predictability over multiple time
scales, but traditional
laboratory experiments are typically constructed as random sequences of stimuli to minimize influence across
trials, limiting their generalizability. Additionally, psychological science routinely makes reference to
affective stimuli and rewards or threats as if they are embedded in objects and events in the world, but the
state of a person’s energy balance and factors that can influence it, such as sleep, caffeine, sugar, or
nicotine intake, can influence how the brain processes information and task performance.

The article also provides several examples of theory building and research guided by this predictive-processing
framework, including studies in sensation and perception, memory, emotion, attention, motor action, depression,
self, social pressure, words as context, reward, interoception, somatosensory prediction errors, secondary
visual cortex, primary visual cortex, secondary auditory cortex, secondary somatosensory cortex, secondary
interoceptive cortex, primary auditory cortex, and primary interoceptive cortex.

The authors conclude by stating that the scientific story of predictive processing is still evolving but many
researchers believe it has ignited a paradigm shift in neuroscience. They suggest that this approach has
important implications for psychological science, both in theory and practice, as it offers a counterintuitive
but coherent, neurobiologically plausible framework for guiding research.

Checking 09_chapter 5.txt
 Alfred Adler was an Austrian psychologist who founded Individual Psychology, a school of thought that
emphasizes the uniqueness and organic wholeness of each individual's development. He began his career as a
Freudian but later departed from the psychoanalytic movement due to his differences with Freud's theories. Adler
believed that every individual strives towards goals, which he referred to as fictions, to overcome feelings of
inferiority and achieve superiority. He saw social feeling as the driving force behind this striving for
perfection, which he called God. Adler was influenced by the philosophical concept of idealistic positivism,
particularly Hans Vaihinger's fictionalism, which helped shape his views on the importance of individual goals
in understanding human behavior and development. While some critics argue that Adler's emphasis on social
interest and the role of God as a goal may be similar to Freudian concepts such as libido and the father image,
others see significant differences between their theories. Overall, Adler's Individual Psychology offers a
unique perspective on human motivation and development, emphasizing the importance of individual goals and the
striving for perfection in shaping our behavior and experiences.

Checking 0a187866618ca3049030ec5014860ae8-original.txt
 In which complex number z satisfies the equation Re(eiπ/2z) > 2? To answer this question, we need to understand
that eiθ = cos θ + i sin θ and iθ = π/2 + 2nπ for any any complex number z = x + iy. Therefore,

Re(eiπ/2z) = Re(e(iπ/2)Re(i) + Re(e(π/2 + 2nπ))Re(i)) > 2

Since Re(i)0 and Re(e(θ)) > 0 for any real or complex θ, we only need to consider the imaginary part of iπ/2.
The imaginary part of iπ/2 is equal to sin(π/2) = 1, so we have

1 + Re(ππ/2 + 2nπ) > 2

The real part of π/2 + 2nπ is 90° + 360°n, which can take on any value between 0 and 360°. Therefore, there are
infinitely many complex solutions to this inequality, depending on the value of n. The solutions are given by

z = x + iy, where x = 90+360°n and y = 1.

In summary, the set of points z for which Re(eiπ/2z) > 2 is infinite and consists of all points on the circle of
radius 1 centered at the origin in the complex plane, with an angle of 90+360°n with respect to the positive
real axis.

Checking 0xaa85.txt
 In Inexperiencedefault!fileType: "text/plain"

Title: The Significance of Consciousness: Exploring the Nature and Value of Subjective Experience by Charles
Siewert

Charles Siewert1's book, "The Significance of Consciousness," aims to clarify the meaning of phenomenal
consciousness, its relationship to intentionality and thought, and its value. The author argues for a
first-person approach to understanding consciousness and defends it against criticisms.

1. Introduction:
- The book focuses on three aspects of consciousness: its significance, its relationship to intentionality, and
its importance.
- Consciousness is often neglected in philosophy and psychology, and the author aims to clarify its meaning
without making controversial metaphysical or epistemological assumptions.
- The study of consciousness should not be limited to the mind-body problem and its related issues.

2. Defending a First-Person Approach:
- The author proposes taking a first-person approach to explaining what is meant by 'conscious experience.'
- This approach involves using examples of experiences that one knows with first-person warrant, asking the
reader to consider these examples from their own perspective, and contrasting them with hypothetical cases cases
of absence of conscious experience.
- First-person knowledge of one's own mind is distinct from third-person knowledge and cannot be reduced to the
latter.

3. What is Meant by 'Phenomenal Consciousness'?
- The author explains phenomenal consciousness as the feature that makes experiences shareable with first-person
warrant.
- Examples include silent speech, other forms of imagery, and sense experience.
- A thought experiment using blindsight is used to help understand what phenomena are not consciously
experienced and what is unique about conscious experience.

4. Consciousness Neglect:
- The author argues that theories of mind that neglect phenomenal consciousness, such as eliminativism and
functionalism, lack a conceptual or metaphysical possibility of certain forms of blindsight.
- He criticizes these theories for their inability to account for the contrast this with the subjective
experience of conscious beings, leaving out what is essential to consciousness.

5. Phenomenal Consciousness Distinguished from the Mind's Self-Representation:
- The author argues that phenomenal consciousness and mental self-representation (higher order thought or
introspection) are distinct concepts.
- Phenomenal consciousness is not a matter of mere sensation or 'raw feel,' but involves differences in Chapter
Seven, which are integral to the many differences in visual experience and recognition.

6. Visual Consciousness and Intentionality:
- The author argues that intentionality is built into visual perception and that this affects the way we value
consciousness.
- Understanding and recognizing something involves differences in phenomenal character, which is not merely a
matter of interpretation or 'feeling of understanding.'
- Visualization experience can be assessed for accuracy and the phenomenal character of visual imagery
determines what is recognized as shapes or objects.

7. Conscious Thought:
- The author argues that thinking, in the sense of forming an image of something, has intentionality built into
it.
- Noetic phenomenology (thinking without using language: Sudden realizations or turns of thought) shows that
there are differences in the way thoughts seem to us and these differences cannot be reduced to interpretation
or nonphenomenal features.
- Extraphenomenal conditions, such as causal links to the environment or membership in a linguistic community,
do not affect the assessment of truth for noetic phenomenology.

8. The Value of Consciousness:
- The author argues that we value consciousness for its own sake and not just for the nonphenomenal benefits it
provides.
- A thought experiment is used to demonstrate this value by asking whether one would prefer having conscious
experience even without these benefits.
- The author also discusses the importance of studying consciousness in philosophy and psychology, as it offers
valuable insights into perception, emotion, volition, and attention.

Checking 1 (1).txt
 This is the table of contents for a book titled "Evolutionary Thinking Across Disciplines: Problems and
Perspectives in Generalized Darwinism." The volume is edited by Agathe du Crest, André Ariew, Martina Valković,
Hugh Desmond, and Philippe Huneman. The book is published by Springer as part of the Synthese Library series.

The book consists of four parts. Part I focuses on how disciplines can benefit from or contribute to
evolutionary frameworks, with essays on topics such as evolutionary psychology, economics, cultural evolution,
and education. Part II discusses common principles or explanatory structures in evolution theory, including
metaphysics and human social evolution. Part III questions the risks and limitations of evolutionary
explanation, addressing topics like natural selection, evolution and ecology, and pluralism. Part IV considers
how evolutionary approaches might be amended or improved, with essays on the Modern Synthesis,
Darwinian/Hennigian systematics, and adding agency to Tinbergen's four questions.

The book includes contributions from various authors affiliated with institutions in France, Germany, the United
States, the Netherlands, and Spain.

Checking 1 (2).txt
 Al kennisje10:07:53 AM
Alcohol use is a prevalent behavior among adolescents, with 26.4% of youth aged 12-20 reporting using alcohol in
the last month and 17.4% reporting binge drinking. Rates of initiation are highest for Hispanics (29%) and
lowest for Asians (8.3%). The prevalence of alcohol use is higher among males (28.6%) than females (24.2%).
Early alcohol use, before age 15, increases the likelihood of later alcohol dependence and problems. Alcohol use
is associated with risky behaviors such as substance abuse, risky sexual behavior, delinquency, and suicide. It
also affects cognitive development and social-emotional functioning.

Early adolescent alcohol use is influenced by a complex interplay of socio-environmental, intrapersonal, and
behavioral factors. The most consistent risk factors are peer and parental factors, including low levels of
parental monitoring, inconsistent discipline, and permissive attitudes towards alcohol use. Authoritative
parenting, which involves high demands and support, is protective against alcohol use. Frequent and open
communication between parents and children about alcohol use is also important. Access to alcohol, offers of
alcohol from peers, and positive beliefs about alcohol use are additional risk factors for early initiation.

Interventions to prevent adolescent alcohol use have had mixed results, with some studies showing short-term
effects but no long-term impact. School-based programs that focus on both socio-environmental and intrapersonal
factors may be more effective. Parenting practices, such as authoritative parenting, can also ﬂexibly prevent
alcohol use in adolescents. Prevention efforts should target younger ages, before the onset of alcohol use, to
address the developmentally signiﬁcant tasks of that age group.

Checking 1 (3).txt
 In x == x:

1. Internal and external formulas: The internal formulas are those that do not involve the new predicate
"standard," whereas external formulas do.
2. Subset” axiom: The subset axiom asserts that for every set X, there exists a set S such that for all x, x is
in ordered in S if and only if A(x) holds, where A(x) is a formula of internal mathematics.
3. Transfer principle: The transfer principle (T) states that for an internal formula A whose only free
variables are x, t1, …, tn, and for all standard values of the parameters, if A holds for all standard x, then
it holds for all x.
4. Idealization principle: The idealization principle (I) asserts that for an internal formula A, if A filters
in x (with respect to a directed set D and the transitive relation ≺), then the relativized formula Ast obtained
by replacing each ∀ by ∀ st and ∃ by ∃st is equivalent to A.
5. Standardization principle: The standardization principle (S) allows us to make definitions using (S) by
defining "for x standard, F(x)" means "F(x) is an element of the standard set SF{ x ∈ X : A(x) } }," where A(x)
is a formula of internal mathematics.
6. Reduction of external formulas: The reduction algorithm involves eliminating all external predicates,
bringing internal quantifiers to the left of external ones, using (I) and (T), and simplifying the result to
make it more readable.
7. Answers to exercises: Solutions to various exercises throughout the chapter are provided.

In summary, Internal Set Set Theory is an extension of ordinary mathematics that introduces a new predicate
"standard" without defining it, allowing for the study of infinitesimals and other non-standard objects within
the framework of mathematics. The theory is constructed using three axioms: (I) idealization principle, (S)
standardization principle, and (T) transfer principle. These principles enable the manipulation and reduction of
formulas, making it possible to prove various results in the theory.
