Orson Scott Card.
Orson Scott Card is a science fiction author.
He wrote the book Ender's Game.
It's a classic sci-fi book.
I have read the book.
I don't remember if I've recommended it in my book recommendations, but if not, it's
a book I certainly would have been comfortable recommending because I do think that it is
a very powerful book in a number of different ways and it is an entertaining book as well.
It turns out that Orson Scott Card is anti-gay and now this is the subject of quite a bit
of controversy.
Back in 2009, he joined the board of the National Organization for Marriage, which
as we know is a disgustingly anti-gay group.
He also said that married he wrote on a in the Mormon Times.
I don't know if he's actually Mormon, but he wrote in the Mormon Times, married people
attempting to raise children with the hopes that they in turn will be reproductively successful
have every reason to oppose the normalization of homosexual unions.
I mean, it's the type of vocabulary we hear from the most extreme anti-gay nuts.
Now Orson Scott Card has found out that there's actually a boycott planned of the movie version
of the book Ender's Game.
There's a there's a movie that is in the works of Ender's Game, the book.
And when he found out that there is actually a boycott being planned because of his anti-gay
points of view, he said that actually the gay marriage issue is completely moot now
because the Supreme Court rulings have made it moot.
How I don't know.
And he also says that gay marriage supporters need to show tolerance towards those who disagreed
with them when the issue was still in dispute, basically saying those who are in favor of
equality need to tolerate those who are in favor of discrimination.
I have a couple thoughts on this.
Number one, the idea that we have to tolerate discriminatory bigots does not make logical
sense to me.
Legally speaking, we do tolerate intolerance.
It's called the First Amendment or since Scott Card or whoever wants to can make whatever
claims they want, they make whatever statements they want, but they are not free from the
repercussions of bigoted speech.
And we've talked about this when it came to Dr. Laura's N word rant and how she thought
because people didn't want to listen to her show anymore, that it was a violation of her
First Amendment rights.
It of course wasn't.
It was just the repercussions of her exercising her First Amendment rights.
So legally speaking, we already have tolerance of bigotry.
That doesn't mean people need to tolerate discriminatory views by any means.
Now that doesn't mean you, you are intolerant by committing violence.
Of course, we have laws and statutes that prevent that, but you can be against those
points of view and boycotting Orson Scott Card is absolutely within the realm of what
would be normal to do.
But I want to talk about the other thing, which is people have been asking me, given
that a lot of people know about my somewhat, I don't want to call it extensive knowledge,
but certainly I've read a lot of kind of classic science fiction books like Ender's
Game.
Does it make me revisit whether it's a good book or whether Orson Scott Card is a good
writer?
And I actually think of Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Fyodor Dostoyevsky was a known anti-Semite
that does not mean that his books are not worth reading or that his books are in some
way not writing that is at the same level as it would be if we didn't know him to be
an anti-Semite.
I've read a bunch of Fyodor Dostoyevsky.
There is no question that when I read it, I am aware of the fact that he was an anti-Semite.
I'm aware of that.
But I don't think that that means that the literature is no longer worth consuming.
Although I could see people being so offended that they say, I don't want to read anything
Orson Scott Card writes.
And they're entitled to that.
That's their prerogative.
I'd have to agree with you.
Can I still watch a Mel Gibson movie and enjoy it?
Can I still watch Braveheart and enjoy it?
Yeah, I think I can.
And I've never read Mein Kampf.
But I have to admit, I think it might be a fascinating read.
So some people can separate those things, other people can't.
And either way, that's okay, really.
Yeah.
Although I have to admit, I don't watch any Mel Gibson stuff anymore.
Because the look of him, his physical appearance and his physical presence makes me a little
bit nauseous.
But that's kind of to each of them.
Facebook.com slash David Pakman Show.
Join us on Facebook.
We'll take a break.
Dennis Campbell is next.
And then still plenty more to talk about.
Glad you're with us today.
The David Pakman Show at davidpakman.com.
