I'm, I'm, I'm not sure we can change anything here.
We can try.
Okay.
Well, that's the thing.
But my point is, I think we may be on this natural path to collapse or certain collapses
in society.
We may be on this natural path to high inflation coming soon.
You know, we may be, we may, the reason I said the fourth term, it's not because I believe
it's going to happen, but the book's interesting because same I'll say in history doesn't repeat,
but it rhymes, right?
There is a lot of similarity.
Perhaps this is something we can't stop.
I don't know.
I don't know.
What do you, what, what do you specifically worried about?
All right.
I'm worried about a universe where the chairs that are supposed to be reserved for smart
people have no smart people sitting in them.
Rich, you want to come up here?
Are you referring to people in government?
Cause we're there right now.
Not just government.
And we definitely got the B team out there right now.
Yeah.
I'm not so sure that I'm so thrilled with our tech companies either.
And I'm not so sure that I'm thrilled with our university departments and I'm not so
thrilled with our newspapers and our news agencies.
Like more or less, this is what's interesting.
Decentralization can be the, not even, not, yeah, the catalyst across all of those things.
Well, maybe I'll throw some, I just feel like it's almost impossible to have the interesting
conversations anymore.
I don't even know how to do it, right?
So in part, my thought is, if you really wanted me to talk and say something that's
going to piss off your audience, that I find fascinating, it's how do you get a bunch of
people who get decentralization to do something centralized, right?
That's hard.
That's one of the reasons why I'm not totally maximalist in my orientation, right?
At some level, you've got a bunch of hard-bitten people.
We don't trust.
Okay.
I get it.
You don't trust.
Okay.
You're going to have to trust and you're going to have to do something centralized
if you're going to do something that shows that this was what you guys said it was.
Well, there's a different point here.
We're decentralized with power, the platform, the protocol, okay.
You can get them together to centralize to go and do something external for Bitcoin.
Just don't make it Bitcoin.
Like you can, if you wanted to create the, you know, for example, libertarians who are
anti-politics, I always find that's a bit of a problem.
I think if you want to attack.
You're not a libertarian.
I'm not.
I'm, I love the ideas, theoretically.
Do you like hanging out with libertarians?
I do like hanging out with them.
I love them.
Right?
I think the picture they paint of the world is incredible.
That's the problem.
If it were credible, I'd be more excited.
It's incredible.
Well, the problem is from whatever political position you're in, you believe your story
is credible and you believe others aren't credible.
I was just down in El Salvador with a group of people.
One of the girls from the US was trying to sell me a Marxism.
She thinks it's great.
I was like, what?
Marxism.
Yeah.
Just trying to sell me a Marxism.
The point being is from...
She can sell Marxism.
That's...
You have talent.
No, she didn't do a good job.
But the point being is she hates capitalism, right?
Whether you're left, whether you're right, whether you're libertarian, anarchist.
From where you are, you believe your picture of the world is right and everything else
is nonsense.
And what we've haven't got is enough people trying to just...
Trying to see everyone else's version of the world.
That's what we don't have.
Everyone's like, this is my fucking...
Selfish.
But we're getting back to...
Yeah.
What do you think we need to do?
Just tell us.
Would you say centralize?
What do you mean?
You mean we need to go political, attack the system with our money from the changer?
You kind of survival-ish.
Look, I bore myself on this topic.
This is the end game.
We're watching the end game.
We can't recognize that it's the end game because we're not in a shooting war with China
at the moment.
Yet.
Okay.
It's worth mentioning that Bitcoin is firmly in the middle of US-China relations, firmly.
We are in a situation in which we've got a dire economic problem, which is communism
failed first.
Capitalism appears not to be able to get the job done.
We don't seem to be able to think much beyond communism versus capitalism.
This is what's new, gentlemen.
This is what's new.
And we're still having old-style conversations about what's new.
You're circling...
I feel like you want to tell us something.
And I'm like...
No, I don't want to tell you anything because every time I say...
I don't want to say anything like that because if I say, I'm Eric Weinstein and I believe
X1 and Z.
Oh, Eric Weinstein.
Yeah, but I don't care about them.
I care about these things.
That's not what I'm trying to say.
What I'm trying to say is I would like this to do something new beyond just be a new form
of money.
Well...
If it doesn't want to do that, if it just wants to be a new form of money and it wants
to make sure that some people can have hopes and dreams for their children and you can
buy that hard operation you were hoping to get your spouse or who knows what, great.
No arguments with it.
I happen to have a different question which is, does it solve everything?
That's really my question because if it solves everything, I would know what I would want
to go shopping for first.
What I would want to go shopping for is a return of sense making and a lineage level
solution for human survival.
Now people, they aren't used to these things.
They say, if you had a billion dollars, buy my great aunt, the house she'd always want.
That's great.
I would like to get off this planet and I would like to get off this planet with options
because as we just saw under COVID, we're running one centralized experiment.
That one centralized experiment is too dangerous with this many stupid people in positions
of leadership.
Right now, whatever we're selecting for in terms of leadership, we used to have a lot
of brutal people on the world stage who are very talented.
We have fewer brutal people on the world stage and way less talent.
This idea of making everything dumber, we've had 75 years of peace that are coming due.
We are out of shape.
We have no idea what enforced 75 years of peace within a thermonuclear planet.
This is coming to an end.
My feeling is we've had what I've called the great nap, we've had 75 years to get out
of shape, to forget what it means to be a country, why we have centralized institutions.
Nobody can even remember why we have journalists because they used to put their lives on the
line to get the story and follow certain sorts of codes.
Now they seem to be a pox on-
But you know why that is.
Again, that comes down to the money.
They don't have the money anymore.
The internet changed things.
It changed the economics of journalism and the economics of entertainment and eyeballs
completely changed.
It's become about clicks.
We know that.
But it's not about clicks.
Nothing sells journalism like Jeffrey Epstein's stories.
When you find people say, oh, people aren't interested in Jeffrey Epstein's.
Are you kidding me?
Well, there's random bits of great journalism.
You know, they're wrong.
No, no, no.
But I'm trying to make this.
Okay.
I am failing.
I desperately want to be having a different conversation.
I don't know what the conversation is you want to have.
Let's start from a different perspective.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
