I think Google is self-driving cars and balloons that send internet to everyone.
So my name is Sarah and I'm studying software engineering and public policy at Macquarie University.
And this year I'm interning over the summer at Google.
As I was growing up, my parents kept telling me that internships were just making coffee for people.
So I was a bit hesitant about my first internship.
When you walk in, you get off the elevators here in our building and it's bright yellow.
And immediately that kind of sets the tone for everything.
People are very focused on a balance between working and having fun and the office really facilitates for that.
There are games and there are plenty of places to go and relax when you need a break,
which you always do when you're working really hard.
I'm Andrea and I'm an intern here at Google.
I'm a first year computer science student.
Our tale today tells the story of two EP interns, Flo and I'm Eddie.
I'm Florentia, you can call me Flo.
I'm also an intern at Google and I'm also a first year university student.
Okay, nice ones yours.
We are actually an engineering practicum intern here at Google.
It's like an internship program that is focused on the underrepresented group in software engineering.
The really cool thing is we're working on the products.
We're ingrained in a team, we're embedded in there and oftentimes these projects will go to launch,
which I think is absolutely unbelievable.
One of the challenges we have at Google is trying to find the next generation of people
who are going to come and work here and help us achieve the really ambitious projects that we're working on.
My name is James McGill and I manage three teams that work as part of the bigger Google Maps product.
When I started at Google Sydney in 2007 as an intern, as part of Google Australia's internship program.
Interns bring a fresh perspective. Their enthusiasm is contagious throughout the office.
Hi, I'm Stephanie Borgman. I manage our internship program here at Google Australia.
We're really excited about the fact that our interns are from all different backgrounds.
I think girls in engineering are a little bit of an endangered species and that there's really not a lot of us around.
So this is where we come in.
We were summoned to Google Castle to find a solution to this awful dilemma.
Google is an organisation that aspires to really reflect the global diversity.
We always find it's an amazingly vibrant, exciting time of year when we have our interns descend upon us.
Hi, I'm Renee. I'm a former Google intern. I worked as an intern with my manager, Mike.
My name is Mike Lawther and I'm the Chrome Product Area Lead here in Sydney.
We're not trying to figure out what interns would work on on the Chrome team.
What I'm looking for mostly is some sort of spark, some sort of passion in there.
We had one intern who came in. She applied very late in the program because she wasn't sure if she should apply.
I really didn't know what I wanted to do. I didn't know if I wanted to move away from home.
I didn't know if I wanted to come into the big city.
I think if I hadn't done the internship, I may not have had even the confidence to try and get a job at Google.
It definitely gave me confidence and skills that helped me to get the job.
Coming to Google, you see that the people who work here, really what they have in common is this passion for technology of making things better.
Some of the best advice someone gave me before I applied for the internship was you'll never get anything that you don't apply for.
You don't know. You can be sitting here next.
