Hyperphantasia and Auditory OS.
Open sidebar
Hyperphantasia and Auditory OS.
Check my spelling wording etc:

It sounds interesting, hyperphantasia is definitely on the other end of the spectrum. I have a friend who does this as well, it sounds kind of fun. Although it is still so far from what how I use my eyes and brain that it is difficult to comprehend.

Technically I could build a house from scratch, without a blueprint, including the electrical and plumbing. I can plan out the compostion of a painting, including its colors and textures without seeing anything, and I'm not sure I would want to.

I can imagine how a new arrangement of furniture will feel to look at, but it might be some kind of plan for how to direct the gaze around the scene or move around on it. I can think of how different colors will work together and feel, but it is more like a bunch of principles or rules. 

And I think I like to think about counterfactual situations or something and try multiple solutions to problems. There are probably lots of tradeoffs and benefits to different strategies. I am just so used to my memories not being in the form of a narrative or visual scene that it seems like the only normal way.

I tend to learn things in the form of lists or vocabulary definitions, so as I learn new meanings it also rewrites my memories, like I might think of another option I hadn't thought of at the time. When I make blender models, I don't add texture, color, or lighting, I feel like it is done when I can pose the figures or fly around the scene.

It seems like that is something that someone who cares more about that aspect could finish. And it's a good enough approximation. It feels like I would be interested in an auditory operating system more like echolocation, where the different objects announce things like their proximity, speed, and shape by their sound.

I am also interested in outline-based operating systems where objects are drawn only in outline and the color of the outline varies with distance. I am probably years from being able to make working prototypes, but I suspect I'm trying to reverse engineer my mental operating system.

Like I like to arrange my books by color and height rather than by topic, and I like to think of ways of mapping the qwerty keyboard onto the piano, and I am working on a typing tutor game and an Arabic keyboard, just because I think it will help me learn Arabic, although it would be good if it comes in handy to others.
Your spelling and grammar are correct, and your wording is clear and concise. Here is your text with some minor corrections and suggestions:
"It sounds interesting; hyperphantasia is definitely on the other end of the spectrum. I have a friend who also does this, and it sounds kind of fun. Although it is still so far from how I use my eyes and brain that it is difficult to comprehend.
Technically, I could build a house from scratch without a blueprint, including the electrical and plumbing. I can plan out the composition of a painting, including its colors and textures, without seeing anything, and I'm not sure I would want to.
I can imagine how a new arrangement of furniture will look, but it might be more like a plan for how to direct the gaze around the scene or move around it. I can think of how different colors will work together and feel, but it is more like a bunch of principles or rules.
And I think I like to think about counterfactual situations or try multiple solutions to problems. There are probably lots of tradeoffs and benefits to different strategies. I am just so used to my memories not being in the form of a narrative or visual scene that it seems like the only normal way.
I tend to learn things in the form of lists or vocabulary definitions, so as I learn new meanings, it also rewrites my memories. For example, I might think of another option I hadn't considered at the time. When I make blender models, I don't add texture, color, or lighting; I feel like it is done when I can pose the figures or fly around the scene.
It seems like that is something that someone who cares more about those aspects could finish. And it's a good enough approximation. It feels like I would be interested in an auditory operating system more like echolocation, where different objects announce their proximity, speed, and shape through sound.
I am also interested in outline-based operating systems, where objects are drawn only in outline and the color of the outline varies with distance. I am probably years away from being able to make working prototypes, but I suspect I'm trying to reverse engineer my mental operating system.
I like to arrange my books by color and height rather than by topic, and I like to think of ways to map the QWERTY keyboard onto the piano. I am working on a typing tutor game and an Arabic keyboard because I think it will help me learn Arabic, although it would be great if it could also be useful to others."
ChatGPT Mar 14 Version
. Free Research Preview. Our goal is to make AI systems more natural and safe to interact with. Your feedback will help us improve.
New chat