In south-east at six tonight, as some ratepayers in north London look forward to lower rates
in the year ahead, a report on the prospect for the rest of the region.
Mastering the microchip, our two teenagers' expertise with computers is making them a
fortune.
Reaching the victorians, the successes and failures of the campaign to conserve 19th
century buildings.
And loyally.
Good evening.
In south-east at six tonight, you don't need a computer to tell you that we're now living
in the age of the microchip.
Our homes are rapidly being invaded by mini-computers.
And slowly, we're even being programmed into how to use them.
The British market is already worth millions of pounds, and early next week, the latest
generation of hard and software goes on show in Birmingham.
The BBC is in the forefront with its huge computer literacy project, based on the corporation's
own microcomputer.
There are over 25,000 of them in use in the country's schools, and already some youngsters
in the south-east are making their fortune by mastering the microchip.
Seventeen-year-old Jeremy Rustin, and Alex Golner, who's 15, are two London schoolboys
who stand to make about £16,000 between them this year, cashing in on the computer craze.
Jeremy has published three books about how to make the best use of your personal mini-computer.
This one, it says, is destined to become the Bible of the BBC user.
He's also come up with a cassette that speeds up the BBC micro.
His latest project is to produce computer games for the BBC.
Alex Golner's first book of computer programmes is due out in March.
Well, Jeremy, first of all, how did you become hooked, and what's the fascination?
I started off being interested in electronics and building radios and so on, then I started
building small computers, and from then I just started buying ready-built ones instead.
It must be pretty difficult writing all these best-selling books and trying to struggle
with your A-levels.
Uh, yeah, it is, actually. Very difficult. Um, I failed my A-levels in the summer because
of it, actually.
Has it all been worthwhile?
Oh, yeah, very much so.
Now, the fascination up here, we've got this design, which I believe you call French tiles.
Now, is this just typical of the sort of patterns you can make?
Yeah, I mean, that's just a quarter of an hour's work or something, just as an amusement.
Talking of amusement, Alex, I mean, you've got your games book coming out soon.
I think a lot of children must have been given computer games for Christmas.
Is it healthy to have so many of them sitting around just plugged in, playing them?
I don't think, actually, it burns their minds, but it does keep them off the street.
And, um, it also helps them get ready for the big computer world, where nearly everything
is being taken over by computers.
Do you think the sort of, uh, the way that teachers are getting computer studies across
in school is good?
Well, there is a difference between computer studies and computer programming in the primary
schools.
Two children are being taught about how to program their computer.
While in their comprehensive schools, people are actually told about their whole system
of computing, which is quite different.
Well, Jeremy, perhaps we could now take a look at your latest computer game, which is called
Doctor Who, I believe.
Now, how does this work?
Is this sort of Pac-Man, isn't it?
Um, yeah, it's based on some of the ideas from Pac-Man, uh, but it's a very long program.
It's taken quite a long time to load off-disc.
And it's going to pop up here.
Ah, here we are.
Yeah, essentially, um, you're that little dot in the corner.
Down here?
Yes.
And you're being chased by those worms who have now eaten me, which is the head of the game.
Oh, I see.
But do you think that there is a bit of a generation gap when it comes to working with computers?
That, you know, people of my age, it's almost too late to learn?
No, not at all.
Um, I found that quite a lot of people, old age pensioners and people of any age, have
been writing to me with comments about the books and suggestions and so on.
So there must be quite a lot of people of all ages interested.
What are the practical applications, really, for home computers?
What's one of the most useful things you can do with one in the home?
I think the most useful thing, really, is word processing for writing letters and so
on.
There are the less general applications like shopping lists and what I use it for, cataloging
records and books.
Well, I know you can play all kinds of tricks with it and, in fact, you've even been programming
it to actually show our South East at Six logo.
While you get that sorted out, let me just tell people what tomorrow's weather is going
to be like.
Uh, tomorrow will be a mostly cloudy day and our picture, by the way, comes from Mr. Page
of the Biliriki in Essex.
After a dry start, there will be some outbreaks of rain for a time and then it will become
drier later.
It will be somewhat less cold with afternoon temperatures of 7 degrees centigrade, as you
can see there, 45 Fahrenheit.
So rather cloudy, some rain for a time.
Jeremy, let's have a look at your South East at Six logo.
That's rather splendid, isn't it?
How long did it actually take you to get that together?
About two hours.
Two hours?
Yes.
I mean, that's rather, I mean, it's very pretty, but do you think it was worth the effort?
Um, well, yes and no.
But there's actually quite a lot of complicated maths involved in that, which just doesn't
show up when you look at it.
Well, Jeremy, I'll tell you now, I'll put you on the spot.
You've got nine seconds to see if you can, uh, punch up the nationwide programme.
See what you can do.
Off you go.
Well, let's see what we can manage, yeah.
Good evening, nationwide tonight, underage drinkers.
As a fresh campaign is launched to keep young people off the bottle, we ask why do they
do it and how do they get round the law?
Okay.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
