pleasure to introduce our second speaker of this session, Max Arnott, who was originally an
undergraduate here in Lancaster and is now completing his second year as he said of his PhD
under my supervision. So Max is going to tell us about what that is of closed ideals of the
algebra of bounded operators on a direct sum of classical binary spaces and the incompressibility
of its quotients. So please, Max. Thank you for the introduction. Thank you for having me on to speak
and thanks, Benza, for a great talk as well. So it might be the title for the longest title
in the conference. So that's our honor as well. So start off with a few definitions. So closed ideal
is a subspace closed in the norm topology. So it's closed under addition and by multiplication
by arbitrary elements of the bank algebra that it's a subspace of. We're going to use b of x, y
for the space of bounded operators, and we're going to use b of x for b of x, x.
An operator ideal is an assignment sending each pair of binary spaces to a subspace of their
space of bounded operators. So for every pair x, y of binary spaces, there has to be,
there has to exist a non-trivial one for that assignment. And for any quadruple w, x, y, z
of binary spaces, any s from w to x, t from x to y, u from y to z, u, t, s has to be in i of w, z.
And we'll use i of x for i of x, x, which is quite natural. So examples of operator ideals,
which we are going to be using. So g of d is going to be the operator ideal of operators
factoring through d. And we're going to use the norm closure of that. So all of the operators
ideals that we're going to use today are closed operator ideals. It's actually an operator ideal
if and only if d is isomorphic to a square. But everything we use today will be isomorphic
to a square. So we don't need to concern ourselves with that. So we're going to use the kappa
compact operators as well. So it's a generalization of the compact operators. I think Matt Dawes came
up with these ones in the first place. And the Banach spaces of interest to us are c0 of gamma
for gamma sun cardinal and lp of gamma for gamma sun cardinal as well. We're also going to need the
finite dimensional versions of the LP space. So it's just n2, n tuples with the P norm.
We're going to use the c0 sum of the finite dimensional l2 spaces as well. So that is the
norm. So the elements of that are sequences of elements of Hilbert spaces. And for the norm you
take the supremum of the norms of those elements. An operator t factors through an operator s if
s is a factor of t. And an operator t factors through a Banach space y if we can express it as
a product of two operators, one going into y and the other one coming out of y. So now we
sort of give the outline and motivation of the talk. So it's all about classifying the lattice
of closed ideals of a space of bounded operators. So Matt Dawes found the lattice of closed ideals on
B of c0 gamma and B of lp gamma. So that's for P between 1 and infinity but not including infinity
and gamma infinite. Larsen, Loy and Reed found the lattice of closed ideals of B of the c0 sum
of the l2 spaces. And Larsen, Schlumprecht and Schach then found the lattice of closed ideals
on the bounded operators of the the dual of this space. So I will say now that within this talk
we're going to be working with the direct sum of c0 gamma and this c0 sum here. The results also
hold for the duals. So l1 of gamma plus this l1 sum here. But there are just a couple of things
you have to do ever so slightly differently. So I've done it in in in terms of this c0 sum.
But all of the results hold for this talk if you replace all instances of c0 with l1.
So for classical Banach spaces that's that's everything we've got. There are some more exotic
examples where we know all of the closed ideals. For example if you went to Niels's talk on Monday
at Garth's retirement session he explained about a C of k space which has a few operators
in the sense that its operators are sums of multiples of the identity and separable range
operators. And the space of bounded operators on that C of k space has exactly four closed ideals.
So what we're going to do is take the direct sum of the c0 gamma and this c0 sum of Hilbert spaces
and we're going to find a lattice of closed ideals of that. We'll then show that if we
quotient this Banach algebra by any of its closed ideals we get a uniformly incompressible
the uniform incompressible property which I will define when we when we come to that.
So what we need to do is sort of talk about operators on a direct sum of Banach spaces
in terms of matrices. So we can identify any operator by a matrix Tij and the ijth entry
goes from xj to xi. So addition is just entry-wise. Composition of operators is simply matrix
multiplication so there's nothing interesting going on now. I'm sure everyone's seen it before.
The action on a pair x1 plus x2 in this direct sum is just given as follows.
You can also recover any quadrant of the matrix just by using the inclusions and projections.
So if we let jj be an inclusion from xj to x1 plus x2 and qi be an equation from x1 plus x2
to xi then we can say that Tij the ijth quadrant is equal to qitjj.
And then closed ideals are subspaces of the space of bounded operators so each quadrant has to be
a subspace of the bounded operators on that particular quadrant.
Now something that's quite easy to prove is that in any closed ideal on a direct sum
on the bounded operators of a direct sum of Banach spaces the first and fourth quadrants
have to be closed ideals of the respective space of Banach spaces.
So given that the spaces we're working with we know they're full lattices of closed ideals
and we know what the possibilities for i11 and i22 can be.
And for that reason we're mainly focusing on what can be in the off-diagonal quadrants.
So here are these lattices of closed ideals I was talking about.
So for the C0 sum of the finite dimensional L2 spaces you have four closed ideals.
So you've got the trivial ones being zero and the entire space of bounded operators
and then you've got the compact operators and the operators approximately factoring through
the where these C0 in our case but as I said it also works for L1.
And the lattice of closed ideals for C0 of gamma or LP of gamma is given by zero the
compact operators the LF1 compact operators all the way going up to the gamma plus compact
operators which are equal to the entire space of bounded operators. So the definition of these
an operator is kappa compact if for every epsilon greater than zero the closed unit ball of the
domain of the operator contains a subset x epsilon with cardinality strictly less than kappa
such that the infimum of the norm of t x minus y for y in this subset of the unit ball
is less than or equal to epsilon for every x in the unit ball.
So what you'll notice is because this is strictly less than if I set kappa to be gamma plus where
gamma is the cardinality here what you'll end up with is you can take x epsilon to be
the entire unit ball so that's why the gamma plus compact operators are equal to the entire space
it's true for any time you've got a space of density gamma, kappa gamma plus k gamma plus of x
is going to be the entire space of bounded operators. So a closed ideal on this direct sum
on the bounded operators of the direct sum so we're going to write e for this c0 sum of the
Hilbert spaces now we know that the possibilities for the first and fourth quadrants are going to
be given for by zero compact approximate factoring through c0 operators and the bounded operators
in the first quadrant and the fourth quadrant is going to either be zero or some kappa compact
operators in in that position what we can do is you can quite simply prove that if i is the
it's an ideal on the of the bounded operators on a direct sum of bounded spaces if any of its
quadrants are the compact operators then all of them must be and that goes in converse as well so
the only time the compact operators can appear as one of the quadrants is if all of them are
and the same goes for zero so what you can do using this is just pull out the first two ideals
from these quadrants as well the direct sum has the approximation property meaning that the
the compact operators are the closure of the finite rank operators which tells you that the
smallest non-zero ideal is the compact operators here and then what you do when you combine these
results is you can say if a closed ideal on this finite space of bounded operators
strictly contains the compact operators then it must be of the this form so it must have
first quadrant either approximately factoring through c0 or the entire space of bounded operators
and the fourth quadrant has to be kappa compact where kappa is at least f1
so the identity operator on c0 factors through non-compact operators on the operators going
from c0 gamma to e and from e to c0 gamma all of which factor through c0 themselves
so I haven't proved that here you do have to do a little work to prove it but it's not
it's nothing crazy
this implies that all of the operators are the operators factoring through c0
and it follows that for any closed ideal of this space of bounded operators
strictly containing the compact operators the quadrants two one and one two have to be the
entire space of bounded operators so from factorizations given by Dawes and in Larson-Loyne
Reid's paper we know that the identity on c0 factors through every non-compact operator on
c0 gamma and e respectively when we combine the results from these bullet points what we get
is that if a closed ideal strictly is not sorry a closed ideal of the space of bounded operators
on e plus c0 gamma is either contained within the compact operators or contains the operators
factoring through c0 and this gives us our first three inclusions in the lattice of closed ideals
so yeah here we've got the lattice of closed ideals we know that the rest of them the off-diagonal
quadrants are the entire space of bounded operators on their respective boundary spaces
and the other quadrants are off the following forms so yeah and here
so the cases for when i11 is the entire space of bounded operators well all of them operators are
going to be kappa compacts when kappa is bigger than or equal to f1 because the space e is a
separable space and what this tells us is that the ideals that are in this form are the kappa
compact operators themselves so now we're able to paint this picture for what the lattice of
closed ideals looks like so the operate the ideals j these are of the form where the top quadrant is
the approximately factoring through c0 operators and the fourth one is the kappa compacts and these
ones are the kappa compact operators there is a bit more work that needs to be done to show
that everything just falls into place nicely but um we're going to gloss over that because we want
to get on to the next topic which is incompressibility so binocalgebra are incompressible if every
continuous injected binocalgebra homomorphism from them into another binocalgebra have to be
bounded below so this was talked about in mac doors's talk on monday it also was talked about
by bill johnson in the binoc space webinar back in january i think and that's available on youtube
i would recommend that that talk so it's uniformly incompressible if the the binocalgebra homomorphisms
into another binocalgebra the lower bound of them depends only on the norm of the homomorphisms
themselves um so here's a proposition from that bill johnson talk a binocalgebra is incompressible
if and only if the norm is unique in the sense that every continuous algebra norm is equivalent
and this sort of gives another place where this was studied before the phd thesis of griff
griff where so this is all about uniqueness of norm properties of calcine algebras it explores
this line of research and that's what gives a lot of incompressibility results and so it gives
ones that are useful for us he proved the uh quotients of b of c0 of gamma and lp of gamma
by any of their closed ideals so these are called the kappa calcine algebras because they're the
quotients of the bounded operators by the kappa compact operators so these all have
unique algebra norms and he also showed this for the calcine algebra of the c0 sum we've
been using um so from the the methods that he gives in his paper uh so he uses block basic
sequences to prove these kind of results and you can combine the results and prove that the calcine
algebra of this direct sum uh plus our c0 of gamma space that calcine algebra is incompressible
um
so yeah this is sort of how we prove incompressibility results uh from here on and this is uh i'm not
going to prove it here because it was in bill johnson's talk again which i'm going to keep
referring to um so if there exists a non-zero element a in a bannock algebra capital a and some
finite m less than infinity such that for every norm one x in a there are bc and a with
the norm of b times a norm of c less than or equal to m and a equals bxc then a is incompressible
so when we can select a to be an idempotent a is uniformly incompressible um so this is a very
useful uh theorem to have because these kind of factorizations exist so an element of bannock
algebras factoring through all of the unit elements of the bannock algebra is really useful results
when classifying closed ideals an example of it is when we take x to be our direct sum our c0 sum
of the finite dimensional helbert spaces every operator which doesn't approximately factor through
c0 which is norm one the identity on this space factors through it and this was used to um classify
the closed ideals of this uh um the bounded operators on b of x so what we have to do to
prove incompressibility then is find the upper bound on the norm of u times the norm of v
um i will add that this proposition here gives us an easy way of showing that the entire space
bounded operators itself has to be incompressible in fact uniformly incompressible um or any sub
algebra of it which contains the finite rank operators and that's because you can just get
everything to factor through a norm one uh rank one operator and it's um it's quite trivial to do
that in a bounded way like this so for our example here we can actually always choose u and v for
which the norm of u times the norm of v is less than or equal to two i'm going to do that right
now so what we do is we take x t to be an operator which is uh it bounded on x and for any operator of
this uh form we can write t as a matrix t ij and the ij entry goes from l2j to l2i
um so importantly we can perturb t by an arbitrarily small compact operator
and then we can consider it with a matrix of finitely supported rows and columns
so we define this uh m epsilon uh quantity so if s is from a finite direct sum of Hilbert spaces
to x finite sum of l2 spaces we set m epsilon of s to be the supremum number m for which
s of the projection of l2 to the one over g1 perpendicular plus dot dot dot plus p the projection
from l2n to the orthogonal complement of gn so if s composed with this direct sum of operators
has norm greater than epsilon for any subspaces gj of sorry hj here should be l2 to the j
um of dimension at most m um so the idea of this is m is the largest natural number for which if we
remove a a space of dimension at most m from each of the Hilbert spaces in the domain of s
then we still have an operator which is larger than epsilon in size uh i find this definitions
a bit easier in words than it is when you um write it down like that so because we have that t
is we can consider t as a matrix of finitely supported rows and columns when we take qn the
projection onto the nth Hilbert space qn of t we can consider m epsilon on that um
so we do that just by ignoring the Hilbert spaces in the domain of t on which it acts trivially here
on which qn of t acts trivially I should say um so Larsson-Loyan-Reeds paper gives the factorization
the identity factorizes factors through t and from that paper from the proof what you can do
is prove that r can have norm at most one and s you can take to have norm less than or equal to
one over epsilon epsilon you can take to be any uh value for which the supremum of m epsilon qn t
for n natural is equal to infinity what we showed uh more recently is that you can actually take
epsilon to be anything less than the equation norm of t um and what that tells you is that when
you take epsilon less than less than the equation norm of t you get that m epsilon qn t is equal to
infinity um that's whenever that's true when uh whenever t does not factor approximately through c0
um and this basically ties the results together um so if you take any t in the quotient space
b of x over the operators factoring approximately through c0 you have this uh this factorization
through the identity and you also know that it's bounded you just take a half epsilon to be halfway
here so we've already seen that every closed ideal of this bounded uh this base of bounded
operators on the direct sum strictly containing the compact operators has that it's one two and two
one quadrants are trivial there the entire space of bounded operators and i've just noticed here
that these should say c0 gamma instead of c0 so apologies for that um so quotienting this
space of bounded operators by such an ideal you're going to get elements of this form so
in the two one and one two quadrants you're going to be adding entire space of bounded operators
and what that means is you can you can identify anything which only differs in these two quadrants
so they get quotiented away basically
um and lastly i didn't prove this because there isn't going to be time but the uniform
incompressibility of the quotient spaces in such a case uh it follows directly from the uniform
incompressibility of the quotient of the bounded operators on c0 of gamma by its first quadrant
and the direct sum here by its fourth quadrant so the important thing here is that once you know
that in these quotient spaces the the off diagonal quadrants are going to get quotiented away
you end up with the incompressibility following from the uniform incompressibility of the quotient
spaces in the other two quadrants so all of the ones where i is bigger than the compact operators
are of this form we know from griffwires results that the uh calcine algebra of this direct sum
is going to be uniformly incompressible and the other cases are it's just a i equal to zero and
in that case you've got an entire space of bounded operators so it's trivial so thank you for listening
and i'll take any questions thank you very much max for a very nice talk
um are there any questions please
um
can i have one question please joe um have you thought about l infinity in terms of incompressibility
i don't think we have we've been looking at a couple of other spaces so the there's some different
there's some different lp sums of different finite dimensional l lp spaces that we've been looking
at because although they don't have their uh lattices of bounded operators fully charted out
you do have some of these factorization results so i've been looking into a couple of those which
they prove quite difficult and also we've been looking at the cfk space that neils talked about
on monday with a few operators um and that one it seems like it's going to be incompressible but
the questions of it by any of its closed ideals will be but we haven't got there yet so anything
can happen but no we haven't looked at l infinity unfortunately thank you we should probably add i
mean there is this um a graph paper the one that bill johnson spoke about in the barnock spaces
webinar back in january and where these incompressibility property was referred to as i had i think
but i understand they changed the terminology subsequently so this is a pre-print by bill
and the gideon and um chris phillips so um they are i think they are looking at capital lp
in particular and i think is that right for the reflexive range right yes that's correct
that was the main thing so that yes so that was one of the cases that was left open i think i
agree where but i don't know bill did you look at the l infinity no we didn't
okay actually i haven't really thought about it all
okay are there any other questions
if not i suggest we thank max again and then
we'll have a
