Mexican Death Whistle TheoriesOpen sidebarMexican Death Whistle TheoriesModel: GPT-4Summarize: This article was uploaded to the Mexicolore website on Sep 18th 2011

within Mexicolore Learn how a Mexican composer today is incorporating the death whistle into her compositions
within Mexicolore ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―Death whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―: cremated example (re)discoveredïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―
outside Mexicolore ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―The History of the Death Whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― video by Roberto, November 2016
Feedback button
Here's what others have said:

13 At 2.29pm on Friday June 16 2023, Corinne wrote:
This ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―death whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― sounds like a near-perfect imitation of the screech of a barn owl. Listen for yourself:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S_J1VCCC_So&ab_channel=VizonRok
So were they put into tombs as a decoy to help the deceased cross over by summoning a barn owl as a guide? Were the barn owls considered portents of death, but also psychopomps in old Mexico as they have been in plenty of traditions?
Mexicolore replies: Many thanks for this. The similarity in sound is remarkable! You could well be right and itïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―s an intriguing idea. Yes, the barn owl was very much a portent of death (see our short feature on this here -
https://www.mexicolore.co.uk/aztecs/aztec-life/superstitious-10)
Though mentioned in this context in the Florentine Codex, thereïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―s no reference to barn owls being psychopomps (that we know of).
12 At 7.59pm on Thursday March 30 2023, rocko wrote:
Interesting theories for sure.
My first thought upon reading about these is psychological warfare. How terrifying it might have been to hear ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―screamingïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― - either a single scream or many - prior to warriors bursting onto the scene. Many people panic by ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―freezingïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―, This would make them easy to subdue/kill.
Iïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―m no historian and I have no evidence, but seems like a potentially intriguing theory.
Mexicolore replies: Youïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―re right, it does sound effective (though presumably enemies would likely be familiar with/forewarned about this tactic and so ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―expectïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― it); the real problem is, as you say, thereïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―s just no evidence that thatïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―s what happened...
11 At 4.33am on Monday December 26 2022, Hali Ann3 i5duh wrote:
Okay so this might be a stretch, but ii think that the whistles were meant to summon something tangible, ii doubt the young lad was sacrificed so much as he probably just had a bad tooth abscess and died. Accidental or natural cause... tho one whistle alone causes horrifying shrieking two or more n likely 3 blown tandem will create a harmony... Many different things occur to animals including human when affected with resonance...is it out of the realm of possibility that a strong wind being or something that causes that particular sound might be drawn to the noise...? Calcasieu is a name of a Louisiana parish derived from the native American Indians that inhabited this place long before we lived here, it stands for screaming/crying eagle...ii have been very attracted to whistles harmonica flutes n the like more n more this past year...thereïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―s something very interesting trying to come up n debut here guys n gals .. just uu wait n see
Mexicolore replies: Coooool ideas...!
10 At 7.14pm on Friday October 21 2022, Barry Hall wrote:
Iïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―m delighted to see an ongoing discussion here on these fascinating instruments. I was friends with Roberto years ago when I was writing a book on clay musical instruments and am saddened to hear of his passing. I have made many of these ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―death whistlesïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― and you can get many different sounds from them besides ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―screams.ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―
Mexicolore replies: Thanks for sharing this, Barry. We miss Roberto very much...
9 At 12.29pm on Saturday May 7 2022, Kye Grahama wrote:
I am fascinated by the architecture of these death whistles. I cannot imagine the pure fear instilled by the screaming from these instruments of death. Where can I buy some?
Mexicolore replies: People are tending to get a bit carried away with the idea that Aztec death whistles were, in your words, ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―instruments of deathïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―. There isnïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―t any evidence for this, whereas we DO know that these whistles were buried with people who had died as a reminder of the challenge to be faced on the long four-year journey to the underworld from hurricanes that could slice through you ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―like an obsidian bladeïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―. The sound, in other words, was not a semi-human shriek but an imitation of a very powerful wind...
8 At 6.14pm on Friday March 12 2021, Nigel Coxon wrote:
I am running some experiments with 3D printed death whistles, trying to convert an existing skull design to use a different exterior shape.
The design I have has three slots in the rear of the whistle and I wondered if anyone knew how they change the sound? I can provide pictures if anyone thinks they can help.
7 At 1.30am on Tuesday July 28 2020, pyrocolada wrote:
Here is a video of Joe Rogan blowing the whistle 2 weeks before COVID19 hit the USA. https://www.instagram.com/p/CCua4V6l7Ap/
Mexicolore replies: Poor old Aztecs, get blamed for everything!
6 At 1.14am on Sunday July 14 2019, Ernst von Bezold wrote:
Thank you for this fascinating exposition. The double chamber of the cross-section image reminds me of the double chambered Peruvian whistling bottles and the pronounced changes of consciousness reported (J. Transpersonal Psychology, ca. 1970) to be associated with several blown together (besides hyperventilation, perhaps assisted by body cavity resonance, e.g., sinuses, chest, heart, skull) The article refers to sound quality attributed to beat frequency effects produced with two whistles playing together. Have you identified beat frequency(ies) produced by blowing a single whistle, as the spectogram illustrated in the article, evidently showing three main frequency domains, may indicate?
Mexicolore replies: Thanks for writing in. Weïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―re sure Roberto would have gladly looked into this for you; sadly since his death this is unlikely to happen...
5 At 7.39pm on Tuesday June 12 2018, Frithjof Grude wrote:
Allow me to share a few thoughts I have around the fascinating death whistle:
The death whistle is supposed to emulate the sound of a human scream.
Itïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―s usage was likely to make insignificant, or ridicule, the screaming of pain of a sacrificed criminal or enemy?to further incite futility and enhance their punishment.
The design has likely been arrived at by cutting up the neck area of corpses to replicate the larynx in clay.
To find out for the first time that the larynx is responsible for the human voice, they may have actually blown through various parts of the neck of a corpse.
The sound of the aztec death whistle is so haunting that itïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―s reasonable to imagine it was considered magical and even possessed by the soul of the victim it was modeled after?thereby having available a posthumous punishment as a preemptive measure.
Mexicolore replies: Wacky ideas! But do you have any evidence at all for them?
Far more plausible - backed up by our knowledge of ancient Mexican beliefs in the nine levels of the underworld and the challenges souls would face on the journey down to the bottom - is the now well established idea that death whistles were buried with corpses to remind journeying souls of the fierce winds that could slice through you ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―like obsidian bladesïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―, just one of the challenges. Your idea of ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―posthumous punishmentïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― strikes us as fanciful, to say the least...
4 At 12.21pm on Thursday December 18 2014, Leila wrote:
The internal shape of the whistle, in pic 3, reminds me a bit of a laryngeal cross-section near the vocal cords; no wonder the whistle sounds so eerily like a scream! Thanks so much for this fascinating information!
Mexicolore replies: Thanks, Leila, for this intriguing piece of information...
3 At 3.18pm on Tuesday October 22 2013, Cristina wrote:
Roberto Velïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―zquez is one of the most important researchers in Mexico. I am proud to read him in this beautiful place. Thank you very much to Ian Mursell and to every person that works hard to make this possible. My best wishes!
2 At 2.45am on Saturday April 21 2012, Luigi Romero wrote:
Thanks for the information, I bought one off eBay a couple days ago and wanted to read more information on it. Thanks
1 At 1.17pm on Sunday February 5 2012, Kritzia LaRose wrote:
Thank you so much for such an in depth background on these fascinating whistles. Iïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―m an art teacher whose infusing the chamber whistles into my curriculum as part of the precolumbian era in my curriculum. I canïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―t begin tell you how much Robertoïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―s research has been inspiring me. Iïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ve added this to my curriculum as the musical part of my masters studies of multiple intelligences in education. Thank you again for the wealth of information on your site.
Sinceramente,
Kritzia
Mexicolore replies: Thank YOU, Kritzia, for this very positive feedback. This is precisely what our website - and Robertoïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―s experimental work - is for, to inspire and encourage others. Good luck with your own research, and let us know how you get on...!1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThis Mexicolore website discussion concerns the "death whistle," a type of whistle associated with the ancient cultures of Mexico. The articles and subsequent feedback discuss various theories and ideas about the use and design of these whistles. Here are some key points:A modern Mexican composer is incorporating the death whistle into her compositions.The whistle produces a sound that remarkably resembles the screech of a barn owl. Some theorize that it might have been used as a decoy to summon barn owls, seen as portents of death, to guide the deceased in their journey to the afterlife. However, there is no evidence in historical records like the Florentine Codex to support this idea.Another theory suggests the whistle might have been used as a psychological warfare tactic, with its horrifying scream serving to instill fear in enemies. However, there's no evidence supporting this claim.Some suggest the whistle was meant to summon a supernatural entity. This claim is also speculative and lacks historical support.The death whistles were made to produce various sounds besides "screams". It's argued that they were likely buried with the dead as reminders of the challenges faced on the journey to the underworld.Some people are working on 3D printing these whistles, exploring the effects of different designs on the produced sound.The whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―s internal shape reminds some of a laryngeal cross-section near the vocal cords, which may explain why it sounds like a human scream.There are discussions on whether the whistle was used as a tool of ridicule or punishment for the sacrificed, though these theories are mostly conjecture and not backed by evidence.In summary, the death whistle is a fascinating instrument that continues to intrigue researchers, artists, and enthusiasts alike. While many theories about its use and design have been proposed, historical evidence supporting these ideas is limited.1 / 1 has generously been written specially for Mexicolore by Roberto Velïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―zquez Cabrera, a mechanical engineer by profession who has made a life-long study - including the physical reconstruction - of ancient Mexican resonators and other wind instruments. He is the founder of the Mexico City-based Instituto Virtual de Investigaciïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―n Tlapitzcalzin.
Pic 1: Experimental model of the death whistle
Pic 1: Experimental model of the death whistle (Click on image to enlarge)
The extraordinary ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―death whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― was exclusively used in several zones of ancient Mexico and belongs to a very unusual family of Mexican resonators that are not well known and which can produce special sounds imitating animal calls and the noise of the wind or storms. It is not a common whistle or musical instrument. It has been associated with death rituals by its decorated face of a skull and with the wind because two examples were found in the hands of a sacrificed male skeleton in front of the Ehecatl (wind god) temple at Tlatelolco. Unfortunately, the exact original use and purpose of the death whistle and many other ancient resonators have been lost. There are some ancient death whistles made of clay in museums and collections, but very few of their studies and sounds have been published. This is the first paper in English on the death whistle posted on the Internet.

Pic 2: Drawings of death whistles by Josïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― Luis Franco
Pic 2: Drawings of death whistles by Josïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― Luis Franco (Click on image to enlarge)
It was Josïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― Luis Franco who published the first (1971) drawings of the death whistle and his family of Mexican ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―aerophones with springs of airïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―. A drawing by Franco shows a death whistle with the decorative face of a skull (pic 2, left), which points to its original purpose as a death whistle. Another drawing by Franco shows the internal structure of a death whistle with the decorative face of an owl (pic 2, right). In Mexican cultures the owl is associated with the coming of death. The main technical elements of the death whistle are shown in the cross section of this illustrative model (pic 3).

Pic 3: Cross-section of death whistle model
Pic 3: Cross-section of death whistle model (Click on image to enlarge)
The only known ancient death whistles with archaeological context were published by Salvador Guilliem Arroyo in 1999. They were recovered from the hands of the skeleton of a sacrificed 20-year-old man that was found buried in front of the Ehecatl (wind) temple of Tlatelolco (pic 4). This finding indicates that the whistles are associated with Ehecatl (wind) and Mictlantecutli (death), and they could be related to the ritual of sacrifice. Many other ancient skeletons were found in the same ceremonial complex of Ehecatl. Guilliem proposed that the ritual of the ceremonial complex could be associated with the famine of 1454.

Pic 4: Skeleton of man buried at wind god temple, Tlatelolco, with death whistle (indicated)
Pic 4: Skeleton of man buried at wind god temple, Tlatelolco, with death whistle (indicated) (Click on image to enlarge)
If the whistles were associated with Ehecatl or the wind, the sounds of the whistles may have also been required to simulate the sounds of the wind, because a strong wind cannot simply be summoned whenever the occasion requires, as in a ritual or ceremony.
Ehecatl and Mictlantecutli are very important in Mexican mythology and iconography, as shown in the dual representation of the Borgia Codex (pic 5).
The only reference to the possible ancient use of this type of whistle comes from the following text: The most remarkable festival in connection with Tezcatlipoca was the Toxcatl, held in the fifth month. On the day of this festival a youth was slain who for an entire year previously had been carefully instructed in the role of victim... He assumed the name, garb, and attributes of Tezcatlipoca himself... [as] the earthly representative of the deity.... He carried also the whistle symbolical of the deity [as Lord of the Night Wind], and made with it a noise such as the weird wind of night makes when it hurries through the streets. (Lewis Spence, Myths of Mexico and Peru, London, 1913, pp. 69-70).

Pic 5: Mictlantecuhtli back-to-back with Ehecatl, Codex Borgia (lam. 56)
Pic 5: Mictlantecuhtli back-to-back with Ehecatl, Codex Borgia (lam. 56) (Click on image to enlarge)
Several papers on the death whistle have been requested in various academic forums. The latest was presented at the 2nd Pan-American/Iberian Meeting on Acoustics, Cancïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―n, Mexico, 2010. Its Lay Language Paper was posted (in Spanish) with other Mexican resonators in the ASA Press Room of the American Institute of Physics.
A few models of Mexican ancient noise generators and of other kind of resonators with their sounds are posted on the internet in videos such as ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―Mechanical Engineer Recreates Sounds of his Pre-Columbian Ancestorsïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― (on the web site of Associated Press since 2008 - link below).
The dynamics of the sound system of the Mexican noise generators is very complex. It could not be simulated with computerized mathematical models.

Pic 6: Spectogram of the sounds of the Mazatepetl ceramic death whistle fragment
Pic 6: Spectogram of the sounds of the Mazatepetl ceramic death whistle fragment (Click on image to enlarge)
This short article is a summary of the study of a ceramic fragment of a ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―death whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― from the surface of the Mazatepetl (deer hill, south of Mexico City) - pic 6, left. It probably dates from the Early Postclassic (1250-1380) era. It was found in an archaeological dig led by Francisco Rivas Castro. Since 2006, the consultation document of the study has been openly available (in Spanish) on my web site and it has been presented at other conferences and in several journals.
The sounds of the whistle could be analyzed, because its sound mechanism is still in working order. Though not ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―musicalïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― (in the modern western sense), they are similar to those of the winds. Their frequencies - the strongest of which come within the maximum range of hearing sensitivity of humans (1kHz-6kHz) - are shown in this spectrogram (pic 6, right).

Pic 7: Experimental models of ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―death whistlesïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―
Pic 7: Experimental models of ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―death whistlesïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― (Click on image to enlarge)
Several effective procedures for the construction of the death whistle were tested and many experimental models were produced (pic 7) to test hypotheses and to be used in conferences and demonstrations, because clearly the original ancient resonators cannot be used for those purposes.
For example, an experimental model made without the tubular wind path does not change the produced sounds. The models with a wind path can be used to free the hand for other purposes, because they can be held firmly between the teeth and lips.

Pic 8: ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―Death whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― models in the hands of engineer Roberto Velïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―zquez
Pic 8: ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―Death whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― models in the hands of engineer Roberto Velïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―zquez (Click on image to enlarge)
It seems that the death whistle might have been used in the sacrifices of slaves, because chichtli (in Nahuatl) was an instrument that could produce a chich sound and it was used in the banquets of Aztec merchants where slaves were killed: according to the Florentine Codex, chich was the signal to pull out the hair from the middle of the slaveïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―s head. After comparing the spectrograms of the chich sound made by a human voice with that of the death whistle model, and bearing in mind the connection with Ehecatl the wind god, the death whistle could aptly be named Ehecachichtli in honour of the deity.

Pic 9: Solid silver model of a ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―death whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― by Roberto Velïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―zquez
Pic 9: Solid silver model of a ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―death whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― by Roberto Velïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―zquez (Click on image to enlarge)
The ancient designs of Mexican resonators may be used to recreate the beautiful and extraordinary art of sonorous jewellery, such as this beautiful silver death whistle (pic 9).
Although ancient ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―musicïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― has been lost, the sounds of death whistles can be used to create new compositions. For example, Enrico Chapela used several of my ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―skull whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― models to create a composition Trio Cadensa (Encrypted Poetry), inspired by the poem ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―The Ravenïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― by Edgar Alan Poe, but special instructions for the player had to be invented, because normal musical notation cannot cope with the complex sounds of these whistles!

Pic 10: Dual faced ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―death whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― model by Roberto Velïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―zquez
Pic 10: Dual faced ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―death whistleïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― model by Roberto Velïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―zquez (Click on image to enlarge)
More research remains to be done in the future on the effects of their sounds. For example, we know that when two or more similar ancient whistles or their models are played at the same time special effects can be produced, due to the vibrations generated or ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―phantomïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― sounds. If the beats are ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―infrasonicïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― (too low for the human ear to detect) they may alter states of consciousness. Several death whistles played at the same time can generate very complex vibrations, because their noisy signals are produced in a range of frequencies and the effects on humans is significant due to the intensity and range of their main frequencies, but their effects on health have not yet been analyzed formally. An experimental dual model of the death whistle with the faces of Ehecatl and Mictlantecutli (pic 10) has already been used to test the possibility of the two whistles found at Tlatelolco being played at the same time. The sounds generated are similar to those of a storm. The produced frequencies are more complex and of greater intensity than those of single whistle models.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThank you for sharing this fascinating information about the ancient Mexican 'death whistle'. It seems like a lot of research and experimentation has been done on this instrument by engineer Roberto Velïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―zquez Cabrera, who has reconstructed several models and studied their acoustic properties. The 'death whistle' is a unique piece of cultural history, which provides a unique window into the soundscape of ancient Mexican culture.I find it particularly interesting that the whistle was used in rituals related to the gods Ehecatl and Mictlantecutli, symbolizing wind and death respectively, and that the sounds it produces mimic the sounds of winds and potentially even the perceived sounds of death or dying. The suggestion that the whistle might have been used in sacrificial rituals also adds a layer of cultural and spiritual significance.The aspect that the whistle's sounds may have effects on states of consciousness due to infrasonic vibrations is intriguing. Further exploration in this area could uncover more about the ritualistic and spiritual uses of the death whistle.I'm curious to learn more about the specific acoustic properties of the whistle and how they compare to other pre-Columbian wind instruments. Would you happen to have more information on that? Or perhaps could you share a bit more about the 'sonorous jewelry' mentioned towards the end of the text? This idea of wearable sound-making objects is quite fascinating.1 / 1LIVE NOW
Deadliest Catch

 
Nature

 
Photo by: Roberto Velazquez

Roberto Velazquez

The Aztec Death Whistle Makes One of the Scariest Sounds You'll Ever Hear
By: Reuben Westmaas
If your worst nightmare had a soundtrack, it would feature this whistle.

August 01, 2019
These days, the Aztecs have a certain reputation. We've already told you about their most popular ball game kept score with human vertebrae, and you're probably familiar with the skull-heavy decor. Now, take a listen to the Aztec death whistle and find out how that aesthetic extended to their musical tastes as well.

Skull and Cross-Tones
We're not going to lie. The sound of the death whistle is the most frightening thing we've ever heard. It literally sounds like a screeching zombie. We can only imagine what it would be like to hear hundreds of whistles from an Aztec army on the march. We're not entirely certain what the whistles were used for, however. They may have been used as an intimidation tactic in war, but there's one aspect of Aztec society in which they certainly played a role: human sacrifice.


In 1999, a 20-year-old sacrificial victim was discovered by archaeologists, clutching a death whistle in his hands. He was found in a temple to the wind god Ehecatl at Tlatelolco, suggesting to some scholars that the whistles were meant to evoke the howling wind. In any case, modern musicians and anthropologists have grown more interested in the role the whistles played in the ongoing indigenous history of Mexico.

Back from the Dead
One of those scholars isn't an anthropologist or a musician at all, however. Roberto Velïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―squez is actually a mechanical engineer, and his simulations of air rushing through the whistles have been instrumental (no pun intended) to recent attempts to recreate the ceremonial sounds. If you look for videos of the death whistles in action, you'll soon find Xavier Quijas Yxayotl, who has made the instruments out of ceramic, jade, and stone. You can also hear the whistle used in a more haunting, reserved way in the work of Mexican-Canadian Cristina Garcïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―a Islas.

This article first appeared on Curiosity.com.


 
Nature

 
The Stegosaurus Was An Ancient Relic To The T. Rex
By: Joanie Faletto
These two popular dinosaurs never crossed paths.

August 01, 2019
Humans and the Tyrannosaurus rex are closer on the world's timeline than the T. rex and Stegosaurus. Weird, right?

Why It Matters
It's a common error to lump together all non-avian dinosaurs into a single time period. The truth is, dinosaurs roamed the Earth for a long time, and they all most certainly did not exist together. For example, the Stegosaurus roamed the Earth during the late Jurassic period, between 156 and 144 million years ago. On the other hand, the Tyrannosaurus rex lived during the late Cretaceous period, about 67ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―65 million years ago. The T. rex actually existed closer in history to humans than to the Stegosaurus. Yes, to the T.rex, the Stegosaurus was ancient.

Why It's Relevant
Relative to how long the dinosaurs roamed the Earth, we humans have been around for a blip in time. It can be tempting to think of all non-avian dinosaurs as a single group living at a single point in time, but in reality, that couldn't be further from the truth. When it comes to dinosaurs, most of us have a lot to learn.

This article first appeared on Curiosity.com.

Site Map Visitor Agreement Privacy Notice  AdChoices About Advertise Careers at Discovery TV Ratings Help California Privacy Notice Accessibility Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information
ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ― 2023 Warner Bros. Discovery, Inc. or its subsidiaries and affiliates. All rights reserved.
1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTThank you for sharing the additional context on the Aztec Death Whistle. According to the information you've shared, the whistle might have been used as an intimidation tool in war. The sound it produced, likened to a screeching zombie, would indeed be terrifying, especially if heard from hundreds of whistles in an advancing Aztec army.The connection with the wind god Ehecatl that was established by finding a death whistle with a 20-year-old sacrificial victim in his temple, suggests that the sound of the whistle might have been associated with the howling wind. The chilling sound of this instrument and its potential use in ritualistic human sacrifices makes the Death Whistle a rather eerie part of Aztec culture.The work of mechanical engineer Roberto Velïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―squez in simulating the sounds of the death whistle and musicians like Xavier Quijas Yxayotl and Cristina Garcïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―ïŋ―a Islas in using the death whistle in their works, show an ongoing interest and exploration of this unique instrument in contemporary times.Moving on to the second article, it's fascinating to note the significant time gap between different dinosaur species, such as the T. rex and Stegosaurus. The fact that the T. rex existed closer to us in history than to the Stegosaurus is a poignant reminder of the immense span of time that dinosaurs roamed the Earth and how our human timeline is a comparatively tiny fraction of Earth's history.1 / 1It kind of sound like someone screaming, maybe a dinosaur would make a sound like that.1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTYou're absolutely right! It's possible that the Aztec Death Whistle, with its terrifyingly haunting sound, could be likened to the kind of noise we might imagine a dinosaur would make. It's important to note, however, that we don't actually know what specific sounds dinosaurs made, as sound doesn't fossilize and no living creatures from that time are around today.Paleontologists can make educated guesses based on the structures we know some dinosaurs had (like the hollow crests of the hadrosaurs, or duck-billed dinosaurs), but much of it is still speculative. For instance, some theories suggest that larger dinosaurs might have made deep, resonating sounds, while smaller ones could have emitted higher-pitched noises. But the scream-like sound of the Aztec Death Whistle might indeed fit into our imaginations of the more fearsome and chilling sounds of the dinosaur era.1 / 1The Aztec death whistle was a whistle exclusively used in several zones of the ancient Mexica,[1] which mimics the sound of a horrifying animal-like screeching, which was thought to be used in warfare to scare away their victims.[2] It is thought that hundreds of warriors would use the whistles at the same time.[2]


A 3-D print copy of an Aztec Death Whistle
0:03
Screech from a copy of an Aztec Death Whistle
References
Edit
 "The 'death whistle'". www.mexicolore.co.uk. Retrieved 2023-01-19.
 "The Aztec Death Whistle Makes One of the Scariest Sounds You'll Ever Hear". Discovery. Retrieved 2023-01-19.
Categories: WhistlesAztec warfare
1 / 1ChatGPTChatGPTYes, the Aztec Death Whistle is indeed known for its eerily horrifying sound. The instrument was made from clay or other materials, usually carved into the shape of a skull or an animal, and when blown, it emits a noise that is reminiscent of a human scream, a howling wind, or a wild animal.The use of this instrument in warfare is a popular theory. It's believed that the terrifying sound could have served to intimidate enemies or to communicate over long distances. There's also evidence to suggest they might have been used during sacrificial rituals and ceremonies, as a way to guide the spirits of the departed.As for the reference to a 3D printed copy of an Aztec Death Whistle, this represents a modern way of recreating these historical artifacts. With advancements in technology, it has become possible to reproduce exact replicas of such ancient instruments, thus providing us with an auditory glimpse into the past.Your references from mexicolore.co.uk and Discovery are trusted sources providing further valuable information about this fascinating, yet somewhat chilling, part of Aztec culture.1 / 1ChatGPT may produce inaccurate information about people, places, or facts. ChatGPT May 24 VersionChatGPT
