All right. Well, thank you. Thank you very much. And thanks for having me at this amazing meeting. I'm sorry, I'm not there in person. And I hope to share some ideas with you today around this idea of non neural intelligence. So the details of everything that I'm talking about data sets papers, everything is at this site, and my own personal thoughts on what it might mean are all here.
So the summary that I'm going to try to transmit today are basically to describe some aspects of biological systems as self constructing poly computing agents that operate in very diverse problem spaces. They navigate these spaces at multiple scales, which I'll show you examples of and they form a kind of a gentle material that is not well described either by things like the laws of chemistry, nor by some of the computational
paradigms that we have today. I'm going to towards the end, talk about how biology emphasizes saliency, not the fidelity of information, because the medium is fundamentally unreliable. And this has some very important implications for both for for engineering, but also for for biology.
I'm going to show you examples of how biology makes creative agents, not solutions to specific problems, as we might think of the evolutionary process.
And I'm going to talk at the end about this idea of emergent cognition, not just immersion complexity. So the talk is in three parts, a little bit about non neural problem solving and get us warmed up to think about examples beyond brains, and then talk about some fundamental principles that are beginning to come to light about how this works.
About intelligence that's that self assembles picks its own goals and so on. And then then give you some really a kind of wild speculations about where some of these things come from, in addition to evolution and the engineering.
So the first thing to know about biology is that the distinction that a lot of people try to make between, let's say living things or even humans and then quote unquote machines is a very tough binary binary categorization to maintain nowadays.
Not only don't we know from the facts of evolution and developmental biology that we are at the center of a of a continuum, or very smoothly changing a metamorphosis process that takes us from a single cell all the way to whatever it is that that we are.
But also now with bioengineering of different types, we now have this other continuum where we can start to make modifications to various degrees, because everywhere along the levels of organization, we can add engineered systems to the natural evolve ones.
And so what we really have is a very a series of of intersecting a continuum and and very soft categories where it becomes really hard to say,
Well, you know, whether something is a natural living being or or or an engineered a kind of artifact and so on. And that's and that's fine. We need to we need to get on board with this.
So my framework that I'm working on is designed to help us recognize, create and ethically relate to a truly diverse intelligence, regardless of its composition or of its origin story.
So that means, you know, the familiar creatures, of course, like like primates and birds and so on.
But also some really weird organisms, colonial kinds of things, swarms, engineered new life forms that never existed before AI agents, whether purely software or in fact embodied and robotic, and maybe someday exobiological agents, if we find them.
So I would like to be able to think about all of these things together with the same set of tools. Obviously, I'm not the first person to try for this. So here's Rosenbluth, Wiener and Bigelow's
scale of how passive, passive matter is able to go up these different sort of phase transitions to get to like human, the human like
metacognition and so on. And so the there are there are two main purposes of this framework. One is that it has to move experimental work forward. So I'm not interested in just philosophy. I want these things to have
impact in in discovery impact in in biomedicine and so on. So new capabilities and in fact, better ethics to enable us to relate to novel beings that we're not really
used to thinking about. And so this is this is the first version of that framework is is described here.
So I like to think about a kind of axis of persuadability. So if you think about all these different kinds of agents that I talked about, what what do they have in common? How can we start to think about them?
Well, one way to start to think about them is what would it take for another agent? So this is very much an observer focused observer relative view. What would it take for that agent to interact with them? Maybe hardware modification is the only way, but
maybe some tools from a control theory and cybernetics where you can reset the goals and not micromanage the hardware quite as much, but maybe even better some tools from behavioral science where you can train the system and really
don't need to necessarily know much about what's what's going on under the hood. And then of course, all the way up here, you're entering very kind of very complex relationships where you're
communicating and and your your your agency is benefiting as much as you're you're putting out, which is not the case here. So this kind of this kind of spectrum. And this is this is not tied to any specific substrate or any specific origin. And the idea is that when you have a given
system, you can't have philosophical preconceptions about where it must fit, you actually have to do experiments. That is, this is very much an empirical science where you make a hypothesis about where your system sits, you then use the relevant tools, see how that
goes for you. And then we can all see whether that is an appropriate guess as to the level of agency of your system. So, so, so what we focus on in my framework is, first of all, making making this very much a
not not not being tied to old philosophical categories, as in when people say category errors and so on. Really, we just have to do the experiments and find out. And as I will show you, we get lots of surprises.
And, and and very much a an observer centered stance, the question is, what what what is it, how much efficacy do you gain by using a certain set of tools when you interact with the system in a certain way. So we all know that touring was was interested in different kinds of embodiments of mind and so so so kinds of problem solving
machines and intelligence through reprogrammability and plasticity. But one of the other things he did was to write a paper on the chemical basis of morphogenesis, the self assembly of chemical gradients from disorder into order.
And so, so you might wonder why would somebody who was who was interested in, in, in computation and in programmability and intelligence and so on. Why, why would he be studying something like this. And I think that's because he saw a very profound truth, which is
that the self assembly of minds and the self assembly of bodies are fundamentally a very, very parallel process there are some some really strong symmetries between these two processes. So I'm going to do next is to talk about a few unique features of the biological substrate will take a brief tour of what I call the
essential material of life and we'll look at some of these some of these examples. First of all, we all take this journey so you start off as a quiescent OSI to little blob of chemistry and physics.
You might look at it and you might say well there's clearly no no intelligence there. It's just a little physical system, the molecular biologists are doing fine in characterizing how it works and so on. And then through a very soft and gradual process, something like this or even something like this results.
There is no magic point here there's no light lightning flash where you go from physics to having a real mind. So if you think that these kinds of systems have intelligence and whatever else you might want to say about first person perspective and consciousness I won't say much about that today.
But whatever it is, you have to be able to tell a story of scaling, because we know we know where it comes from it comes from here. So somehow from here to here that is during this process.
There's a scale up of the capabilities that that are present here that give you the give rise to this. So we so now we know we have to we have to tell a story of scaling and transformation.
But at least we're a true unified intelligence right we have this nice centralized brain it's solid.
Ricard Soleil talks about liquid brain such as ants and termites and so on but but surely that's just a metaphor you know we've got a real brain this is kind of a metaphorical collective intelligence.
Well, Descartes for example really liked the pineal gland, because it was a unitary organ in the brain which he thought was well fitting to the unified experience of a of a human.
But if he had access to good microscopy he would have looked inside that pineal gland and we found that there's not really one of anything that there are a ton of cells in there, and inside each one of those things is all this stuff.
So we are all collective intelligence is there is no to my knowledge there is no monolithic sort of in non decomposable intelligence.
And what we're made of actually is things that are like this now this happens to be a free living unicellular organism but this is what a cell is capable of.
This is called the lacrimaria. You can see it's it's hunting for food in its environment. There's no nervous system here. There's no brain.
There are no other cells. There are no stem cells, just one cell handling its business in a small kind of area it has it has very high competencies at single cell level agendas.
In fact, within that cell there are there are pathways molecular pathways or things like gene regulatory networks.
And if you don't assume that these networks are sort of dumb machine like things but actually test them, you will find out that by stimulating the different nodes and looking at other nodes, using the standard tools of behavior science.
You can find six different kinds of learning including Pavlovian conditioning. Again, no neurons, no brains, no, no nucleus needed to know none of that stuff.
Just just a few nodes interacting with each other in ways describable by ordinary differential equations that is sufficient for a number of interesting examples of learning.
And so all that is described here but we are now building machines to actually interact with cells in that way and to train them, which has all sorts of applications for drug conditioning and things like that.
But so so inside of individual cells you already have this material that that out of the box due to the properties of the mathematics are are able to do things like like learn from experience.
So in our architecture what the what the biological material has is this kind of multi scale kind of scheme where not only are we structurally a set of nested dolls but actually functionally each of these layers from the molecular networks to the subcellular components to networks of cells, tissues, organs, of course, whole organisms, but also swarms.
At each of this level, the material solves various kinds of problems in its own space. So there's competency throughout. So we're talking about, I'll describe in more detail momentarily what these other spaces are.
But basically there are there are agendas, memory forming ability, learning capacity, and so on at every level, and they're all interacting, cooperating and competing at the same time.
So this this remarkable architecture allows some really wild behavior that we still have not been able to replicate in any of our engineering. I'll show you some examples.
One example is this. So this is a tappel. So here are the nostrils. Here's the mouth. Here's the brain, the gut and the tail.
Now what you'll notice is that what we've done here we've prevented the primary eyes from forming. This is where they would normally be, but we did induce an eye on its tail.
Okay. And so what's happening here is that we put this we put this eye on the tail, and then we use this machine which we have built to test these animals for visual learning, specifically to be able to to learn to stay away from a moving light spot that that chases them around.
What we find is that they can see quite well. These eyes put out an optic nerve, the optic nerve comes out. It does not go all the way to the brain. It goes in some cases synapses on to the spinal cord, some cases the gut, some cases nowhere at all that we can find.
And these animals can can see pretty well. Now isn't this remarkable this requires no evolutionary adaptation. We've completely changed the sensory motor architecture of this creature.
We didn't need new rounds of selection, other other kinds of compensatory mutations and so on. What why does this work out of the box why why does this animal buys this animal able to use this novel architecture without all of the all of the readjustments.
As I'll argue later in the in the talk, it's because I think from the very beginning these animals with these cells in fact do not take much for granted. They're solving their self assembly problem on the fly it never the tackle never assumed that the eyes were going to necessarily be in the right location, and it's able to make this work from scratch because that's what every embryo does.
And I'll show you some more examples of that. Here's another example. These are planaria, these flatworms that have this amazing power of regeneration so you can cut them into pieces. Every piece gives rise to a perfect little worm.
But one thing you can do is you can train them are also smart. You can train them on place conditioning tasks where there's a little bumpy surface that we laser etch into the Petri dish and we feed them and so they recognize this as a safe place to eat.
We then cut off their heads, which contains a true centralized brain. The tail sits there with no behavior for about eight days, slowly grows back a new brain. And when it does grow back in your brain you find out that these animals remember where they remember the original information.
So that tells you that, first of all, the information is not entirely confined to the brain, but also that it can be imprinted onto a brand new brain when that appears. So the movement of information across tissue and from this tissue into the centralized brain is something that's a kind of a remarkable feature, the ability to move and accommodate this radical reconstruction event.
You can imagine the implications of this for human regenerative therapeutics of degenerative brain disease. So if we get new tissues moved into our brain, what happens to our personalities, to our memories, it might well be okay because at least in some systems these memories can move, they can take over new tissues.
Another example is this, so this is not Photoshop or AI, this is a real fly. What these flies have on their surface is a picture of some local ants and what it does is it kind of wiggles the wings real fast and it looks like the ants are scoring around and it keeps predators away because they don't want to deal with the biting ants.
And so it's in effect, it's running this kind of stripped down, very coarse grained 2D morphogenetic program that looks like ants on its wings. And it's kind of remarkable, but not more remarkable than the ability of the fly to build itself together.
So this in fact is just a kind of virtualized morphogenesis that it's doing here, but the whole fly had to do this itself to become a three dimensional fly.
And so what we have here is this idea that life actually is navigating all kinds of spaces, many of which are very hard for us to recognize.
So when we talk about things being embodied or not, for example, AIs and software and other kinds of things, whether they do or do not have an embodiment, I think we have to be really careful and humble about the fact that we are not good at recognizing spaces, unconventional spaces in which embodiment can take place.
We are pretty good as humans to observe intelligence as movement to medium speed movement of medium sized objects in three dimensional space.
You know, we see animals doing clever things that we can sort of recognize that.
But biology uses lots of different spaces, so the space of possible gene expressions, the space of possible physiological states and anatomical morpho space, which is the space of geometric configurations that the body can take.
And in all of these spaces, there is some navigation that if we were good at observing it, we would immediately recognize this as some kind of intelligent problem solving behavior.
For example, all of our organs point outwards.
If we had a kind of think about it, think about it like a sense of taste, but pointing inwards into our body chemistry and, you know, sensitive to, I don't know, 20 different parameters of your body physiology, I think we would have no problem realizing that our liver and our kidneys are intelligent
symbionts that live in this in this space and keep us alive during all of the different things that happen to it in those in those spaces.
So for the next few minutes, what I want to focus on is this space right here, I want to show you what problem solving in these spaces looks like and I could talk about some others some amazing examples but for reasons of time I'm just going to stick with this one space.
And so what we're going to do is take a look at what happens when we entertain the possibility that morphogenesis so the the self assembly and the self repair of living bodies are the behavior of a collective intelligence of cells.
So so we're we're we're kind of pivoting some ideas from from neuroscience and saying that the movement within this anatomical space is a kind of behavior.
And there's a collective intelligence of cells that is executing this this behavior.
And so let's let's look at what that looks like.
Well, the first thing is that development is very reliable.
So you start off with a with a single cell and eventually you get an amazing human target morphology.
But this is not why I'm calling it intelligence.
It is not because it's reliable.
It is not because there's a huge jump in complexity here.
That's not it.
What I'm the reason I'm calling it intelligence is because this process has some remarkable problem solving capacities in navigating that space.
The first one you notice right away when you cut that early embryo in half, you don't get two half bodies which you get are perfectly normal monosagotic twins.
And that's because from different positions in this morpho space, the system will move to a region that corresponds to a to an ensemble of of patterns that are species specific to this to this organism.
And they can avoid various local maxima and things like that.
So so you can get there from different positions.
That's that's already interesting.
William James defined intelligence as this ability some degree of the ability to reach the same goal by different means.
OK, so that's what we're looking at.
Some animals can do this throughout their lifespan.
So this this guy is an axolotl.
This amphibian regenerates its limbs, its eyes, its jaws, spinal cord, heart, parts of the brain and so on.
And so anywhere that is amputated along this this limb, the cells will grow very quickly.
They will form the pattern and then they stop.
When do they stop?
They stop when the correct pattern has been completed.
So they take this journey.
They've been deviated from this region from the correct region of anatomical space.
They work really hard to get back there when they get back there.
They cease.
So it's a kind of you can think about this as a kind of anatomical homeostasis and error minimization scheme that is that is achieved in this in the space.
And here's here's another example that we discovered some some years back that when you have a tadpole that has to rearrange its face to become a frog.
So the jaws have to move the eyes have to come forward and so on.
You could you could think of it and in fact people did think of this as a hardwired process that everything just moves in the right direction and that's that.
But what we we tested this experimentally we made so-called Picasso frogs and we scrambled all the positions of the craniofacial organs.
Here's the eye on the back of the head, the mouth is off to the side.
These animals become quite normal frogs.
And that's because all of these different things don't just move the same normal path.
They move into novel paths, sometimes going too far and coming back until they get to this correct pattern and then they stop.
So the genetics in fact does not specify a bunch of hardware rearrangements.
It specifies a system that executes a flexible program that can recognize unexpected states and take corrective action.
This is this is context sensitive problem solving which raises an interesting question.
How does it know what's correct?
How does it know where it's going in this in this in the space?
And I'll show you that I'll show you that momentarily.
So so let's talk about let's talk about how how all this how all this works.
And we've been we've been studying this idea of morphogenesis as problem solving behavior in that space.
And by by learning to communicate with with these problem solving modules, we've actually discovered some new approaches in in biomedicine.
And we did that by discovering that bioelectricity is a kind of cognitive glue that binds individual cells towards a common purpose.
So let's talk about that.
The first the first thing we can think about is actually how do individual embryos come to be anyway.
So so here's a here's a blasted or an embryonic blasted or there might be 50,000 cells at this stage.
And we look at that and we say well look there's one embryo.
So how what are we counting when what do we what is there one of our what are we counting when we say there's one embryo?
Can you hear us?
I can. Yeah.
There's there's a remote question.
Oh, please go for it.
There is a question in the room.
So Picasso example that would end the information about the rearrangement into the correct kind of frog pattern also be genetically coded.
It's just you didn't mess with that program, but you mess with the location.
Yeah, the question of the question of what is actually genetically coded is is really deep.
You know, when you read the genome itself, of course, you don't see any of these things that the genome codes for proteins.
It doesn't code for for eyes or shape or or, you know, the number or the location of anything that the direct information that you get from the genome is protein.
And so if you don't mind, can we maybe in the Q&A because we could we could talk about this for a really long time.
It's basically, you know, bottom line, I think is that what the genetic specifies is a really interesting kind of hardware.
But the product of that hardware and solving these problems.
I don't think it's really fruitful to pin that on the on the genetics per se.
But obviously the hardware is important as it always is.
But I'm happy to I'm happy to talk more about that after.
So so here's actually this is this is a perfectly good example of the role of the genetics.
So so look, here is a here's a blasted term.
It has, I don't know, tens, tens of thousands of cells.
When we say it's one embryo, what we're actually counting is alignment of physical alignment.
I mean, the cells literally aligned, but more importantly, they're aligned in their journey to in morpho space.
They are all working on one thing.
Now, what you can do and I worked on this as a grad student within duck embryos, you can take a little needle and you can make some scratches in this blasted term.
What will happen is that for the four to six hours that it takes for them to heal back up, each of these little regions will not recognize that the others are there.
It thinks it's the only one and it self organizes completely into an embryo.
And when they do heal up, you get conjoined twins, triplets and so on.
So how many individuals are actually in this blasted term?
Well, it could be zero.
It could be one, two, three up to probably half a dozen.
You don't know how many and the genetics doesn't tell you how many because this process doesn't do anything to the genetics.
What the genetics has given you is an excitable medium, which is able to self organize into some number of embryos that are going to perform specific journeys in morpho space.
But how many there are is flexible and it's up to the current circumstances.
Now, you could ask this kind of question is like, how many of these could you possibly get per cubic millimeter of living tissue?
All of these systems have to by putting themselves together, they have to actively determine where is the border between me and the environment because every cell has some other cell as a neighbor.
So this embryo has to decide where are my borders?
Where do I end and somebody else begins?
And this has much like everything else that we study in morphogenesis.
This has very interesting parallels in neuroscience and psychiatry, because fundamentally the issue of individuation and dissociation like in the dissociative identity disorders, split brain patients and so on.
This question of how many of us are in here and where do I end and somebody else begins is a really fundamental aspect of self assembly.
Now, another interesting thing that the living material does is it really optimizes for saliency, not fidelity of information.
And here's an example to see that.
You've got caterpillars, which live in a kind of two dimensional world and they crawl around and eat leaves, and they have a brain that's suitable for doing that.
They have to metamorphose and become this, which is a actually a hard body creature, which has a completely different controller than a soft body here.
They fly around, they live in a 3D world.
What's remarkable is that if you train the caterpillar for particular stimulus and the reward, the caterpillars will remember.
So if you train the butterflies will remember.
So if the caterpillar is trained to find leaves at a particular color disc, the butterflies can do this.
But what's important is that during this process, that brain is completely basically refactored.
So most of the cells die, many of the connections are broken.
It rebuilds a completely new brain.
And the one interesting question is how does the information survive this?
That's interesting.
But an even more, I think, important fundamental question is the idea that, well, the actual memories of this caterpillar are of no use to the butterfly.
It doesn't move the same way.
It doesn't even eat the same stuff.
Leaves are of no interest to the butterfly once nectar.
So you can't just store with fidelity the original information.
You have to remap it onto a new architecture when you put it together.
So this ability of the living material to reinterpret the memory engrams that it has at any given moment and to use it in whatever way is appropriate now as opposed to trying to keep the interpretation stable, I think is a really important aspect of biological intelligence.
And one way that it works is that this kind of architecture, this bow tie thing where you have a lot of inputs and then you have a very constrained set of either a single or a constrained set of nodes here is ubiquitous.
This happens in chemical networks and in biomechanical networks and bioelectrics.
There are many bow ties like this because what actually has to happen here is that, and this will be completely familiar to some of the machine learning folks, is that by squeezing it through a bottleneck, you are forcing a generalization and you are forcing the being on the other side to have to be creative in interpreting that information because you've thrown away a lot.
You don't have the details, you just have some kind of generative prompt that you then have to reinflate.
And what that means for biology is that a living being at any one moment does not have access to the past.
What you have access to are the engrams, the memory traces that has been left in your brain and body by past experience, but now it's on you and this happens every few hundred milliseconds.
It's on you to, at least in the neural case, it's on you to now reinterpret what do those memory traces actually mean?
What do those engrams mean?
Because long term, as far as biology is concerned, everything is going to change, not only the environment, but your own parts are going to change.
Evolutionarily, you will be mutated, you don't know what your body is actually going to look like.
And so what you have to commit to, because the material, unlike in most of our computerized constructions, the material is completely unreliable.
You never know how many copies of a given protein you're really going to have, what's going to be degraded, what's going to be moving around and so on.
It's very noisy, very plastic.
And I think what biology does is from the beginning, lean into the fact that everything is up for reinterpretation.
You don't take the past too seriously.
The information you have are messages from your past self, but those messages, so all your memories are messages from a past self, but all those messages are up for reinterpretation.
And all of that is described here.
But it has some important consequences.
It means, and this is back to what I was saying about that tadpole with the ion.
In fact, it means that every act, both of behavior in anatomical space, but also in kind of neural conventional, neural behavior, what you're doing is at any given moment you are playing the hands of your doubt.
You are creatively interpreting the material and the data that you have, because you don't have access to what it really was.
And because you're throwing away so much detail, this part can probably be algorithmic, so some sort of compression and generalization, so learning.
But this part has to be creative, because I don't believe there can be a purely kind of deductive process here.
You have to creatively utilize that information and evolution does this all the time.
So creatures generally don't make other creatures.
They make eggs, and then these eggs have to be reinflated.
That genetic information has to be reinterpreted, and it can be reinterpreted in really clever ways.
I will show you an example.
This is the cross section through a kidney tubule in a newt.
So normally eight to 10 cells work together to give rise to this kind of specific architecture.
Now one thing you can do to these is you can greatly increase the amount of genetic material.
Meaning that you can sort of squeeze them to prevent the cell from dividing, but the nucleus replicates.
And so you can have not just two end, but four and six and so on.
So the first thing that you find is that while the nucleus gets bigger and bigger, the cells do too.
So the cells grow to accommodate the nucleus, but the newt stays the same size.
And if you take a cross section through those tubules, you find that it has much larger cells,
but fewer of those cells are building the exact same structure.
So it has adapted to the size of the genetic material, it has adapted to the size of the cells,
and now fewer of those cells to get to the same anatomical outcome.
Things get really crazy when you make six end newts where the cells get so gigantic,
one single cell will wrap around itself and give rise to the same structure.
So think about what this means.
In the service of the same anatomical outcome, it will call up different molecular mechanisms to do so.
In this case, cell-to-cell communication, in this case, cytoskeletal bending.
You're using the tools you have in different ways to get what you want.
This is basically precisely what the kind of thing that James was talking about.
And think of something else.
Imagine you're a newt coming into this world.
You don't know how much of your genetic material you're going to have.
You don't know how many cells you're going to have, because we can also add and take away cells.
It doesn't matter.
You don't know a lot about your own parts.
Never mind the environment changing, your own parts can change,
and you still have to figure out how to make a coherent structure.
And what the biology does, and this is still very poorly understood in all of these different cases,
but what it has is incredible flexibility, because I think that every instance of the self-assembly of both bodies and minds
is this kind of de novo problem-solving where you have some tools, and you find ways to do this.
And one of the ways it does this is through very extensive homeodynamic circuits
where there is a stored set point, and everything works really hard to try to get back to that set point.
Now individuals cells have tiny little set points, so things like pH and hunger level and things like that.
They're single numbers, but this kind of thing has to store a much bigger pattern
of what is the correct set point.
How do we know what a correct limb or a correct face is?
And so we have started making models of what happens when cells come together into networks
that allow them to do the kind of pattern completion that you need to do when you're missing a region of the body
or to reach specific regions of morpho space.
And we talk about something that I call the cognitive light cone, which is simply the size of the goal states you're able to pursue.
So what is the maximal size both in space and time of the set points that you are capable of pursuing in different spaces?
And this is what it looks like biologically.
So unicellular organs have little tiny goals.
Everything they care about is right here.
It's just a few minutes back in time, just a few minutes of predictive capacity, very small spatially as well,
little tiny cognitive light cones, all concerned with metabolic states, proliferative states, physiological states, things like that.
But during evolution and development, something amazing happens.
They scale up into networks which pursue enormous grandiose goals like this.
In other words, the set point that serves as a termination to this process is a very complicated structure.
It has the right number of fingers.
No individual cell knows what a finger is or how many fingers you're supposed to have, but the collective does.
And the way we know that is because if you try to deviate it, it will get back to exactly this.
Now, this capacity has a failure mode.
That failure mode is cancer.
So when you disconnect cells from the collective, they no longer remember that they were all part of one big intelligence working in this space.
They go back to this.
And so this is human glioblastoma.
And these cells have rolled back to their evolutionary tiny little ancient goals.
So what is the cognitive glue then that binds them together towards these grandiose construction projects?
What is it that goes wrong here?
Now, in the nervous system, we know what it is.
It's the bioelectricity across your neurons, which allows you to do things like this.
This rat has been trained.
It presses the lever.
It gets a delicious reward.
No individual cell has both experiences.
So the cells at the feet that touch the lever, the cells in the gut get the sugar.
No individual cell has both experiences.
So who owns the associative memory?
Well, it's the rat.
The rat knows things that the parts don't know.
And what holds the rat together as opposed to a pile of cells is the electrical network.
So in neuroscience, this is what it looks like.
The hardware is basically a set of cells that have these ion channels in their membrane.
That means they can acquire specific electrical states.
And they do or do not pass those states on to their neighbors through these electrical synapses known as gap junctions.
And that hardware underlies this physiology.
So here's this group did this amazing video of a zebrafish alive zebrafish brain.
And the commitment of neuroscience is that we should be able to decode this.
So this is neural decoding by watching these these electrophysiological events.
We should be able to to say what are the thoughts, the, you know, the preferences, the memories, the, and so on of this creature as it navigates three dimensional space and people are working on this quite, quite hard.
But it turns out that evolution caught on to this this method of creating higher order beings with intelligence and other spaces very early on.
Every cell in your body has these ion channels.
Most cells are connected by these gap junctions.
And around the time of bacterial biofilms evolution first noticed that you could use electricity to assemble large scale individuals across space and time and coordinate information.
And so what we've been doing for some years now is using using the approaches from from from neuroscience and behavioral science to ask the same question.
If we if could could we decode what the non neural cells are thinking in their journeys through anatomical space or what are these what are these of electrophysiological patterns mean.
And on a single cell level what we can do now is this is again a tadpole.
It has a little tumor because of an induced human oncogene.
And the thing is that once that happens, it turns out that oncogenes are really good at disconnecting cells electrically from their neighbors.
As soon as they do that you can already see.
So this is a voltage sensitive fluorescent dye.
You can already see that the voltage here is quite different.
They're depolarizing or disconnecting.
And as far as they're concerned, the rest of the embryo is just external environment to them.
They're not more selfish than normal cells.
They just have little tiny cells.
Their cells get smaller that border between self and world shrinks.
And now the rest of the body is just environment.
So what do they do?
They proliferate and they migrate and that's metastasis.
So so this this unusual way of thinking about the cancer problem suggests the novel therapeutic.
It means that instead of trying to kill these cells or in fact fix the genetic damage.
So these cells have an oncoprotein which you know a nasty KRAS or a p53 mutation or something like that.
Well, instead of fixing it, what if we electrophysiologically reconnect them to the rest of the cells?
So here these two are the same animals.
So the red is the is the tag.
It's a fluorescent tag on the oncogene.
So if you sequence the genetics, you'll say, oh yeah, there's definitely going to be a tumor here because we can see the hardware defect.
It's an oncogene.
But actually there is no tumor because what we've done is injected an ion channel that forces the cells into electrical communication with the rest.
And they simply go on their way doing what the network was trying to do, which is to build nice muscle and skin and all of that.
So so this here once again, we're seeing that dissociation between what actually happens and what the what the genetics are because some genetic some some hardware defects are fixable in software.
Not all of them, but some of them.
And so what we've done is develop some tools so you can see here this is an early frog embryo.
You can see all the electrical conversations that these cells are having with each other.
These are some ex-planted cells.
Again, you can see the colors represent the voltage of all the cells.
We do a lot of computational modeling to try to understand how the transition between these states takes place and how the different ion channels and the properties of the excitable medium of the tissue underlie the self assembly of patterns.
So you can think like touring patterns and other kinds of patterns and why those patterns have memory properties, why they they produce certain kinds of structures and then and so on.
So I want to show you just very briefly what they look like in vivo.
So this is what we call the electric face.
This is a pre pattern.
It's a bio electrical pre pattern.
Here's the video.
Here's one frame from it.
This is this is what you're looking at here is the is the electrical pattern memory that tells this tissue where the various organs are going to be built, meaning all the different genes that need to be turned on and off are dictated by this bio electrical pattern.
If you change the pattern, then then the all the downstream steps will change.
Not only is this is this how individual organ primordia and different different structures are formed, but you can see across even even ex-planted and culture.
There's some very rich bio electrical dynamics happening.
And in fact, individual embryos use this to talk to each other.
So there's a there's a notion that we discovered recently of a hyper embryo where actually it's not just within one being, but but but these embryos when you when you poke this one here, all the others know about it.
And there's all sorts of novel gene expression in the hyper embryo that works that is different from what the what the individual embryos do.
And you can see this.
You can see this kind of information propagating across the collective.
So again, that multi scale right bio electricity as the cognitive loop between cells and actually even between organs and between embryos.
Now, now watching these patterns is all well and good, but more importantly, we need functional ways to read and write that information.
We don't use any applied fields, waves, no frequencies, no magnets, nothing like that.
What we do is develop tools to operate the bioelectric interface that cells use to communicate and control each other.
So that means target the ion channels in their surface to control the voltage and target the gap junctions to control the topology of the network.
So in the neuroscience, this would be synaptic plasticity or intrinsic plasticity.
We use all the same all the same tools, optogenetics, pharmacology and so on.
And so this is the communication interface that we're trying to hack.
So what we want to do is we want to manipulate the information content of these electrical patterns on the hypothesis that it is the medium in which the collective intelligence of cells is storing its data while it's navigating that morpher space while it's trying to get to wherever it's trying to get to.
So let me show you just a couple of examples of what that actually looks like.
So here is an early frog embryo.
I showed you in that electric face, there's a particular little spot that tells you where the eye is going to be.
So we can inject a potassium channel in a different spot of the body to form that same thing.
Let's do that in the gut here.
So the cells, sure enough, they will make an eye.
These eyes have all the lens right in the optic nerve.
They have all the right components.
So that tells you that these bioelectric patterns are instructive.
They will control the outcome.
In fact, it is very modular.
So we are not trying to tell individual stem cells what to be or what genes to turn on.
We gave a very high level subroutine call, which is that build an eye here and everything else happens from there.
The material is organized in a way that once a large scale pattern tells the system what to do, all the other steps are undertaken.
The same way that in neuroscience, when you're training the rat, you give it stimuli.
All of the other things that have to happen, like tuning the synapses and everything else in the brain, you don't have to be in charge of that.
That amazing bioelectric interface takes care of all of that.
All you're providing is the top level experience.
The system is rearranging itself as needed to meet certain goals.
In fact, the material has another incredible property, which is scaling to the task it's given.
So this is a lens sitting out in the flank of a taphole somewhere.
We've only injected a few of the cells here, the blue ones are the ones we injected.
There's not enough of them to form an eye.
So what do they do?
They recruit all of these, which we never touched.
So it's a secondary recruitment event.
They recruit all of these to help them build this eye.
In fact, they have a whole conversation that turns out where these cells are saying, don't do this.
We're meant to be skin or gut.
And these cells are saying, no, we should be an eye and depending on who wins, you either get an eye or you don't.
But it's a kind of recruitment like you see in other collective intelligences where, for example, ants will recruit nest mates when they come across a big piece of food.
So this is the kind of thing you can do.
You can induce entire organs.
You can also radically re-specify the shape of the body.
So these are those flatworms that I showed you, the planaria that the pieces need to remember.
How many heads should planaria have anyway?
And normally they do this by maintaining this voltage gradient that says one head.
We can now manipulate that by rewriting it to say, no, actually, you should have two heads.
Now, this is quite messy still, but the technology is still being worked out.
What we can do is say, no, actually, you should have two heads.
And if we cut this animal, sure enough, what it will build is a two-headed animal.
Now, notice something interesting.
This electrical pattern is not a map of this two-headed animal.
This electrical pattern is a map of this perfectly normal structurally and, in fact, molecular.
So the molecular biology says one head, the anatomy says one head,
but the stored electrical pattern of what I'm going to build if I should get injured at a future time.
So this is a very primitive form of counterfactual memory, says two heads.
And in fact, that's what happens, but it doesn't do anything.
It's a latent memory until you activate it by injury.
And the reason I keep saying it's a memory, oh, and by the way,
this is another aspect of the genetics.
There's nothing genetically wrong with these animals.
The same exact hardware can store at least two different representations
of what a normal body plan should be and where in morphospace we're going to go, here or here.
And the reason I keep calling it a memory is because once you do this,
these two-headed animals are permanently two-headed.
You can cut this middle fragment, no more treatment of any kind,
and plain water forever as far as we can tell.
It will continue to grow two heads because the electric circuit that's formed in this tissue
has this amazing property that once you reset the pattern, it keeps.
Not all of them do this, but this one in particular does.
And here they are.
You can see this video of these two-headed animals hanging around.
And again, the genetics are untouched.
There's nothing wrong with the genetics here.
So the question of how many heads should a planarian have is tricky.
On the one hand, what the genetics does do is encode some biological hardware
that all things being equal in default mode will give rise to a pattern that says one head.
But it doesn't have to be that way.
It's reprogrammable by experience, by transient experience,
that does not change the genetics at all.
And in that case, you will have a permanent line of two-headed animals.
And you can imagine, we don't do this, of course,
but you could imagine throwing these animals in the river somewhere.
They do reproduce by splitting themselves in half and regenerating.
And so 100 years later, some scientists will come along.
They'll scoop up some samples.
They'll say, oh, cool.
A speciation event.
Here are some one-headed forms.
There are some two-headed forms.
Great.
A speciation event.
Let's see.
And figure out where it happened.
Michael?
That is not where it is.
Michael?
Sorry?
Hi, Michael.
Good to see you again.
Thank you.
Good to see you.
One of the things about this specifically one,
given that there is this maintenance,
that begs an obvious question of why does not natural selection work on this?
You don't need to be genetic.
You don't need to be epigenetic.
You can be like this.
Yep.
That's one question.
Another one is you've shown why I just change the electrical field here.
I depolarize or I polarize.
And this way, I'm producing an eye.
When I do that, I'm producing a leg and so on and so forth.
But there must be something different,
saying produce a leg versus saying produce an eye.
So the obvious question is how many degrees of freedom,
how many memories can you actually store?
Or does that all depend upon the biochemistry and so on and so forth?
Yeah.
Great questions.
First of all, I will say that I think evolution uses this all the time.
Because in every system that we've looked at, things like,
I mean, here, the fact that this thing builds a face at all
is evolution exploiting the self-organization of exactly this pattern.
And we have computational models that produce the smiley pattern in the tissue.
This is exactly the outcome of evolution exploiting the self-organization,
the memory, and the self-healing, the pattern completion properties of electric circuits.
So I think evolution is all over this.
It was from the time of bacterial biofilms.
There's some amazing work by Gural Soelle at UCSD on how bacteria use this.
I think it's ancient, and I think evolution uses this all the time.
But a question.
I mean, we've got inheritance, but where is the mutation?
That's one of the other key ingredients of natural selection.
So it's actually trying out the space, and then you have differential survival and so on and so forth.
This is, again, a discussion that could take by itself a really long time.
I don't believe that the standard story of mutation and differential survival
is sufficient for understanding all of this.
Not just the bioelectrics, but in general.
I think there's a lot more going on here.
And I think that I'll get to some of this at the very end.
But partly, I mean, if you wanted to look at the conventional piece of this,
there are certainly mutations in ion channels.
So for example, when evolution discovered voltage-gated ion channels
by manipulating the properties of the protein, the voltage-gated ion channel protein,
what you get is a voltage-gated current conductance, which is a transistor.
Once you have that, you can build all kinds of things.
So in a certain sense, evolution certainly shapes the hardware
and by providing different kinds of ion channels,
you get excitable media with different properties for sure.
But I also think that it's not all about this
because there are many, many important properties to this.
And this is the thing I'm going to talk about at the end if I get to it.
They're kind of free lunches from the physics of it.
And there are aspects of the laws of mathematics, of computation, of physics, and so on.
That you get kind of for free.
And I think evolution exploits this greatly.
And I think what these proteins are, what evolution actually produces,
are a kind of pointer into that space, into that latent space.
And let me show you some of those examples, and then we'll talk more about this.
And Mike, usually I would be holding up a sign that you have about 10 minutes left.
10 minutes, okay.
I will skip a bunch of stuff then and fly through a couple of things.
Okay, we won't bother with this.
Just to say that it's not just about head number.
In fact, you can make different head shapes.
Again, it's stock hardware.
We're not changing the genetics, but if you manipulate the bioelectric pattern,
it can make the shapes of other species of planaria,
about 100 to 150 million years of evolutionary distance.
So there's this morpheus space.
This species is perfectly happy to visit these other locations,
but that's not what it normally does.
It makes brains and stem cell distributions like these other species.
In fact, you can go further in this latent space,
and you can make things that don't look like planaria at all.
So you can make these crazy spiky things and these 3D kind of cylinders and so on.
So this is meant to say journey, not journal, auto correct here.
But the idea is that we need to explore this space.
I want to show you a little bit of that if I have time.
So let's talk about what can happen here.
So this is normal development.
So here are your acorns that give rise to this nice flat oak leaf,
and we see so many of these and we think,
well, that is what the genome encodes.
This genome encodes this exact structure.
This is the temptation because this is so reliable.
Well, along comes a bioengineer, not a human bioengineer.
This is a wasp.
What the wasp has evolved to do is to prompt the cells by signals,
by chemical signals that get the plant cells to build this or this
or lots of other things.
These are plant gauze.
They are not made of wasp cells.
They are made of plant cells.
You would have no idea that these cells are capable of building something like this
if you didn't see this example, right?
Because this lulls us into a false sense of limitation
on what the genome is actually capable of.
It's actually capable of a lot more.
Now, I'll show you this.
If I ask you what you think this thing is,
it looks like something I got off the bottom of a pond somewhere
and then I could tell you that I sequenced the genome.
The genome is 100% Homo sapiens.
What these are, we call them anthrobots.
They are a novel construct made of adult,
there's no embryonic tissue anywhere here.
There's adult human tracheal epithelial cells from elderly patients,
which under certain circumstances,
reboot their multicellularity and form this kind of thing that runs around
and this matches no normal developmental stage of human development.
It has some interesting properties.
If you make some neurons here and you put a big scratch through it
and you let these bots in,
they'll make something called a super bot cluster.
Four days later, what you see is that what they did underneath
is that they took the two sides of the neural wound and they knitted them together.
Who would have thought your tracheal cells that sit there quietly
in your airway for long periods of time
could self-assemble into this multi-little creature that's able to do this?
It has a radically transformed transcriptome,
9,000 genes that are different from what the human body is typically doing.
So all these things are novel, but there's never been any anthrobots.
There's never been evolutionary selection to be a good anthropot
or to have a specific anthropot transcriptome.
Again, stock hardware, there's nothing wrong with this genome.
No synthetic circuits, no nanomaterials, no scaffolds, nothing.
What are those neurons? Is that the in vitro or is that in the body?
Right now this is in vitro.
We're obviously testing in vivo next, but this is a petri dish.
This is a two-dimensional petri dish.
I'm pretty sure I showed you this last time.
These are xenobots, same kind of thing,
frog skin cells that cannot reproduce by the normal froggy fashion,
but they run around when given loose skin cells.
Basically, this is Von Neumann's dream of a machine that runs around
and makes a copy of itself from things in the environment,
because these little balls mature into the next generation of xenobots,
which makes the next generation, which makes the next.
What I'm really interested in is where does this stuff come from,
because you can't pin it on selection.
There's never been selection to do any of this stuff.
It's not designed by us. We didn't teach them to do all this.
What I think is happening here is that all of these kinds of things
that we build, these chimeras and these synthetic beings,
they're a kind of vehicle for exploring this latent space
of possibilities that evolution makes use of,
but I think that because there's such a heavy component from this space
that we can't really say that these things are happening
because of a specific algorithm or because of the genetics,
there's a really important external component here
that I do think has a structure to it, which means we can explore it.
This is not a mysterious view.
We don't want to be surprised when these emergent capabilities show up.
We want to have a systematic process of exploring it,
and I think that's what these constructs that we make are.
I'll just end here by saying that because life is so plastic
and solving problems from scratch at every opportunity,
pretty much any combination of evolved material, engineered material,
and software is some kind of potential agent,
so hybrids and cyborgs, and many of these things already exist,
but there's going to be way more.
Everything that Darwin meant when he said,
Endless forms most beautiful in life is like a tiny little corner
of this incredible option space,
many of which we are going to be living in with in the coming decades.
I really think that the field of diverse intelligence is critical
in trying to understand novel problem spaces,
novel kinds of minds, the emergence of these things
that are not directly from the algorithms or the chemistry that we are putting together
to allow us to have a kind of ethical synthbiosis.
And by the way, this word was invented for me by GPT
as a way to explain the idea that we should be figuring out
how to live with these other unconventional beings.
And we've begun to study the emergent goals and competencies
of very minimal systems.
If anybody's interested in this, here's a study of good old sorting algorithms.
So if you're a computer scientist, you've studied this, everybody has these sorting algorithms.
They do all kinds of interesting things that we never knew about
that are kinds of problem solving
in a very minimal, transparent, deterministic kind of algorithm.
And so my message here is, following my greed here,
who was saying this is not a pipe, this is our picture of a pipe,
I think that a lot of the arguments about whether or not living things are machines and so on,
I'm not even sure machines are machines anymore.
I think that there is so much surprising, not just complexity, not just unpredictability,
but actual cognition at different levels.
Problem solving, behavior preferences, memories that come from very minimal setups
that I think we need a lot of humility in looking at these minimal models
and saying, well, I know what the algorithm is or I know what the chemistry is,
so I know what it's going to do.
I think life is much more interesting than that.
So I will end here and just to say that I think intelligence is pretty ubiquitous.
We need to get better at observing it in unfamiliar environments.
I think that we have a research agenda here, which is to develop principal frameworks
that try to get it right as far as what kind of mind we're looking at
by loosening up some of our own evolutionary firmware.
In the future, we have all kinds of exciting things around developing these models
and using AI as universal translators.
All of this is discussed in extensive detail.
I can send this around if people want.
I need to do a disclosure.
There are three companies that are funding some of the work that I told you.
Here are the amazing people, the postdocs and the PhD students and our collaborators
that have done all this work, and I will stop here.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
