Some people say a man is made out of mud.
A poor man's made out of muscle and blood.
Muscle and blood and skin and bones.
A mind that's weak and a back that's strong.
I'm sorry, Don. I didn't mean to be cross.
I'm just so upset these days.
I don't seem to know right from wrong anymore.
And any way you look at it, women's work is not for sissies.
Most men would have a hard time of it if they were to change jobs
with wife, mother, or girlfriend.
The homemaker walks miles every day,
from sink to icebox, from cupboard to stove,
and from kitchen to dining table.
Let's use some very special photography
to compress the whole job of preparing a meal into a few seconds of time
to see how many steps it really takes to get dinner on the table.
Remember, this is a hurry-up picture of just one meal
out of more than a thousand.
Is that what you'd call a blitz meal?
Even an efficiency expert would be staggered
by the amount of chasing around and indoor road work
that the little woman takes as a matter of course.
There's the stir-climbing event, for example.
Usually accomplished, full tilt,
and with an arm load of brooms, mops, blankets,
and sundry household paraphernalia.
Here's another hurry-up picture of the clinging vine
whizzing through a day's program
that would leave the average mountaineer gasping for breath.
Each trip upstairs is the equivalent of lifting her own weight 12 feet,
and at the rate of 20 trips a day,
that's lifting about 12 tons of weight.
Who said weaker sex?
Ironing is another kind of work
that's a lot of little jobs all rolled into one.
Just iron one of hubby shirts, for instance.
The iron may have to be lifted 20 or 30 times.
And since a flat iron weighs about as much as a brick,
a day's ironing actually uses just about as much muscle as bricklaying.
Flattening a towel or wielding a trowel, even Steven.
If you misbehaved, you weren't normal.
And the idea of normal is a kind of vegetative state where nothing happens.
But that's what everybody tried to aspire to.
But I think it's a word that people are constantly using
to exhort you to behave better.
Why don't you be normal?
It's not normal to wear your hair long.
It's not normal to wear Levi's.
It's not normal to listen to rock and roll.
It's not normal to read comic books.
There's a whole list of a million things that everybody does that isn't normal.
And though she's not really ill, there's a little yellow pill.
She goes running for the shelter of her mother's little helper.
And it helps her on her way, gets her through her busy day.
Because benzodiazepines started to get a very bad reputation for being highly addicting,
in fact, we had a whole generation of housewives in the 1970s that were addicted to Valium.
Often the introduction comes in the form of a goofball.
These are barbiturates.
Ones in common use are second-all, nembital, and luminal.
These are legitimate medications when prescribed by a physician
who understands their use and potential dangers.
Barbiturates are sedatives and hypnotics.
Well, what are we going to get for you, Bob?
Well, what are we going to get for our friends when they say,
ooh-la-la, wake up, please, Susie?
Wake up, please, Susie?
Wake up, please, Susie?
