Yes.
So you're going to do two complete rotations.
Two complete rotations.
So this is a very fundamental property of the world that is somehow not discussed.
I think I find it very interesting that people want to talk to me about the multiverse.
Sometimes they want to talk to me about quantum measurement problem, but the idea that we
are somehow based on a square root, and I would disagree with you slightly if you would
permit it, that it's not just a question of the square root of the vectors, it's a square
root of the algebra generated by the vectors that really the spinners are, this exterior
or Clifford algebra.
This object has fascinated me my entire life, and it's very strange that all of the stability
of matter and matter's strange properties with electron shells are all coming out of
this weird knot that appears everywhere in the universe, and it's not universally known
that it's even there.
Yes.
So it's the difference between the fermions and the bosons.
So the particles which have a spin, which is half an odd number, which have this curious
property that you rotate them and they get back to manage themselves.
And it's crucial for matter, because the Pauli exclusion principle depends on the Fermi
statistics, which is to do with the exactest property.
So without this knottedness and the scissor trick or whatever you want to call it, we
wouldn't have a periodic table and chemical elements.
You wouldn't have anything.
We wouldn't have anything.
Yeah.
You wouldn't have fermions.
In other words, you wouldn't have things which have an exclusion principle.
And the bosons, which are the opposite, they like to be on...
If you have two bosons, you can have them in the same state, and they'd rather like
to be in the same state.
So you get these things called bosons and condensates, where if you get them very cold,
they all flop together into the same state.
But for the fermions, it's completely the opposite.
They hate to be in the same state, or they can't be, and this is what sort of pushes
them apart.
So the Fermi principle, the public principle.
So you have this strange thing called the spin statistics theorem that says that if
things have a knottedness of a particular kind, then they either are highly individualistic
or highly communistic, whatever you want to call it.
My question would be, there's another aspect of that that I've been very curious about,
which is when we have to treat these objects quantum mechanically, and you've of course
thought a great deal about quantum theory.
We have two totally different prescriptions for how to make these different objects quantum
mechanical, but there's a one-to-one correspondence between these two utterly different treatments
that matter and force get quantum mechanically.
It's the darndest thing.
When you get these two kinds of particles, two kinds of atoms, the bosons and the fermions,
then it has to do with make a complete rotation.
Do they come back to themselves, or do they come back to minus themselves?
That's the topological bit.
But then there's this whole thing that might go under like Berazin integration, which is
no integration at all.
I mean, you're effectively almost lying about what you're doing to the fermions to make
them look like bosons.
And yet, what we seem to get out of this is that nobody...
I don't think anyone could have anticipated that there would be a dictionary of two totally
different structures, which seems to be almost word for word.
Yes, because they're not totally different in the sense that you take a two fermion system
and you get a boson.
So you...
Well, they have to...
They're all part of the same world.
Yes, that's right.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Bye.
