Then, yeah, I thought I would give an introduction. So, Peter Gray is a psychology researcher
and scholar at Boston College, and works on the intersection between education and play.
And he's also the author of several books, including The Accident, Free to Play, which
I highly recommend for anyone here. It's a wonderful book on non-schooling and democratic
schools as well. And today he'll be presenting the talk, The Biology of Education and the
Absolescences of School. And with that, I hand over the floor to Peter. Thanks so much for being
here. Well, thank you for having me. It's nice to see you all who are here. I'm going to
give a talk on the biology of education, and then maybe if there's time at the end, talk about
the obsolescence of school. We'll see how much time there is. I definitely want to leave time for
questions and discussion at the end of the talk. So, I'm an evolutionary psychologist,
which means that I'm interested in human nature. I'm interested in how our human nature came about
by natural selection. And I'm particularly interested, especially in recent years,
in the nature of human children, and most particularly in those aspects of children's
nature that have to do with their education, which really are all the primary aspects of
children. The purpose of childhood is education. Natural selection created children with the
characteristics that lead them to educate themselves if we allow them to do so. Unfortunately,
we're not in this day and age so much allowing them to do so. And so, this is a big part of
of what I've been working on. So, the thesis for this talk is that children come into the world
biologically designed to educate themselves. We don't need to educate children. What we need to do
is to provide the conditions that allow them to educate themselves. So, that sounds like a radical
thesis from today's perspective. It runs so counter to our belief that schooling, forced
schooling is absolutely essential for children to acquire the skills and attitudes and knowledge
that they will need to function as effective adults in our world today. My research suggests
that that assumption is not true, that if we provide children with the opportunities that
allow them to use their natural ways of learning, they will educate themselves very well. In fact,
they'll educate themselves better than we would educate them in our schools. So, that's the thesis
that I've given myself to present and I'm going to dig right into it. But first,
before I get to the handout, the list of things on the handout, let me say, I should say what I
mean by education. So, normally, kind of in our culture today, we think of education as schooling.
We kind of define education as schooling. If I were to ask you how much education you've had or
ask you about your education, you would probably tell me how much schooling you've had, how many
years of school you've had, what your highest diploma is, and so on and so forth. We have come
to confound education with schooling. And so, of course, if I'm talking about self-directed
education, I can't be talking about, I can't be defining education as schooling. I have to define
it as something more basic than that. So, my definition of education, actually, I have somewhat
different definitions of education depending upon the group that I'm talking to. But normally, most
often, when I define education, I define it as everything that a person learns that enables them
to live a satisfying, meaningful, and moral life. So, I don't define it as exactly the same
thing as learning. I define it as the good things we learn, the things that are really helpful that
we learn, the things that enable us in the long run to live a satisfying, meaningful, and moral life.
I think this is kind of what most of us would want education to be doing, allowing people to live
satisfying, meaningful, and moral lives. We care that people are good in this world, that they do
more good than they do harm. So, that's kind of my rough definition of education. Sometimes,
when I talk to groups of anthropologists, I define education a little bit differently.
I start off then by talking about how we are cultural animals, that we've been passing cultural
along far, you know, throughout our whole history as homo sapiens and probably longer than that.
We are the cultural animal. That's what defines us in some sense. We're the animal that can't survive
without culture. And what does culture mean? Culture is what gets passed along from generation to
generation. Every generation picks up a good share of the knowledge and skills of the previous
generation and builds upon that. So, another way that I define education then when I'm talking
to anthropologists is the process of cultural transmission, the process by which every new
generation acquires the skills and knowledge and mores and so on of the previous generation.
So, that's another way of thinking about education.
What does that mean? What are these skills? In some sense, you could think of it this way.
There are some skills that human beings, let's go back to the happy and the moral and
satisfying and moral life and meaningful life definition. There are some skills that human
beings everywhere have to learn no matter what culture they're growing up in order to live that
kind of a life. These include things like walking on two legs, speaking your native language,
being able to control your emotions to some degree, being able to get along with other people
or a social species. We can't survive alone. We have to be able to cooperate. We have to know
how to elicit cooperation. We have to know how to compromise and get along with other people.
These are some of the skills that people have to learn no matter what culture they're growing up in.
So, these are kind of species typical skills. But then there are also cultural typical skills.
So, depending upon what culture a child is growing up in, there are some skills that are
really important to that culture but may not be so important to another culture. So, if you're
growing up in a hunter-gatherer culture, the skills that are involved in hunting and gathering and
sharing food and the things that are essential to that culture, to survival in that culture are
culture-specific skills that children have to learn. In our culture, we're a literate and
numerate culture. So, it's not absolutely essential but it's certainly valuable to know how to read and
how to write and how to use numbers and calculate and the meaning of calculations and so on and so
forth. We're also increasingly a culture defined by the use of computers and technology of that
sort and so acquiring those kinds of skills that are involved. And what we're doing right now on
Zoom, these are important skills for most people to develop who are growing up in our culture today.
So, those are cultural skills. So, those are two categories of skills that are really important
to develop. But then there's also the kinds of skills and knowledge that define the unique
differences, the unique characteristics of the person being educated. So, I'm sure that all of
us on this screen right now have interests that we don't necessarily are not necessarily
shared by others on this screen. So, for some of us, education means learning a particular
thing that this is really important for me to know for the kind of satisfying and meaningful life
that I want to live. But that may not be important for you to know for the satisfying and meaningful
life that you want to live. So, we live in a world where knowledge and the number of skills
are essentially infinite. I mean, there's no way any of us could come close to mastering all of it,
right? Our schools are premised on the idea that everybody's supposed to master the same things
as if we were all going to be doing the same things in life, as if we all had the same interests,
as if the world depended upon our all knowing the same things. Well, I'm going to present an
argument against that. I think we're better off if we follow our own interests and some people are
going to pursue mathematics, other people are going to pursue the understanding of bird life and
the continents they're living on and other people are going to get interested for one reason or another
in Roman history and some people are going to get interested in astronomy and so on and so forth.
And my experience as I'll talk about later is that indeed, when people are free, there are people
who get interested in all of these things, but not everybody gets interested in all of them.
And if you get interested in something, you learn about it and you pass on that knowledge and you
develop that knowledge. So briefly then there's these sort of three categories that you could say
that those skills and knowledge that are essential, more or less essential for everybody to know,
no matter where they're growing up. Then there's those culture specific skills that are important
to learn and then there's those individual specific skills that are important to learn,
that different people, it's important for maybe you to learn that, not important for me to learn it,
it's important for me to learn something else because I've planned a life that depends upon
learning those particular things. So that's education. So now if you do have the handout,
you can see that I'm now going on to A in the handout, the educative instincts that underlie
self-directed education. So when I say that children come into the world biologically designed
to educate themselves, what am I really saying? I'm saying that they come into the world with
certain basic drives or instincts and that these are characteristics of all normal human beings,
and short of those who have very serious brain damage, that lead normal human beings to educate
themselves as long as they have the freedom to do so. And it's not really a great mystery what these
are. They're kind of obvious. Anybody who's observed a child or anybody who's even introspected about
yourself knows these are a basic part of being human. So the first drive that I've listed here under
A, under educative instincts, is curiosity. You know, Aristotle in his famous treatise,
Metaphysics on the Origin of Knowledge, the very first sentence in that treatise was,
human beings are naturally curious about things. Nothing could be more true than that about us.
We are curious from the moment we're born and unless that curiosity is suppressed until almost
the moment we die, we are constantly curious. We are constantly wondering what's going on around us.
We're constantly trying to figure out the world around us. There's research with newborn babies
showing that already within hours of their birth, they're exploring their environment. If you show
them as soon as their eyes can fix a little bit, you show them a particular pattern and they look
at that pattern as if they're studying it. And then you show them a choice between that pattern
and a new one and they spend more time looking at the new one than at the old one. It says,
okay, I kind of got that one. Whoa, well, this is something new. Let me look at this one.
Already they're exploring with their eyes. As soon as they can move around there, what are they
moving for? They're moving in order to explore the world around them. They want to get their,
you know, at first they want to get everything into their mouth because we are mammals and
mammals tend to explore with their mouth, but we humans, our unique way of exploring is with
our hands, getting things with our eyes and our hands. And so they want to get their hands on
things as soon as they can move around. This is why we have to babyproof our house because they
want to get their hands on to everything. They want to explore everything. What would happen
if I dropped this on the floor? What would happen if I, you know, stuck this hairpin into that
socket in the wall and so on and so forth? So we have to, so it's obvious that children are just,
we try to stop them from exploring the world because of the trouble they cause by exploring
the world. We don't have to encourage them to explore. They just naturally do that. And this
curiosity does not die off as they grow into older childhood unless we kill it once we start
school where we shut, where we tend to shut curiosity off because curiosity will get you into
trouble in school. Not everybody can be curious about the same things at the same time. That's
not going to happen. So in order to have a classroom, you have to shut off curiosity,
per individual curiosity is disruptive in the classroom. So, so that's curiosity.
Curiosity is the drive to acquire information about the world and especially, you know, what's
out there? How does it work? What can I make it do? How do, what, what's there? What does it do?
How could it be useful to me? So the second character is, the second drive I've lifted
on the handout is playfulness. So curiosity is the drive for knowledge and understanding.
Playfulness is the drive to practice and create. Play is doing stuff and play is learning how to
do stuff. So that's, so in sense, these are complementary parts of education. Education
involves knowledge and it involves skills. Curiosity is for acquiring knowledge. Play is
for acquiring skills. Anthropologists have shown that children throughout the world,
when they have ample time to play, play at all of the skills that are essential for children
throughout the world to learn. Those species specific skills, all of them are practiced in
play. And I'm going to also argue as I go along that so are the culture specific skills
practiced in play and then ultimately this individual specific skills are also practiced in
play. So think of the different ways that children play. An anthropologist tell us when children
have ample time to play, which most children in our culture do not, they play in all of the ways,
not just some of the ways that I'm going to list here now. They play in physical ways and that's
how they develop their physical body. They play at chasing one another around. They play at wrestling.
They play at climbing trees. They play at leaping. They play at all these kinds of vigorous physical
activities. That's how they build strong bodies. That's how they build strong heart and lung.
That's how they develop the ability to move gracefully. There's no substitute for play,
for developing the physical body. Children are simply not designed to lift weights or run around
a track or do calisthenics and so on and so forth. There's no substitute for allowing children to
allow to play in the natural ways that they play. It turns out all young mammals play in these ways.
They all have physical bodies and this is how mammals develop their physical bodies.
Also in this vigorous kind of exercise play, this physical play, they also play in risky ways.
They climb trees higher than their parents might want them to climb. They leap over caverns.
They wrestle in ways that could potentially get hurt. This is also true for other young mammals.
Monkeys have been observed chasing one another playfully around high enough up in trees
and if they fell, they could actually get hurt. Young goat kids skip along cliffs. Why are they
skipping along cliffs where they could fall and even perhaps kill themselves?
Chimpanzees have been observed climbing to the top of a tree, young chimpanzees, and then dropping
and catching themselves just before they hit the ground. Why do they play in these risky
kinds of ways? Why didn't natural selection weed that out? The argument is that this is how
young animals acquire courage. They are practicing doing things that are a little bit scary. In fact,
somewhat scary. Not so scary that they freeze up, but scary enough that they're learning how
to feel frightened and still control their mind and their body. They're preparing themselves
for future emergencies and so when our children play in risky ways, which we too often prevent
them from doing, they are following nature's course for learning courage, for learning how to
face danger. We're all at some points in our life are going to face real emergencies. If we've had
the experience of playing with fear, playing where we are controlling the amount of fear,
we are in some sense titrating the fear so that we're not terrifying ourselves, but we are
experiencing a certain amount of fear. We are learning that, yes, I can feel fear and still
I can keep control of my mind and I can control my body and I can deal with this and the world is
not so scary after all. That's physical play and risky play, but children also everywhere play
with language. If you watch the baby learn language, it's always in a playful mood. The first
cooling and babbling, the language like sounds that begin to occur, occur when the child is happy
and in a playful mood and it's often kind of even banter back and forth in our culture with the
parent. When children use their first word, it's never used to ask for anything. They're not using
language instrumentally. They're not, B.F. Skinner was completely wrong. That's not how children
learn language. It's not because they get rewarded for using a word or they acquire what they are
asking for. Children use language first playfully before they ever begin to use it to ask for anything.
They're simply pointing things out. They're simply playing with the sounds of the language and then
ultimately playing with the words of the language. As they grow older, they begin to even play with
the constructions of the language. There are doctoral dissertations on what's called crib
speech where they have recorded very young children talking to themselves in the crib
and they're repeating the same thing over and over and over again, varying it a little bit as if
practicing saying these statements, practicing the form of a question or practicing pointing out
the color of something and then using different color words as they're practicing and so on.
So playful use of language is how children learn language and as children grow older and they begin
to play with other children, then language, in order to play, they have to communicate with
language. They have to tell one another, they have to negotiate. What is it that we're playing?
What are the rules of how we're going to play? What is it that I expect of you and what do you
expect of me if we're going to play together? Play, social play requires communication and
this is the area where children most fully develop language and in fact even in our culture,
let alone in other cultures where children have much more opportunity to play, even in our culture
it's been shown that children's language when they're playing with other children is far more
sophisticated and complex and their language is when they're talking to an adult, such as when
they're talking to a parent or to a teacher, has to be sophisticated because the language in play
is real, they have to negotiate what they're doing, they have to talk about what they're doing in order
to be able to do it. We are the animal, so we're not only the animal that has language but we are
also the animal that builds things. We're the animal with opposable thumbs. We have, as long as we've
been human beings, we've been dependent on things we build, tools for hunting, tools, we build our
shelters, we build means of conveyance, whether they're dug out canoes or whatever else they might
be. We are the animal that builds things, it's almost, it used to be one of the definitions
of human beings, less so today because we know that there's a little bit of building at least in
some other species as well. But there's no other animal, just as there's no other animal that has
a sophisticated language as we have, there's no other animal that builds to the degree that we do.
And not surprisingly, therefore, children everywhere in the world play at building things,
we call this constructive play. What they build may differ from culture to culture, but when
children are free, they build things, whether it's sandcastles or whether it's towers of Lego or
whether it's little dugout canoes or whether it's bows and arrows that they can then play with,
their children build things. They're practicing use of those opposable thumbs and they're practicing
use of those parts of the brain that are involved in thinking about what it is you're going to build
and then putting that actually into action through the muscles and through working on
whatever the material is that you are building with. So we are also the animal that has to follow
rules. We can't just behave in accordance with our whims and wishes and impulses. We have to
control our impulses. That's part of what being a human being is. If a person can't do that, we
tend to call them an animal, like they're not a human being. That's part of the definition of
a human being. We follow social norms, social rules that are part of our social structure,
part of our ability to get along with one another. Well, not surprisingly, I'm going to argue that
all play involves rules. Children, when they're playing, they're following rules. They're doing
things and they've got a concept in their head of what they're doing and then they're following
through on that concept. And to play, therefore, you have to control your impulses and follow the
rules of whatever the play is that you're doing. If you're building a sand castle, the rule is
I'm making a sand castle. I'm not just piling up sand randomly. I'm doing something in a systematic
and controlled kind of way. And this is all the more true if you and your partner, your play partner
are making a sand castle together. You've got to have some kind of shared conception of what this
castle is like and you've got to follow that. It's even more obvious in something like the kind
of fantasy play, playing superheroes, playing house. You're the mommy or the daddy in a game of
house. What does that entail? Well, it entails that you have to act like a mommy or daddy or
whatever the party. If you're the pet dog, you've got to act like a pet dog. You've got to control
yourself. If you don't, if you're the pet dog and you've got to walk on all fours and you can't talk,
you've got to say arf, arf. If you don't follow that rule, your playmates will remind me, no,
you're the dog. You're not allowed to get up. You're not allowed to talk. You can just have to say
arf, arf. So this is one of the hardest things that children have to learn to become full human
beings is how to control their impulses, how to follow rules, and they're constantly practicing
that in play. So we are also the, the animal, as far as we know, we're the only animal that's
capable of imagination. It's a little hard to say that other animals don't have imagination,
but we certainly haven't proven that they do. We can, we can think of things that aren't there.
We can think of things that we've never experienced. We, this is what allows us to become
inventors of new things. This is what allows us to create things that nobody ever thought of before.
This is also even what allows us to think about tomorrow. Tomorrow hasn't happened yet,
but we can imagine tomorrow and we can think of what could happen tomorrow and therefore we can
make plans for tomorrow. So imagination is an extraordinarily important skill. All of what's
called hypothetical reasoning that scientists engage in, hypothetical deductive reasoning,
or that all of us really engage in, is involves imagination. What if this were true? Let's pretend
this is true. And if this is true, then what else follows from that? Well, children in their play
are constantly doing that kind of thing, especially in their sociodramatic play or the pretend play
where children are playing together. So let's pretend there's a troll under the bridge. Well,
if there's a troll under the bridge, what are the consequences? I mean, three and four and five
year olds will play games like this and they're engaged in hypothetical deductive reasoning
when they do that. They're using imagination and they're using imagination in a way
that really is allowing them to practice what most people think of as the highest form of human
reasoning, which is the kind of so-called abstract hypothetical sort of reasoning about
hypotheticals, about counterintuitive things. What would happen if this were true, even though
it may not be true? Piaget argued years ago that children aren't capable of such reasoning until
they're 11 or 12 years old. They didn't answer the kinds of questions he would ask them in that
kind of way. But we now know that even three and four year olds are perfectly capable of such reasoning
as long as it is in the core context of play. They're constantly playing with hypotheticals
and they're constantly reasoning in a logical sort of manner with hypotheticals.
It's this fits with the idea that Lev Vygotsky presented long ago that children practice
higher functions in play before they begin to apply them in serious life. They practice all
kinds of things. Play is the practice space for the real world. So also children play in every
culture that we have tools and children are drawn to the tools of their culture. It's almost as
if they look around and they look. So what are the tools that I have to be able to use if I'm
going to be a successful member of this world that I'm growing up in? And so anthropologists
have found that in every culture, essentially, children are drawn like flies to honey to whatever
are the primary tools of that culture. So hunter gather kids are drawn to bows and arrows and fire
and digging sticks and they play with these things. They make miniature ones. You can't keep them away
from such things. In an agricultural culture, they're drawn to farming instruments and they play
with farming equipment. In our culture today, what are they drawn to? More than anything else,
of course, they're drawn to computers. There's no way you could be growing up in our culture
without realizing the computer is far and away the most important tool in our culture today.
And so no surprise that children want to play with computers if they learn how to use computers
very often before their parents have learned how to use them. Or this was true at least some years
ago. And they become very sophisticated very frequently in the use of computers very early
on because they use them just as hunter gather cultures become very sophisticated with the use
of knives and bows and arrows and so on very early on because they start using them very early on.
And perhaps most important children, as well as other animals in this case,
as well as many other animals play socially. No matter how else they're playing, whether they're
playing physically or with language or building things or playing with rules or playing imaginative
games, playing with tools, they want to play with other kids. And why is that? Why are they so drawn
to want to play with other kids? And I would argue it's because perhaps the most important skill
that human beings have to live in order to live a satisfying meaningful and moral life
is how to get along with other people, how to get along with peers specifically.
And so when children are playing with other kids away from adults, so there's no adults,
they're solving their problems for them. No adults tell them what to do. They have to figure
out how to do it. They have to figure out how to negotiate what it is they're going to play.
They have to figure out how to deal with minor bullying. They have to figure out how they're
going to please their playmates because they want to play with these other kids. But if they
don't please their playmates, they'll be rejected from play or the other kids will leave them.
They'll just, you know, I'm not going to play with you if you're going to be like that.
So kids are learning how to get along with one another in their play as long as we
adults are not there interrupting and interfering and solving their problems for them.
So these are the things that natural selection has designed children to learn through play.
It's as if over the course of human history acquiring these abilities led to survival
and reproduction. If you can't acquire these abilities, you are less likely to survive and
reproduce and pass your genes along. And so consequently, the genetic potential to play in
all of these kinds of ways and therefore learn these kinds of skills that I just described
were passed along from generation to generation of human beings. This has all occurred long before
we had anything like schools. We've been human beings for hundreds of thousands of years.
We've only had schools for for most people in the world about a hundred or years or 150 years
for all of us, not more than three or 400 years except for maybe a few princes
and such people. So education has always occurred. We wouldn't be human beings without it
and it is more and it is generally occurred without what we call schools.
So the third characteristics that I've listed on your handout, I should probably keep an eye on
the time here. And the third characteristic I've listed on your handout is sociability.
So we are a curious animal. We are a playful animal. We're the most curious and most playful
of all animals. And we are also not necessarily the most social of all animals, but we're certainly
one of the most social, maybe the most social, mammal. And we absolutely depend upon getting
along with other people. That's part of and I already talked a little bit about that as to
why children play socially. They have to learn how to get along with other people. You're not
going to survive. You're certainly not going to be re able to reproduce if you can't get along
with other people. So but sociability in the context that I'm using it here has to do with a
way of learning. We are part of our reason for being sociable is that we acquire information
from one another. This is why we are so social. We need other people in order to learn about
the world from them. We don't learn the whole world from scratch by trial and error and out
there exploring the world. We learn a huge amount about the world by learning from other people.
We pay attention to what other people are doing and how they're doing it. We watch those little
hunter gatherer kids are watching people using bows and arrows and digging sticks and so on.
They don't have to be taught. They're paying attention. They're watching. They're learning
by paying attention to it. Kids in our society are watching you when when when watching their
adult, their parents and other people and learning from them by looking at them by listening to them.
And often especially in our culture by asking questions. Once you can talk you begin to ask
questions. You want to know things and one way to get to know things is to ask people who might
know it, who might be able to explain it to you. Not only are children come into the world with
a drive to know what other people know, but also with a drive to tell other people what they know.
They like to share information not necessarily with adults and especially if it sounds like
they're being tested. But but kids like to share information with one another and I'll give you
an example of that in just a moment. So we are irresistibly drawn to others as children and in
the process of interacting with others we are learning from others all the time. So this is
this is the sense in which we teach and learn and it's reciprocal as we're as whenever you're
engaged in a conversation with another person you're both teacher and learner and this is the
natural way that people learn through interaction with other other people. You learn what you're
interested in if you're not interested in it and it doesn't have any real meaning to your life at
this time then you're not going to pay much attention to it. So that's so those are those are
three of the basic educative instincts. I want to illustrate how those three instincts work together
by referring to by describing some little experiments, they're college experiments,
they're really just demonstrations that Sigata Mitra did a number of years ago. Most of you
have probably heard of these you know the very famous Ted talk on this but in the late 20th century
in the late 1990s Mitra was the head of a education technology firm in New Delhi India
and the building that he worked in one of its walls faced one of the worst slums and porous slums
in New Delhi and there were a lot of street kids out there who weren't going to school
who were illiterate or meant most of them illiterate and so on. So he got the idea what if I made a
computer available to these kids? What if just made it available? I'm not not going to show
him anything about it just make it available. So he did an experiment he called it the hole in the
wall experiment he made a hole in the brick wall of the building put a fairly indestructible early
version of a computer there you know 1990s version of a computer and and he told the kids out on the
street who began to gather around it because they were curious about it right gathered around and
he said you know you can play with it and that's all he said and so the kids so here's what happened
curiosity drew the kids to this thing they never seen anything like this before it seemed maybe
it was a little bit like a television set or something and they began to explore it as any
kids would and they oh boy if I touch this here something changes on the screen and so they got
really interested in what they could make this thing do by touching the the trackpad or whatever
or the mouse I don't remember how he had it wired up and what he found is very very quickly
literally within days they figured out how to do pretty much anything you could do with that computer
later on he added internet connection to publicly available computers and he found that
children on their own learned how to download stuff they found that within a very short period
of time children were doing pretty much in everything that anybody ever does with a computer
they were downloading music they were playing games they were some of them were learning English
words even if they didn't speak English because there were English words on the screen and they
were sharing this and a few of them knew English some of them were learning how to read it didn't
know how to read some of them some of the older kids were downloading stuff that was in their
native language and finding information this kind of way what ultimately Mitra set up something like
a hundred computers he and his co-workers in different places in India some rural some urban
he in one of his papers he made the claim that for every computer he set up 300 kids became
computer literate at that time there was this belief that we if we just provided every child
in the world with a computer the one the one laptop one child view of education then we would provide
the knowledge that we would make it give everybody access to knowledge Mitra's point was you don't
need one one for every child better to have a lot of children on one computer because they're
learning from one another so what's happening here is curiosity is drawing them to the computer
and to explore with it and discover its properties playfulness then arrives in and then they play
with the properties so for example once they've figured out how you can draw on the computer
use the draw program then they're playing and drawing things once they figure out how to download
stuff they're just downloading stuff to play with downloading and so on so they're they've
acquired the information through curiosity they're acquiring skills using it through playing with it
and sociability is what's leading all this to spread it not every child has to discover every
aspect of this computer one child discovers it and they all know it all because they're playing
in a group so there's 10 kids around that computer one kid makes this discovery they all see it they
all want to try it and then one kid in this friendship group has a friend in some other
friendship group and he goes and tells them and pretty soon they're there so the knowledge spreads
like wildfire fire because of because of this this this basic sociability of human beings
children share with one another what they're they know if this is exciting and and they think it'll
be exciting and interesting to their friends so let me go on then now to the fourth characteristic
that i've listed uh as a drive for educative drive which is willfulness the drive to be in charge
of one's own life willfulness all these characteristics get you into trouble in school
willfulness especially does willfulness is the drive to take charge of your own life to not
be a subordinate to not be a slave to not be controlled by other people there's some sense
in which all of us come into the world realizing yes we do depend upon other people we need to
make friends we need to negotiate but yet in some other sense we also have to live life on our own
terms we ultimately have to take responsibility for our own life if we allow other people to take
control of our lives the history that went into our natural selection says they're likely to exploit
us we have to be careful we have to take we have to keep charge of our own life in some way this
drive to keep charge of your own life and not do things just because other people tell us to do it
this is what we call willfulness historically this has a bad rap willfulness you know back in
the time when schools first were started by the and the Protestant Reformation willfulness was
regarded as next to sinfulness and the primary stated purpose of school believe it or not i've
written about this elsewhere it was to drive the willfulness out of children and to teach them
obedience that was really why we originally had schools of the sort that we have today and
i would argue that even today that's the primary lesson of school which is to to teach obedience so
because almost the only way you can pass in school is to do what you're told to do and almost the
only way you can fail is to not do what you're told to do so obedience is clearly the primary lesson
even today which requires the suppression of willfulness so but what is willfulness from an
evolutionary perspective willfulness is the desire to take charge of your own life willfulness is the
statement i'm responsible for my life i've got it i've got to make my own decisions i've got to
i've got to do what i need to do i otherwise i'm likely to be a victim of of of other people's
decisions rather than and charge rather than the the director of my own fate
fifth characteristic i've listed is planfulness so planfulness according to my
spell check is not an english word but it should be it is the capacity to plan it is in this case
i'm arguing it's almost the imperative to plan we are designed to plan ahead we are designed to
think ahead that's part of our extends from our ability to imagine imagine tomorrow think about
tomorrow planfulness develops more slowly than these other abilities which are kind of the all
very very much present even in very young children planfulness emerges in young children but it
develops over time it becomes more and more sophisticated if we allow children to plan
if we allow children to make some of their own plans rather than us doing all the planning for them
so the first planning occurs in my in my uh i would argue in play as soon as children can play
they can plan because play requires a plan i'm building a sandcastle that's a plan you know i'm
going to make this sandcastle then you follow through you're following through on this plan
and maybe as you get a little bit older and you're making a sandcastle with a friend
you talk about let's make a plant sandcastle you've made a mutual plan and maybe you're building
the sandcastle and and you're going to leave it for a little while you've got to go away to lunch
and you say well let's come back to this after lunch so you're now thinking a little bit into
the future we're going to continue making this sandcastle when we come back after lunch and maybe
you'll forget maybe you'll do something else maybe you'll change your mind but maybe you will
actually follow through on that plan and do it and as children get older if they have lots of
opportunity to plan like this they begin to plan farther and farther ahead and ideally at least
and in my research suggests in reality when children are truly and responsible for their own
their own education growing up by the time they're in their mid to late teens they're kind of planning
their future what is it I'm not always going to be supported by my parents how am I going to support
myself what would I really like to do for a career what does a career entail how do I find this out
and they're and they're seeking out knowledge in order to create them for themselves a plan
for the future I may have to oh you know if I want to become a doctor and that may be kind of
is a plan I want to do well it means I've got to go to college and then a medical school and what's
involved in getting into college and medical school how am I going to manage that so children figure
children start to plan farther and farther ahead if we allow them to experience planning as they're
growing up if we do all the planning for them they may kind of assume the world is going to plan for
me and they don't take social responsibility for their own planning as they become teenagers and
young adults so those are the characteristics that I would say are the biological foundations for
self-directed education I'm going to be a little bit quicker on the rest of this handout because
as I said I do want to leave time for questions and discussion but I just want to say a few things
kind of following this up about what is some of the evidence that I have developed and others
have developed to support this idea that children even in our world today can educate themselves
if we allow these instincts to operate rather than are suppressing them as we do in schools
and as we too often do even outside of schools in today's world so I began some years ago to
get interested first of all before before I talk about in our modern culture let me talk about
hunter-gatherer bands so we were hunter-gatherers throughout almost all of our evolutionary time
agriculture was developed a mere 10 000 years ago in some parts of the world and before that
everywhere we were hunter-gatherers now it turns out as you know that some people managed to survive
in a pretty pristine hunter-gatherer culture like way in various isolated parts of the world
into the late 20th century none of them that I know of are pristine hunter-gatherer cultures
today although some come close and there are still people studying what they call hunter-gatherer
cultures but between about 1950 and about 1980 90 this was a big era for anthropologists and
cultural psychologists to trek out into isolated parts of the world make contact with hunter-gatherer
cultures and live with them for a period of time and study them and so I got interested well how
do children in hunter-gatherer cultures acquire their culture what's the relationship between
adults and children in hunter-gatherer cultures because these instincts would have evolved in
that kind of a culture so some years ago with along with a graduate student I contacted
anthropologists who had at one time or another lived in and studied a hunter-gatherer culture
in all we contacted 10 different anthropologists who had lived in seven different hunter-gatherer
cultures on three different continents and we asked them questions about what they observed
about children what they observed about interactions between adults and children and so on I should
say that all of these cultures are what are called band hunter-gatherers so these are people who live
in small bands of maybe 20 to 50 people counting the children including the children in the band
they're nomadic over a kind of circumscribed area they roam around a territory to follow the
available game and edible vegetation so they don't have permanent dwellings they create
what the anthropologists call camps as they move from site to site they don't accumulate
they don't accumulate anything because there's no point in accumulating material goods because
anything that you own is literally a burden because you would have to carry it from place to
place as you move around they survive by sharing they don't have ways of storing foods so they
survive by sharing if you don't get anything you haven't had any luck hunting today or tomorrow
or yesterday but somebody else in the band has then everybody share everybody shares all
especially all meat but they also share everything else and in fact one of the problems that
anthropologists have in such studies is they feel terrible about not sharing everything why
should I have two shirts when somebody else doesn't have a shirt and really would like one of my
shirts so there's this sharing is really part of the whole ethos sharing is how you survive in
the hunter-gatherer band now these cultures all of these cultures are referred to by anthropologists
another term for a band hunter-gatherer culture is an egalitarian culture because these are by far
the most egalitarian cultures that have ever been found and they don't have a high they don't have
hierarchy there's no chief there's no big man there's no you know sometimes we mistakenly talk
about these groups as tribes but it that's not really the right term to use because a tribe is
generally a group that has a chief at the head of the that's a more organized more hierarchically
organized these are not these are bands these are and they and there's no chief there's no big man
there's no there's no bosses there's no subordinates there's no masters there's no slaves everybody is
equal and they go to pains to follow this through you don't in a hunter-gatherer culture
it turns out and I've heard this from various anthropologists not only in our study but also
in what has been written by anthropologists if you're a hunter-gatherer at one of these band
cultures you don't tell somebody else what to do even if you know how to do it better
then you don't tell them oh you're using that axe wrong here's how you should be using it
but you don't do that because that would make it seem like you think you're better than them you are
lording it over them in some sense by by telling them that they're not doing it right and that you
might help them learn how to use an axe by kind of in going off and you in in their eyesight using
an axe in the correct way that would be kind of a subtle way of showing them how to use an axe but
you wouldn't go over and tell them this is how to use an axe because that would be acting like
I know more than you do I'm better than you are and that is actually taboo in a hunter-gatherer
culture so they don't tell one another what to do and this is the remarkable thing they also
don't tell children what to do the same rules the same taboo about telling one another what to do
applies to children so children in hunter-gatherer cultures our willfulness is their guide children
do whatever it is they want to do unless it's extremely dangerous in which case an adult would
stop them from doing it so that's the that's the context of a hunter-gatherer culture and this was
true of all seven of the hunter-gatherer cultures in our study and from my reading it appears to be
true of pretty much if not all band hunter-gatherer cultures so there were actually three conclusions
that came from this study of hunter-gatherer cultures about how hunter-gatherer children become
educated the first conclusion is that adults do not direct children's activities as I've just described
I'm going to read here three quotations these all these didn't come from our study these are all
from various writings by people who've observed hunter-gatherer cultures by anthropologists
so here's one hunter-gathers do not give orders to their children for example no adult announces
bedtime at night children remain around adults until they feel tired and fall asleep adults
do not interfere with their children's lives they never beat scold or behave aggressively with them
physically or verbally nor do they offer praise or keep track of their development
nor do they offer praise or keep track of their development they simply they simply assume the
kids are going to be okay here's another quote the idea that this is my child or your child does
not exist deciding what another person should do no matter what his age is outside the uquana
vocabulary of behaviors this happened to be an observation of a of a south american group called
the uquana there's great interest in what everyone does but no impulse to influence let alone coerce
anyone the child's will is his motive force so by the time we had the protestant resolution or even
before then will was the was the playground of the devil free will the will of the child had
to be suppressed but in hunter-gatherer cultures will was the governing influence of children
and here's another character here's another quote infants and young children are allowed to explore
their environment to the limits of their physical capacities and with minimal interference from
adults thus if a child picks up a hazardous object parents generally leave it to explore
the dangers on its own the child is presumed to know what it is doing so i've seen slides of
two-year-old hunter-gatherer children playing with fire playing with machetes
adults sitting in the background not paying any attention to this i asked one of the anthropologists
somebody who actually this was actually a cultural psychologist who happened to be in my own department
jilda morelle so why do they i'd also allow them to play with these dangerous things don't the kids
sometimes get hurt and she said yeah they do sometimes get hurt you know they cut themselves
they burn themselves practically everybody's got you know some scars from such a thing but they
don't they they can't kill themselves with this you know they're not going to kill themselves
they're not going to wound themselves in a permanent way and the and the adults understand
this is how the kids learn how to use things and why should they stop them so and and they're going
to be able to use these things much better if they practice with it while they're young so the hunter
gatherers seem to have this understanding on the other hand as she pointed out to me or actually
there was another this was another anthropologist pointed out to me the poison darts they're way
up high in a tree where no little kid could get to them poison darts could kill you poison darts
you don't want little kids playing with poison darts so these are not neglectful parents these
are these are not these are people who understand the difference between a real risk and the kind
of risk that's actually healthy for children to engage in something that we in our culture have
lost sight of to a large extent we are preventing children from playing in healthy risky ways and
sometimes especially here in the united states we're leaving loaded guns around on the other hand
which is the equivalent of leaving of of of of leaves leaving poison darts around
so that's the the second point is that children including teenagers have essentially unlimited
time to play and explore so one of the questions we asked in this survey is how much time did
children have for to play and the answer we got from every one of the ten anthropologists was
essentially all the time as one put from dawn to dusk from when they're four years old which is when
they're regarded as children and no longer or infants and they have common sense and don't need
to be watched all the time by adults on into their teenage years really all the way up until the
time when they're likely to begin having children themselves they are children and very little in
terms of work is expected of them nothing is required of them you don't require anything of
anybody if you're a hunter gather and so if children are allowed to be free what are they
going to do they're going to play they're not going to play all the time they're going to hang
out they're going to lie around in the hammock they're going to rest there and and they're going
to volunteer to help out sometimes because they like to help out this is one of the ways that
they learn they want to help out because they they they learn how to do things say by helping by
helping out in in various kinds of ways the third lesson was that in their play and exploration
they were practicing the skills that are important to their culture so one of the questions we asked
of the anthropologists in this survey was what did they play at what are the things you observed
them playing at and we made a list of what they observed them playing at and then we compared
that to the list of the kinds of skills that in that culture you would need to learn so if this
is a culture that uses dugout canoes it turns out the kids played a lot with dugout canoes if
in all of these cultures they built huts so it turns out the kids played a lot at building huts
in all of these cultures they cooked food the kids played at cooking food in some cultures the women
did the fishing in those cultures the girls played at fishing for quite a lot of time all of these
cultures have have art art of various sorts and music and dances of various sorts and the kids
played at the art and music and dances of their culture and in in all of these cultures the men
and at least one of the cultures we studied also the women hunt and it turns out in the cultures
where the men hunt the boys play endlessly at hunting in the manner that the men use in hunting
so if they hunt with bows and arrows the boys played endlessly with bows and arrows with little
bows and arrows they played a tracking game these are incredibly difficult skills to learn
and but nobody teaches them to the children the children learn them by playing at them
and they're playing in age mixed groups so the younger kids are constantly learning from the
older kids they're being scaffolded up to higher levels of performance by interacting with older
kids not so much with adults so that's the that's what I learned from hunter gatherer cultures
this is how children learn in hunter gatherer cultures as they become as they grow older
towards adulthood playful hunting becomes real hunting playful making of play huts becomes
real making of real huts playful use in building of dugout canoes becomes making a real dugout
canoes and uses of them and so on and so forth this is how education occurs in hunter gatherer
culture so now though I want to say something about about in our culture and I will be brief
here I've got references if you want to follow up but I've spent a fair amount of my research time
studying people who are not going to typical schools in our modern culture in the United States
I began years ago by studying the graduates of a remarkably alternative school called the Sudbury
Valley School this was a school that was founded in the nine in 1968 it's still going strong it's
over 50 years old it has by now hundreds and hundreds of graduates there are now quite a
number of Sudbury model schools throughout the world there are none in the UK because they're
not legal in the UK there are some in other countries in Europe however but they're always
struggling with the government to maintain their legality you have summer hill but Sudbury Valley
is more radical than summer hill as Sudbury Valley unlike summer hill is a is a day school
so the kids are living at home they go to school during the day pretty much during regular school
days what the school is is it's a place where children can play and explore to their heart's
content where there are lots of other kids in of all ages from age four on through the late
teenage years basically the same age range as you would find playing together in a hunter gatherer
culture it's a place where the adults don't call themselves teachers they're simply staff members
they are the adult members of the community in some sense they don't call themselves teachers
because they don't believe they do any more teaching than anybody else they are there to do
some of the administrative work that's involved in in running the school to provide models of what
it is to be an adult to provide some of the kind of mature some of the kinds of contributions to
the to the experience at the school that benefits from having more mature more experienced people
present they do not even offer courses this differentiates them from summer hill which
is required by the state to offer courses by the government to offer courses but in in
Sudbury Valley there are not courses offered the courses sometimes occur
if a group of kids get together and they say we would really like to have a course in this
and the course is defined but whatever by whatever it is that the kids are defining it as it lasts
only as long as the kids want it to go and they and one of the things is they can usually talk a
staff member into leading the course if they want a staff member to lead the course even teach it
if they want the staff member to teach something but only goes as long as the kids are interested
there's no testing involved and so on and so forth mostly if you were to go and visit this what you
would find is is kids of from age four on through high school age doing exactly what you would think
kids would be doing if they're free they're playing in all kinds of ways they're hanging out some of
them are reading but they're reading what they want to read by and large they're they're cooking in
the kitchen they're playing music they're rough housing outdoors the school has rules this is not
an anarchy and the rules are made democratically by all the children and the staff together so the
school is run by the school meeting which meets once a week operates by roberts rules of order
in a formal manner so all the rules of the school which are basically rules that any kind of community
has to have an order for people to get along with one another none of the rules have to do with
learning and in fact there's one of the rules is that you can't interfere with other people's
activities so if you were to if you were a staff member there and we're trying trying to make somebody
learn something trying to make them do something they didn't want to do you would be brought up
for interfering with with one of the school members activities so that's the way the school
operates there's all kinds of opportunity for learning there's lots of books there's lots of
there's there's computers there's woodworking equipment there's sporting equipment there's
a full fully equipped kitchen there's all sorts of opportunities for doing interesting things and
learning but nobody's required to do any of that stuff they do whatever it is they want to do so I
got interested in this school some years ago when my own son became a student there I described this
in my book free to learn and I was concerned what's going to happen to him in the long run I was
happy that he was happy there which he was not in the public school he had been terribly rebellious
and simply wasn't going to go to the public school he was happy there and I was happy that he was
happy but I was concerned about the long run so I decided to do a study of the graduates of the
school and already the school this was a long time ago already the school had about close to a
hundred graduates we were able to identify almost all of them and they and get all get the great
majority of them something like 81 percent if I remember right to respond to a lengthy questionnaire
about their experiences since graduating as well as their experiences at the school and I found out
that the graduates of this school including those who had never had any other schooling any place
else unless they went on to higher education the college afterwards were doing very well in life
they were well employed they were happy in life none of them had any regrets about having gone
to this unusual school I have since found some kids who some some young adults and older adults
who do have some regrets about it but they're a very small number but in that first study
of about 80 graduate actually it was about 70 of the graduates who were in that study
none of them regretted having gone to such an unusual school and they were most of them stated
that they were very glad that they had gone to such a school they felt their life was better
as adults because of it they felt they were more responsible for their life that they
were more likely to be in careers that they enjoyed because they had lots of opportunity
to explore various kinds of activities and develop plans for what they wanted to do in life
become good at what they wanted to do and become employed and what they really enjoyed in life
and so on and so forth so that was so that's the Sudbury Valley school and more since then I've
also along with a colleague Gina Morelli conducted some research on on grown home
schoolers who were homeschooled by the method called unschooling where again there's no curriculum
the parents simply support the child in the child's pursuit of their own interests and
we did a study of grown unschoolers and you can see the references there in the on the handout if
you're interested in following this up and found pretty much what I had found earlier in the study
of graduates of the Sudbury Valley school they were doing well in life they were glad they had
been unschooled there were three exceptions which I describe in that and that's in the in those papers
and those exceptions were people who were unschooled against their will
by highly fundamentally religious families who were basically protecting them from learning
rather than promoting their learning enabling their learning and quite understandably those
graduates were not happy with what had been called unschooling but I would argue
this was not really unschooling this was this was deprivation this was in some sense like
shutting your child into a closet so that's the that's the that's the evidence I have about
children in our modern culture or growing up without what we call schooling I want you to
note though that these are not what we would call dropouts these are people who've made a deliberate
decision I'm not going to go to school I'm going to take charge of my own education and I think
the children are biologically as I've said designed to do that and they will do that if we allow them
to do that and if we don't make it look like doing that means failure means that you have failed
you can't do regular school some of these kids by the way if they start off with self-directed
education they begin to feel like well maybe I can't do regular school so they'll go to regular
school for a while just to prove themselves that they can do it and then they go back to they say
yeah okay I can do that but I don't need it that's a pain and they go back to the self-education
procedure so so that's the that's the and there are there are at this point many many thousands
still a small number percentage wise but there are thousands and thousands of now adults in the
world in the United States who grew up without school with self-directed education who are doing
very very well as adults and who are very happy that they didn't go to school so now I want to
sort of to wrap this up very quickly in the bottom of the handout I've listed what I call
the optimal context for self-directed education what is the ideal environment this is the role of
adults the proper role of adults in children's education is to provide the environment in which
children can best educate themselves so I'm not going to elaborate on this you can ask me questions
about it if we when we go to the question and answer in in just a couple minutes but I'll just
list them here the social expectation and reality that education is children's responsibilities
as I've said over and over again already children come into the world believing it's their
responsibility to educate themselves that's why they do all this stuff to educate themselves
but we can talk them out of it if we keep telling them the way you become educated is to do what
we're telling you to do they sort of can give up that responsibility and just do what they're
you're they're told to do and that doesn't work so well so in a Sudbury school for example or in a
homeschooling by self-directed by by unschooling method the adults don't pretend that they're in
charge of the child's education they they they allow the child to go ahead with the assumption
the child is ahead as in charge of their education second is unlimited freedom to play
explore and pursue your own interests you need lots of free time you need time to dabble the
different things you need time to get immersed in something that's at least for some period of time
totally interesting to you absorbing all your time you want to spend you don't want to have it
be disrupted by a bell that says now you've got to go and do something else you might want to spend
hours or days immersed in this kind of playful activity that you're involved in or whatever
it is you're involved in you need time to get bored in between you get bored and boredom
kind of stirs the soul what do I really want to do and daydreaming is kind of when children become
philosophers I mean I remember as a child lying down in the you know being bored in a summer day
because we didn't have activities for kids and maybe my friends went around and I'd lie down on
the grass and look up at the clouds and I think I did some of my best philosophizing about what is
this universe I live in what is why is it I'm in here in this universe what does it even mean to
be here what is a human being these are the kinds of things I think children are natural philosophers
when they have time but they need to have time time to be born not always being busy doing stuff
we have the world in which we're constantly keeping children busy and they don't have time
to be philosophers as well as not having time to play in all the kinds of ways that they want to
play in and they can learn from they need the opportunity to play with the tools of the culture
I've said that they're attracted to the tools of the culture but those tools need to be available
to them the real tools not just pretend tools available to them they need to in our culture
to play with computers to play with cooking equipment and so on and so forth and they need
a variety of adults around who they can approach who they can observe to see what adults are like
not just one adult or two adults but a number of adults who are different from one another
and they and those adults should not be people who interfere or tell them what to do but rather
adults who are there to help if you ask for help they're there to provide comfort if you need
comfort and so on and so forth and then fifth I've listed free age mixing among the children
and adolescents Daniel Greenberg the late Daniel Greenberg who died just a month ago
who was the founder of the school the primary founder of the school
argued that a school like Sudbury Valley could not work if you segregated children by age and
the reason is because the children are constantly learning from one another and the younger children
are especially acquiring more sophisticated ideas and concepts by playing with the older
children and the older children are learning how to be leaders and nurturers by playing with the
younger children interacting with the younger children and then the sixth I've listed is immersion
in a stable moral caring community we're designed to grow up in a community not to grow up in an
isolated nuclear family so unschooling works I think well for families that are well connected
in a community with other families and the children have access to other people and they're
part of a part of a community I don't think it works so well when the children are isolated
it just within the family itself so that's I'm going to bring to a conclusion now I've talked
longer than I intended to I'm sorry about that but I wanted to get through the through the basic
argument why I believe we don't need schools I have left you can read on your own if you want
I've written blog posts about it and I can also if you're interested share a different handout about
why I believe that schools are going to become absolescent over time I think we're already
beginning on that trend but schools arose at a time when in some sense you had to go some place to
get access to information that's no longer true we've all got access to information at the touch
of our fingers we don't need to go to some building some specific place for information
and also there's a lot of other reasons the kinds of skills that are needed in today's world the
skills of taking charge of being an of an entrepreneur of being creative of thinking
out of the box of having social skills the kinds of things that can't be taken over by robots and
computers these are not the skills that are being taught in schools schools are suppressing those
skills but these are the kinds of skills that children are developing in self-directed education
and so I'm going to stop now and whatever time remains maybe officially only five minutes but
I'm willing to stay longer if others can stay longer for your thoughts and and and questions
great yeah I definitely have another say 30 minutes it's it's it's really up to you how long
you have I think yeah I could I could go as long as another 30 minutes if people and if anybody
wants to stay in that line yeah and since this is a virtual talk I'll give a virtual applause and
ask others to please join me to thank our speaker and then we've arrived at the the Q&A part of the
event and I've written some questions down and afterwards if anyone has a question please raise
your hand or put it in the chat I see quite a number of hands on the screen should we go by
just calling those hands I think they're all applauding at the moment I think oh that's what
it is okay I thought they were raised hands for questions yeah oh thank you yeah great
yeah so yeah if you have a question please please raise your hand or alternatively you can put
the question in the chat and I'll read it on your behalf and then I have I have a one or two opening
questions which is um so there's this thing which is kind of baffling to me now namely why why is
it that parents are such busy buddies why are they always concerned about what the child is up to and
like whether they're using computers or not for example like why why do they have this kind of
why why are those kinds of behaviors so suspect to parents yeah that's a that's a really good question
there's there's a number of aspects to your question but let me start with the issue of why
are they so concerned about them using computers at least a lot of the parents that I talk with I
tend to give talks about the value most of my talks are about the value of play and I tend to
emphasize outdoor play and what children are learning when they're playing outdoors see
I was I'm I'm old enough I grew up in the 1950s back in the day when all moms
pushed their kids out of the house get out of the house I don't want you around you know you're in
my way houses were smaller families were bigger you wanted your kids outdoors and there were a lot
of kids then I'm sort of on the leading edge of the baby boomers and so there are a lot of kids so
you'd go outdoors and there'd be lots of kids to play with and I've often said that I had a
hunter-gatherer education as well as school school was not nearly the big deal it is today there was
less time involved in school there was no homework in elementary school the school day
was shorter in many ways we had at least in the elementary school I went with we had two hours
outdoors playing during the school day half hour recess in the morning half hour in the afternoon
full hour at lunch in the six hour school day we were only indoors four hours this is nothing like
school is today in the United States so we weren't school was not the big deal we had much more time
outdoors to play and and so we had a much more what I would call normal childhood looking historically
cross-culturally except in times of childhood slavery or childhood when children were forced
labors except for those times throughout history and place children always had lots of time to
play with other children and I've argued that this is where children learn so when I make this case
what I so frequently learn here is that while the reason children aren't playing outdoors is
because of the seductive quality of the computer of screens in general so screens are keeping kids
indoors I don't think that's the primary reason I think that contributes and well it should in a
way so computers are extremely important but actually in my book free to learn I described
one study that was done quite some years ago and these were all the all the subjects in this study
were kids who had computers because it was a it was a survey done over the computer in which the
kids were asked right now if you had a choice between playing your favorite computer game or
doing whatever it is you most want to do on the computer or going out and playing in the park
with your friends which would you choose I don't remember the exact data but something like 85%
said I would prefer to go out and play with in the park with my friends but that's not possible
I'm not allowed out or my friends aren't allowed out so the computer becomes the saving grace
the only way I can play the only way I can interact with my friends is on the computer
thank god for the computer then right so we want to blame the computer rather than blame
ourselves for the fact that kids aren't outdoors playing so that's part of it and then it's also
the case whenever some new technology is developed this has been true since the time of Plato you
know whenever some new technology is developed the young the kids glom onto it and the older
generation is suspicious of it you know as soon as as soon as the written word was developed the
people said oh my god you know this is going to be the ruination of humanity nobody's going to have
to remember anything anymore and the mind is going to degenerate because people just write
stuff down instead of remembering when novels came out and this is quite literally true when
novels came out this was going to be the ruination of the next generation of people
young girls were going to be reading romance novels and the morals would go to hell you know
and so on and so forth every you know that I think Plato himself was against poetry poetry was
the young people were all becoming poets you know this is this is so the this so this is when
television first came out and I'm old enough to remember that oh there was great fear that these
microwaves in the air were going to destroy the brain emanating out of the television set you
know and you know of course because these things are so attractive we do it anyway and the kids
especially do it and then by the time you grow up with television you say well television is that
pretty normal but just computer thing social media and so on and so forth you could actually meet
people on it that's dangerous right or you're playing games on it that's seductive and so on and
so forth so and then and then you get people who comply you get people who do research and who
make reports that can fit with the public fancy I I because I this is my job I'm among other things
a textbook writer I spend my time surveying literature to see what's true and not true and
to make evaluations of the literature so it turns out some years ago the big issue was whether
computer games were cause would be causing violence and there were a lot of people who were
afraid that playing violent computer games would make kids violent and so therefore there's a lot
of tendency and so many of the games especially at that point were violent it was primarily boys
playing them and and and there were some people who did research that tended to support that but
when I looked at that research it's kind of designed to support it and it's not really showing any
real world violence being promoted so the way you do it the way these studies would be done
would be kind of like the following so you you bring people into the laboratory you have some
of them play a violent computer game and you have some of them play do something else and then you
test them on supposedly your measure of violence and maybe what that measure is is you tell them
okay so there's somebody in another room there and we're going to give them some pizza and you can
control how hot the hot sauce is on the pizza and it turns out those who give them a little bit
hotter hot sauce on the pizza that's the measure of violence that's the kind of study of how
promotes violence first of all note this is short term effect secondly note that there's a kind of
demand effect here that one of the things social scientists should all know is subjects try to
kind of please you and their experiment and if they just played a violent video game and they
suspect that I'm supposed to be a little bit violent here and they also know this is not really
going to hurt anybody a little bit hotter hot sauce on the pizza and it's not even even given all that
is not a very big effect the only studies that have been done of real world violence and there
have been some very well controlled studies show no effect at all kids who play violent video games
are no more likely to be violent in the real world than kids who never play such games and in
fact there's one study at least that shows the kids who don't play video games at all are more
likely to be violent than kids who do play video games and the reason for that I think is because
people who tend to be violent tend not to play they tend not to play anything and I also often
remind people that you know when I was a kid and perhaps when I'm talking to older people when
you were a kid we played cops and robbers I killed lots of cops you know I didn't grow up to be a
cop killer we've had violent movies we've had violent television for a long time there have been
countless studies trying to prove that watching violent movies or violent television promotes
violence none of them every panel turns out kids are very good at knowing the difference between
pretend violence and real violence and they don't become either a nerd to real violence or promote
or inclined to engage in real violence because well I've also done you know I've elaborated on
that but I've also looked at what's this issue about addiction you know we overuse the word
addiction what does it really mean to be addicted to computer games you know the the WHO has a
questionnaire for determining if you're addicted to computer games I took that questionnaire
pretending that I was my 10-year-old self when I was really into fishing turns out I was addicted
to fishing when I was 10 years old I answered the questions honestly as I would have when I was 10
years old including things like do you ever lie and say you didn't go fishing when you did yeah
there were times I skipped school to go fishing right do you dream about fishing yeah I dream
about fishing do you do you need to increase the dose in other words go to big yeah I need to get
bigger and bigger fish you know this is all the signs of addiction right you know so you know
I I take this with a grain of salt and more recently the whole issue is with social media
there's this claim that the kid if you're on social media more you're more likely to be anxious
Atlantic magazine had a big issue and a big article written by on how a new generation is
being lost to social media how it's destroying it I looked at the research done by the author of
that article do you know how much of the variance was accounted for in in this was only in girls
even the author said it was only girls boys were not there was no relationship between social media
and anxiety level for boys there was for girls but in that study by that author who's making these
big claims about it one third of one percent of the variance in anxiety level was accounted for by
social media being on social media one third of one percent this is it was statistically
significant because it was based on a database of thousands and thousands of people somebody
else reanalyzed the data and said there's a bigger relationship between eating potatoes and and anxiety
than there is between social media and anxiety but there we don't happen to have any campaign against
potatoes right now so nobody's picking up on that one so we are a world that is has decided to demonize
screens and social media we're trying to blame we're trying we're trying to we are a world in
which we recognize that our children are suffering our children are suffering they're suffering from
anxiety depression the suicide rate is higher than it's ever been before for we want to find some
explanation of for that the real explanation is school which has become more and more oppressive
more and more anxiety provoking and our prevention of children from just going out and playing we're
constantly putting them into situations where being directed and controlled by adults where
they're constantly being measured and evaluated compared to other people you know something you
take play real play away from children and they become depressed you put children into situations
where they're constantly being measured compared evaluated and you tell them that somehow their
success in life depends upon good evaluations in these situations and they are going to be anxious
should we be surprised by that should we have to look for all these extra explanations of it
we simply can't admit that this school system which has gone berserk in terms of its utilization
of children's time in terms of the testing that's being done in terms of the pressure that's being
put on and our craziness in the us and in the uk not so much in finland by the way our craziness
in believing that it's dangerous for kids to be outdoors playing with other kids without being
watched and guarded all the time these are the things that i'm absolutely convinced are the
cause of the damage to our children here thanks very much this is a very interesting answer
um i have another question but i see vek has raised his hand and vek i think is a very
interesting person and i would love uh for him to to ask away go ahead thank you sam
thank you peter so much for your talk um i just want to say that i uh i've been a big
fan of yours for a long time um i teach non-coercive parenting and so in all of my spaces your
quotes are like everywhere so actually getting to to be in the space with you is a um is a great
joy for me and i felt constant bursts of joy and screaming out loud um in affirmation with
so many of the things that you were saying so i really appreciate you sharing this mindset
years before i came along you were sharing this mindset and i'm really grateful for the big
effect that you've had on the mindset of people i uh please go ahead oh i thought you were going
to say something so i'm just uh expressing my gratitude for what you're saying yeah um and
you know i uh i want to add one thing to what you said about what damages kids is also the
coercive punishment and reward parenting model that's so pervasive i think that is it adds to
the torture of kids from school then they go home and they have that whole experience at home
and i myself that's what i do is i actually work with hundreds of families helping them shift from
the coercive model to the collaborative model and um yesterday i had the play the timing of this
talk is also amazing for me because yesterday i had the honor to speak at and participate in the
conference by the alliance for self-directed education and i got to be on their social
justice panel yesterday because i also think that everything that you've talked about is also about
liberating children's rights as human beings too from the way that we commonly think is just okay
to treat them and so after all that preamble my question to you is because so much of what i do
is thinking about how to help people encourage people to change their mindset about the dehumanizing
way they see children to a more humanizing way where like you were talking about kids learning
from the older children i always think of myself as an older child when i'm around kids and they
just love me for it right like there's no separation at that moment there's no adult in the room and
but that's like a huge leap for people so when you you've been doing this for a long time in
your experience what helps people or what do you think can help people and maybe even the broader
mindset to shift from that old mindset to this more liberated mindset
yeah i wish i i wish i really knew the answer to that classroom um i think that there are some
things that i i can give some tell you about some things that i do that i think are helpful
so one is when i'm talking with parents and i'm trying to shift the mindset one of the things i do
which is especially helpful with those somewhat older parents is to ask them to think about their
own childhood and sometimes i'll ask them even before i talk to to write down and then share
with one another their fondest mem their fondest childhood memory some memory you had from when
you were younger than 10 years old uh that kind of stands out to you as a peak experience of childhood
as something that was just really really was enlightening in some way i you know i i'll sometimes
say if you're a religious person you might think of this as when you sort of made contact with god
or if you're a humanist you might say this was what the humanistic psychologists would call a
peak experience and and um and so i'll have them write this down and then and then i'll ask him so
for how many of you um was there an adult in the picture and almost for nobody was there an adult
in the picture right right they were either alone most often alone or with they were with other
children and then this will kind of lead to some discussion and they will also in this process
recognize well you know when i was eight and had this experience i really was kind of a
philosopher i was really thinking things through i wasn't i wasn't actually more stupid than the
adults in fact i thought the adults were kind of stupid right right you know and so you kind of
you kind of get over this idea that children are a whole different category of thing once you
think about your own childhood it's not quite so effective when i'm speaking to younger parents
because younger parents these days sadly grew up in a world where they didn't have much opportunity
to play they were almost never alone away from adult surveillance right so i really worry about
the fact when we don't you know we're already at the point you have to kind of rely on grandparents
to remember that children were once free you know i've talked to young parents you know and i've
pointed out things like you know the comic strip peanuts well you know that was once true
kids out there interacting with one another doing all these adventures no adults around
that actually was true right and i've had parents say oh no you know you know in comic strips
animals can talk children can be outdoors all these crazy things can happen in comics they
don't recognize that when shalt started that comic strip he was writing about real children
in the real world so the so okay so another thing that i think is helpful this is kind of
one thing i want to say is we have a tendency to blame parents i don't want to blame parents
right parents are getting messages constantly from the rest of the world saying that your job is a
parent is to make your child go through all these hoops right your job is a parent it used to be
that school happened at school and home was home parents weren't involved with school now parents
are drawn into the picture of school all the time they're constantly you're they get notes sent home
that their child is falling behind what are you going to do about it they have to monitor homework
they have to sign it used to be the parents signed off on report cards my own mom refused to actually
even look at the report card she just said really your business i'll sign it my mom was a bit of
extreme but i think that was kind of the attitude of most parents in the 1950s they didn't care that
much about reporting there were some who did i'm sure there were some was maybe partly the social
class i was in we were in a working class we were working class family that didn't care that much
about school not much expectation of going to college and so on and so forth so that was uh
so so uh so so parents are kind of always getting this message you're being a neglectful parent
if you don't watch your child all the time i hear from parents who say you know i i i allow my child
to walk up the slide in the playground you know and then some other mom will stop my child from
doing it or come over to me and scold me for allowing my child to set this bad example for
their child so we're living in a world where there's constant pressures on parents from teachers
from other parents from the world in general from our politicians from we've come to believe
we've come to kind of believe that our children are going to be life failures if they don't get
into some fancy college and they're not going to get into some fancy college if they don't take all
the honors courses and get all A's in them and so on and so on so we've got to change that mindset
i try to change the mindset in part by getting the facts out as much as i can it turns out that
there's no relationship between success in life and what college you go to even by financial success
in life if you control for other factors like how wealthy were your parents to begin with yeah
the other thing that i'm doing is working with schools to bring and this i think fits with what
you just described through the let grow organization that Lenore Scanesi is the president of and that
i was one of the founding members of of this nonprofit we're working with schools this has
been disrupted by covid but before covid there were probably a hundred schools or so involved
we were working with where we were bringing free play into the school setting and the school's
called it play club and what play club is is an hour most schools were just doing it for one hour
a week which is really not enough play but it's enough to give a taste of play one hour a week
of age mixed free play involving the whole school all the kids in school playing together
and using ideally the whole school as the playground the outdoor playground the gymnasium
the hallways the art room if there's a swimming pool at all everything in you know everything
that could potentially be a play area becomes available for play and there's all kinds of
different ways of playing and you've got five-year-olds on through eleven-year-olds all playing
together if it's an elementary school and the teachers who monitor are instructed
to not intervene unless absolutely necessary that the way i would explain it to the
superintendents and to the principals of the school and they and turn to the teachers
is during play club you're not a teacher you're like a lifeguard on an ocean beach you're there
to save a life you're not there to tell people how to play better you're not there to solve little
quarrels you're not there to cheer somebody up who looks sad you're not there to worry about a
skin knee none of that you're just there if you really think somebody's life is in danger or maybe
if they're going to destroy something really expensive you're there to intervene then but only
that it turns out and i also even said you know and even if you feel you have to intervene unless
it's unless it's a dire emergency go up to ten first and see if you still have to intervene
and what has happened there and this i think fits with what you're describing
is the teachers who have observed have discovered that they don't need to intervene
they've discovered that the kids are way more competent than they believed they were they can
get into a quarrel and they can solve the quarrel they can they can get into a play fight and it
doesn't become a real fight they can hurt themselves and and take care of one another
they can and and they they and the and that alone that kid who looks lonely you figure it out or
somebody else will come over i was i was once there was one time when i was observing Lenore
skanesi and i were both there because the public television news program was doing a little news
segment on it and they were filming and while we were watching in play club i pointed to the
camera said to the camera notice that little boy over there little boy is probably a five-year-old
looks really sad he looks almost like he's going to cry he's standing there everybody else is having
fun he's standing there by himself looking really sad and i said i hope no teacher goes to him
and as we watched an older girl and i don't think this was uh this was a sister i think this was
because she was if it was it was an adoptive somebody of a different color came over and started
chasing this little boy and within seconds they were both giggling and laughing and having the
greatest time now what one of more valuable experience that was for that little boy and
for the older girl the little boy learned i don't need a teacher to rescue rescue me this
amazing girl wanted to play with me and what did the girl learn i can cheer up a little kid and i
can have fun doing it that lesson is so much more important and that lesson kind of lesson what i've
learned because there have been interviews now of teachers is not lost on the teachers
they begin to realize that the kids are way more competent than that than that they don't need to do
all of these kinds of things you can allow and so if teachers can get the sense that we can
respect kids more we can trust kids more than we are that can help convey to parents they can
help convey this message to parents too there's one other thing that we're doing through let grow
and i know i'm taking a little time on this but i think this is useful is uh what we call the the
let grow uh assignment and this is uh lanor's invention play club was my invention lanor's
invention was this which is which is done even in more schools than play club and this is an assignment
that the teachers give to the children in their class to once a week at home or out of home do
something that's a little bit scary that you've never done before that you're doing yourself
without your parent and you have to negotiate it with your parent where the school can't be
in the business of telling them to defy their parent you have to negotiate you have to figure
out something that your parent will allow you to do but and which is a little bit frightening even
to you ideally but something you think you can do and you want to do and so maybe it's maybe it's an
eight-year-old girl or nine-year-old girl who says i want to ride my bicycle all by myself to my
friend's house two blocks away it was not being allowed to do that right now in this world so she
talks with her parents this is what i have to do something you know this is school so the parents
have to take it seriously right so i have to do this assignment and here's what i'd like to do i'd
like to ride my bicycle with my friend's house and the parent says oh no oh no i can't let you do that
that's too dangerous um and so then then the negotiation occurs well how about if i just ride
down to the end of the block and back and the first time you can watch me from the doorstep
and so the parent agrees that all right that's all right and so the child does that and reports on
that and then the next week the child says okay so i did that last week how about this time i do
that and you don't watch me so now okay so now the parent has been convinced okay the child can
ride back and i'll also do that you know by the third week the child is riding her bike to the
friend's house and not only is the child proud i did this thing that's a little bit scary but the
mom is proud the mom is proud number one that the child did this thing and survived it right and
number two that i the mom was brave enough to allow my child to do this and so it breaks into
this cycle it's a way to change it from instead of this continuous downward cycle of ever more
constraint on the child breaking into it ever less constraint on the child as the child's allowed
and believe it or not for some of these things i mean it's for for those of us who grew up decades
ago it's amazing what some of the restrictions are on children there are children who are nine
years old who are not allowed to cut their own meat for fear they will cut themselves right
as if this would be some terrible disaster if they cut their finger you know that so they're
we are putting incredible constraints so some of the children says i want to be able to cut my
own meat they'll negotiate with their parent about that they're an amazing number of children who
want to be able to cook what parent would not want your child to cook one thing we discovered by
the way is that the the lockdown during the early stages of the pandemic was actually valuable in
the sense that kids were home with nothing to do and parents couldn't amuse their kids all the time
and the parents realized the kids were developing all kinds of interests
and also one of the interests we did a study through the let grow we did a big survey and we
found that at least during the early months of the pandemic anxiety actually went down
for kids eight to thirteen less than it was when they were in school and uh they were doing more
things that they wanted to do like they had unintentional unintentional on schooling unintentional
on schooling and uh even those who had distant schooling were saying i could do the whole all
my schoolwork in two hours i've got the rest of the day to do what i want and they were figuring
out things they like to do and a lot of them interesting lake from our study wanted to cook
and the parents were allowing first they were sort of teaching them how and then they were allowing
some kids to cook the meals for the dinner and the kids were so proud of that so um so even
there were also by the way in the united states bicycles sold out during the pandemic this was
one of the things you could do social distancing i'm a bicyclist and i have seen over the recent
decades an incredible drop in the number of kids you ever see out on bicycles to the point that's
almost in the u.s almost nobody especially in the suburban areas where i have lived and cycled
you just would never see kids out on bicycles during the pandemic i began to see a lot of kids
out on bicycles so things would think so so this kind of a thing a break in our kind of
ongoing typical existence was creating the conditions where kids were doing new things
so those are at least some thoughts about what what can happen to
you know to have parents change their minds about kids abilities and respecting kids desires
to do things themselves it makes me wonder do you think that the it sounds like children live
in a world that's more formal than it used to be do you think that's true for adults as well do you
think that i don't think it's true for adults i think that it's true i think that what we have
done i mean basically the way i usually say it is we've taken childhood away from children
we are a more adult-centric world than we've ever been before
and less a child-centered world we are we even want our children to become adults very quickly
in the in the sense of doing what seems like us to be adult work which is school work
at the same time we've taken away the kind of real jobs that kids used to have like paper roots
mowing lawns all these kinds of things at least in the u.s babysitting we're not allowing kids to
do those kinds of things that we used to allow things to do but we are so concerned about their
adult lives and we have come to believe that to live adult reasonable adult lives they have to
get high grades in school and do all this school work which is all very sedentary activity which
adults are more capable of than children children are not designed for sedentary activity we aren't
designed for as much of it as we have but um but one way that i one way i deal with this adult
thing is is that is that i ask i describe what school is like and then i said if you as an adult
would you ever accept a job that's like this a job where you are told every minute what it is
you have to do where you're micromanaged to that extent where you're evaluated every day you're
compared to the to your work mates every day about who's doing better and who's doing worse
where you have to ask to go to the bathroom where if you consult with one of your colleagues
about how to do something that's cheating right would you ever accept a job like that
how much would you need to get paid to do a job like that nobody would take a job like that
you know nobody but i've one of the things i've done in some schools where i tried to get
teachers to understand what children are going through is have through the prince to the superintendent
or the principal who would be behind this have your teachers spend a day shadowing a student
go from do what the student has to do for one day and then think about it you know would you
want to do another day like that it is so boring you are so looking at the clock it is so you are
so restless that um so i also and i also think you know oftentimes i want to because i talk about
play a lot play is my thing and i'm interested in children's play i'm often asked well what about
adult play aren't adults deprived of play and i actually don't think adults are deprived of play
as much as children are first of all children need to play and most mammals it's only the young who
play adults are doing real things and um and they don't need to play they've learned it already right
and there's left the drive to play decreases but at the same time adults human human adults do
continue to play because we do continue to learn throughout our lives and we are capable of play
and we continue to have a playful spirit but the truth of the matter is many adults in their
workplaces are playing free to play much more in the context of their work than children are at school
and and we talk about you know you know back at the sort of turn of the beginning of the
20th century by that time we had um in most of the western world certainly in the you
certainly in in the united states and in the uk we had banned full-time child labor because we
came to the belief that children shouldn't have to work all day long and um that they needed time
for play and be with their families and to rest and recreation and so on and so forth
but we now have school which is essentially a full-time job for children there are many children
who are spending more time if you count up school and school work and school like activities
outside of school they're spending more hours a week at school and school like work than their
parents are spending at a 40 hour a week job and there are many children who would prefer to work
in a factory than to be doing this sedentary kind of work now i'm not in favor of factory full-time
work for children i'm just saying the irony of the fact that we believed we were freeing
children up from work and now we filled all their time up with work uh in the form of what we call
school great and i see um we've run over the time that we said we would take again i am uh willing
to keep going ahead if you still have time but i can imagine we're kind of getting to the limit
i could go off for a few more minutes at least yeah then uh we can do one final question in that
case all right let's do that um and now i'm not sure i think the chat probably knows better than i
do who was first adam or danie or denny was denny was okay in that case denny please go ahead i
suspect adam actually has a kid so i'm quite prepared to use this question if you might
forgive him um i guess i'll have to use then um well i already said denny so i kind of i will
i will keep that okay i'll just try and keep it brief then and maybe if um if there's time i was
just interested in something you said in passing at the end of your talk where you thought that it's
i think i remember the exact way you put it you made some remark about how you think school is
becoming less popular or maybe not less popular but i can't remember the exact phrase you used i
think you made some remark that basically said this i think that you're saying you you think
that the tide is changing you think people are becoming more aware of this i wonder if maybe
i got you right and if you could could you elaborate oh yeah that's a good question so i said that i
think that there is some movement away from school it's it's not the mainstream movement but it
but here's the things that i think in the united states there's been a continuous or the last
a few decades increase in homeschooling so more and more families are taking their
children out of school for homeschooling initially in the united states most homeschoolers were doing
it for religious reasons and that's no longer true more and more people are doing it to protect
their children from what was happening in school from the harm that was occurring in school from
the unhappiness that was created in school from the uh from the fact that they could see their
children were coming home depressed and anxious and angry and so on and so forth in increased
numbers of homeschoolers during the pandemic not surprisingly there's been a huge jump in homeschooling
so prior to the pandemic a gallop poll in the united states showed that five percent of american
children were being homeschooled rather than going to public going to school that jumped to 10
percent shortly after i've recently read that it may now be up to 15 percent that's a less reliable
number this is incidentally especially happening among black families so uh the rate of homeschooling
has quadrupled among black families during this period many of whom have discovered that their
children especially are doing better outside of school than they were in school and it's also
being tied to a variety of sort of black liberation movements that were triggered by the police
violence against blacks and the publication of that so the rate of homeschooling among black
families is actually greater now much quite a bit greater than among white families so uh others
and so some of these families were initially homeschooling just because of covid didn't want
to send their children to school with the risk of disease and were really frustrated with the
online learning from school and so they believed they were homeschooling just temporarily but i
hear from a lot of them saying you know this is working out pretty well we're probably going to
stay with this even if the coronavirus disappears so that's happening another thing that's happening
is that the actual rate of application to colleges is declining this is particularly true for men
for one reason or another and it may be in part because there's a realization that there are more
and more men's jobs stereotypically men's jobs that are doing very well that don't require college
so you look around at least here in the united states and you see that electricians and plumbers
and carpenters uh and so on are doing very well they're making very good pay and uh you don't need
a college education to do that they tend to be stereotypically male jobs although there's more
and more women going into them so that's happening at the same time i and i recently wrote a blog
post on this actually i wrote it a while ago a blog post on this there are more and more companies
that used to require a college degree of new employees who are no longer requiring a college
degree and the reason for this is because they've discovered that the college degree doesn't seem
to mean anything that the the college is not preparing them to be any better at the job than
than they would have been without college and so they're discovering that if i hire somebody
right out of high school who's expressed interest in this and has some passion for it and has some
self-directed learning about it i'm better off than hiring some college graduate who is
and i don't have to pay him as much to begin with at least i'm better off doing that than
hiring a college graduate so i've heard from a number in some cases from private discussion
but there's also been some published articles on this uh if you look at my facebook page you'll
see that i've recycled pretty recently one of my blog posts about the inverse correlation between
grade point average in college and innovative orientation so companies that are looking for
innovators are realizing that grade point average is not a measure and in fact it may
an inverse measure of how good this this young person is going to be at innovation and you need
people who can innovate you need people who can think out of the box you need people who can
solve problems that haven't been solved yet you don't need people who can give answers to questions
that have already been answered stand grade point average is about that giving answers to questions
that have already been answered and the kind of people who are innovators are not very interested
in answering questions that have already been answered and they may not therefore do so well
on tests there's more and more recognition of that at the employee employer's lever
still one more thing that i could that's been documented the u.s labor department the official
listing of apprenticeships companies that are offering apprenticeships as a route into
employment have uh have doubled in the past five years so there's an increase and those are just
the official apprenticeships or many other non-official apprenticeships so this is a route
into many kinds of technical jobs many kinds of jobs that entail high skill uh so you can do
so instead of paying a you know a bucket of money to to go to college for training you can get paid
as an apprentice in order to learn the skills that you need for the kind of job that you've
decided on so i see these as hopeful signs as signs that we are beginning to move away i also
think especially in the united states that we've priced college out of we've priced a lot of people
out of the college market college is now so expensive the rates of tuition and fees and so on
have risen so much faster than inflation that um that uh you could still go to college if you're
very rich and you can go to colleges if you're very poor and can get in because of high marks and
so on and therefore gets uh scholarship uh support but people who are kind of in that middle
are having more and more difficulty uh dealing with the fact they have to take out enormous loans
be indebted for long periods of time after on those loans and um and so that's having a
an effect on on the rates of college admissions so i think that i think that things are changing i
think that they're changing gradually i'm looking for a world where um you know there's kind of three
phases to education the first phase is sort of like Sudbury schooling it's a time to learn who you
are or what you're interested in to explore the world and your ways get to know how to deal with
people get comfortable in your own skin figure out what you might want to do in life and then the
second phase is try out what you might want to do in life some kind of an apprenticeship some kind
of a so if you want to be a doctor don't go to the next step should not be college it should be
working in a hospital as an orderly or doing something that gets you in contact with sick people
and you can see what doctors really do and learn do i actually really want to be a doctor
could i stand being around sick people can i could do i want the kind of life that i see
that doctors have and if you do decide yeah that's true then the next stage would be medical school
not college the four years of college you don't learn anything about being a doctor so you'd
apply to medical school on the basis of recommendations you would get from the doctors and nurses you've
worked with but also the medical school might say well we've you know we've got good recommendations
you'd have good bedside manner all that kind of stuff you've got the personality for it
but we need to know you've got the intellectual capacities for it so we're going to require
that you take a course in organic chemistry and and cell biology before you come because we want
that as a background so maybe then there'd be community college offer those kind of courses
right you're not doing a whole four-year college is you're just taking those courses the medical
school wants you to take take those courses you get into medical school and then you go on to become
a doctor same thing so those are the three phases the first of sort of self-discovery the second of
apprenticeship the third of professional training for those kinds of careers that require professional
training where we you know I don't want the surgeon to be practicing on me I want to make sure that
they've had the top-notch training that they've been tested yeah that they know all the latest
procedures and all the dangers and so on that they've passed their boards and so on I also want
the electrician who works on the wiring in my house to have passed all that kind of stuff for
electrician school but I don't care a whit if they've done four-year college they haven't learned
anything in four-year college that would be relevant to that so that's so that's my vision of education
in the future very nice no you have been very generous with your time so I think I do have to
go because I've actually got another meeting I have to have to move on to so it's been a pleasure
to talk with all of you thank you Dr. Gray yeah thanks so much bye bye yeah indeed I'll give
another virtual applause and also thank you to everyone for joining and uh yeah see you in the
next event bye bye
you
