Hey guys, welcome to my channel. So in this video, I'm going to talk about file managers
because I hate file managers, and I'm not talking about GUI file managers like Nautilus
Tunaar, I'm talking about CLI file managers like Ranger, LF, because these things makes
you slow and many people use these file managers even though they know how to use terminal. And
this is not something you should do. So in this video, let's just break this myth and see why
using raw terminal commands like CD, LS find is way faster than using any
ranger like application. Alright, so let's just open terminal. I installed ranger for this video.
So open ranger and go to my music songs. And suppose I just want to go birdie and then this
album beautiful lies. So it took me a bit amount of time, but I believe that it's faster than
using any GUI file manager, you can search and all these kind of stuff. But let's try doing this
with terminal my way. So I have this command fcd beautiful lies enter and boom, I'm in that directory.
Now some of you might say that you use your weird fcd command and not just raw change directory,
which means CD. Well, let me show this by just using CD. I think it's still faster than using
any ranger or anything like that. So yeah, it took same amount of time as it took in ranger.
I don't understand the concept of using ranger over pure Unix commands like LS and CD. I mean,
you can do literally anything, whatever you want to know, you can know about your files and you
can navigate faster, whatever, whatever you ask, I can do this with terminal without any worry.
Suppose you just want to open some songs. So I have this allies open. And if I press enter,
let's just search for a Taylor Swift song. So bad blood. And it's way faster than using
it's way faster than using any, you know, file manager. Now you might say, for me, it's faster
because I'm using this commands fcd and open. But let me tell you one truth. I never used
any of these command. I usually just go like this. Seriously, this is my normal way of going
anywhere. Now there are some people who might say that okay, but with terminal, how you're going to
see thumbnails and these kind of stuff for images, well, I can use a six IB for that. And I have some
commands bind. So suppose I just want to delete some wallpaper or any image in real time, I can
just press control x t and it will delete my image. And I will make a video where you can select
from a six IB and, you know, do some more stuff from it. I think it's pretty useful if you want
to see the image while doing some kind of operation like copying or removing. So it's not ready yet,
but I will show you there are a few more things which some of you might say that if you want to
like select some stuff, for example, let's go to my 10 folder. So I have some bunch of, you know,
garbage files here. And if I want to just select and delete some particular files, what I can do
is I can just write RM and then type whatever I want to delete. I think this is this is pretty
normal way of doing things. I don't understand why people use Ranger or anything like that instead
of just doing this. But okay, fine, if you are not into this, what you can do is you can use FZF
because FZF give you this minus M feature, which lets you select some files. So if I just want to
delete some things, so grab txt, suppose e papers it and when you press enter, it's going to list
all these files. So now I can make a variable out of this. And I can do RM minus RF. And
let's do file PDF, file PPTX and some more stuff add dot txt address dot txt, press enter. And if I
do LS again, so there is no instance of add dot txt. So the file is deleted now. So this is, I guess
more better than using any file manager. So now some of you might say that but how I'm going to
copy and move files by using just terminal commands because when you use CP, you don't see any progress
bar and it's important to, you know, get any progress bar and you get this in Ranger. So
you can use rsync for that. And I use rsync if you just want to copy some small files, you can
use CP if you want to copy some larger files use rsync. So let me just demonstrate you,
make a new directory, go to my temp folder, LS rsync, I should copy some bigger, bigger,
bigger files. So go to my widths folder, and try to copy this, this revolution OS
documentary. So rsync minus minus progress minus AUV revolution OS into my new. So it's going to
show me the progress. So as you can see, it's 66% done and it's done. Now go to my new LS and
here's the movie, I mean documentary, whatever. Now there are a few more things which I use to
do things quickly. For example, I have this get path allies which allow me to get any path. Suppose
if I want to get part of some file, it's going to put that file path in my clipboard. And now I can
do whatever I want. Suppose I just want to delete it, I can delete it, I can use any operation.
So let's just delete it. Now let me just show you that how these commands like fcd open works,
because you know, it's an injustice, I showed you all the cool things and not tell you the secret.
So it's pretty simple, just use fine command with type t, it's going to list out all the
directories and just pipe it into fuzzy finders. So suppose wall enter, and it's going to output
the thing. And what I can do now is I can just make a variable and do cd. So if I press enter now
and do something like wall and press enter, so here I am in the wall. So that's simple. Let me
show you my CSH RC. I think I have to first go to CSH RC. Okay, so this is fcd, it's in function
and not an allies, it's better if you make a function, allies won't work. Also, here online
16, you can see xdg open. So this is doing the same thing, but instead of CD, I'm using xdg
open to open also here instead of D, I'm using F because in fine command, when you use F,
it's going to show all the files and not the directories. Also here, I have this get path.
I think it's better if I just show you. Okay, so first time using find with type F, so it's going
to list all the files and then putting it in fcf. So if I want something, I'm going to get the thing.
After this, I am piping this into said because I want to remove this dot slash before path,
it doesn't look good. So how I'm going to do this is pretty simple from starting remove two
characters. And that's it. This simple set command will do the magic. So alright, so I'm not getting
any dot slash in front of my path. There is one more problem here that it's giving me the next
line. So if I do X clip minus select C and press enter like wall enter, it's not going to output
anything. But if I paste this, it's going to put my curse in the next line, which doesn't look very
nice. So for this, what I can do is so I can use TR minus D for delete. And then next line, it's going
to delete all the next line. Let me show you so wall enter. So here I'm getting this percentage
symbol, which means that there is no next line. It's just my ZSH who is putting this next line
forcefully. I think that's it. That's the command X clip minus selection will put the thing in the
clipboard. And now if I paste this, it's not going to give me any next line. I can use RM, CP,
anything whatever I want to use. So I think the message is pretty clear that terminal is way
faster than using any TUI based file manager because you can do stuff so quickly. And it makes
you smart because the reason is that you do things while figuring out you do things in real
time. It's not you have to put your brain while using your computer and with time it will make
you better with computers. So please give this a try spend one week by just using terminal and
not anything else. I mean, yeah, you use Ranger in your terminal, but that's not the point. The
thing is that just use your commands instead of using any Ranger like bloated software. By the
way, this is my old laptop.
