Narratives are things that we use to see reality.
So sometimes narratives get reality right.
Sometimes narratives are wildly on the basis.
Yeah, that's in keeping with this idea of competition.
That's okay, that's for sure.
But rather than seeing the narrative as a screen or as an obstacle or an intermediary,
it itself is a tool.
It's a state that our psychological conscious apparatus is in.
That's if we get it right, but if we mess it up, then it does become
something that we try to see reality through and we're in a problematic situation.
Today, I had the privilege of sitting down with Dr. Stephen Hicks, who's a philosopher
with a stellar academic career, a very good author.
And we talked about, well, we talked about his contributions to Peterson Academy first.
He's taught five courses at this new online university that some of you may be aware of.
And the rest of you should be, as far as I'm concerned.
He's taught five courses there and we just detailed out the structure of the courses.
And more importantly and more broadly, I would say describe the rationale for studying philosophy
because he's a professional philosopher as an academic.
And so we discussed, well, the importance of a philosophical education.
We discussed the nature of the philosophical endeavor over the last three or four hundred years
as it shifted from modernism to postmodernism to whatever is dawning in this new age that's
emerging. And that constituted the bulk of our conversation.
And so if you're interested in that and you should be, and if you're not, you should ask yourself,
why then, join us.
If the answer is no, it's because you're unconsciously under the sway of some
skeptical philosopher and maybe you shouldn't be.
So join us anyways for that discussion.
So Dr. Hicks, it's good to see you again.
A pleasure.
Yeah, thank you for coming into Scottsdale today.
Yeah, much appreciated.
So I thought we would start by talking practically a bit about you've lectured,
you've done two lectures for Peterson Academy.
I've done five, two are out.
Okay, two are out, you've done five, excellent.
Okay, so run through that a bit, tell people what you're teaching and what the experience
was like and how you understand the mission of this new enterprise.
Why you got involved, all of that if you would.
Right. Well, I'm a philosopher by training.
So my intellectual interest is in what the next generation of good philosophy teaching
is going to look like.
And we got technological revolutions that we are in the Gage.
And education has been very traditional and backward-minded for many centuries.
So in one sense, we are living in an exciting time for what can be done with the new technologies.
And obviously Peterson Academy is highly entrepreneurial.
So I've done many years of in-class teaching, many years of lecturing.
I had at my university a center for ethics and entrepreneurship where we did a lot of
experimenting with new technologies as things came on asking what can be done.
Because in many cases, people can learn very well without the presence of a professor
physically or and so forth.
So what I'm interested in though primarily though is the courses that I have taught over
the course of many years, having them in a vehicle that's obviously going to be accessible to more
people, but also in with better production values and in a way that can't in some cases
be done even in a good in-person classroom.
In philosophy, everything is controversial.
A big part of education in life is philosophical education.
How many beliefs do I have in my mind?
How did they get into my mind in the first place?
Where did they come from?
What's good for you?
What do you like?
What are your values?
What do you want your life to be?
Philosophy has a reputation for just being abstract.
Philosophers love their abstractions, their general principles.
What we want is to be much more careful, but what happens in politics, economics, business,
family, religion is because of philosophical ideas.
John Locke, Francis Bacon, Renee Descartes, Karl Marx, Friedrich Nietzsche,
they were the great geniuses of philosophy who made the modern world.
We're philosophers, for goodness sake.
What is philosophy all about?
It's about a quest for coming to know true reality.
Now, my areas of expertise have been modern philosophy and post-modern philosophy.
When philosophers and historians, we talk about the modern era.
Essentially, we mean the last 500 years, which has been extraordinarily revolutionary,
not only in philosophy, but in how we do religion, how we do science, how we treat women,
getting rid of slavery, industrial, all of that stuff.
It's been amazing and philosophy has its fingers in all of those pies and is part of it.
So partly what I'm interested in is the giant names in philosophy.
And they're all giants for a reason.
They're all over the map intellectually, from Descartes to Locke to Kahn, Hegel, Nietzsche,
on into the 20th century.
What role they have played in making the modern world and then the post-modern world happen,
and in some cases, of course, resisting what is going on in modernity and in post-modernity.
The first two courses that the Academy invited me to teach were on modern philosophy.
And essentially, that picks up right at the beginning of the modern era with the giants,
René Descartes, Francis Bacon, John Locke, laying a new foundation, overturning medieval
philosophy. Medieval philosophy, again, much sophistication there had been a kind of dominant
framework for a millennium. And very quick time things transformed themselves in the 1500s, 1600s,
all of those intellectual, cultural transformations that we study when we do the history. And that
course ends with the death of Nietzsche in 1900. So essentially 1500 to 1900, eight lectures,
but also integrating the philosophers with what's going on historically. Because in some cases,
the philosophers are ones who make the historical revolution happen as their theoretical ideas are
applied. In other cases, the philosophers are responding to what's going on in the culture,
what's going on historically, trying to make sense of it and either urge it on or retard it.
So the second course picks up in 1900 and it's called Post-Modern Philosophy. And the main
point of that course is to say that the post-modern thinkers started to react against in a very
sophisticated way, much of what had happened intellectually in the modern era. And they,
in some cases, were radicalizing it. In some cases, wanting to overturn entirely what had
occurred intellectually and culturally in the modern era. And we started to see in philosophy
a move to more skeptical, relativized, even the death of philosophy, the sense that philosophy
has for millennia tried to answer all of these important questions about the meaning of life
in a culminating fashion. But from their more skeptical perspective, by the time we get
into the 20th century, their verdict is philosophy has become impotent and self-realizes that it
can't, in fact, answer any of those questions so it should, in effect, disintegrate. So I'm concerned
to lay out the pre-post-modern philosophers who are setting the stage for all of this. And here I
would name people like Bertrand Russell, who had a strongly skeptical phase, John Dewey and some of
the pragmatists to some extent, Martin Heidegger and various others culminating then in thinkers
like Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida, who take it. But also, at the same time, since I don't agree
with any of them, but I do give them a fair shot and we're trying to get inside their framework
and see where they are coming from and why these arguments are so powerful and that we have to
take them seriously. Nonetheless, there have been many, as I think of them, philosophers who think
the earlier traditions, sometimes the pre-modern, more scholastic or religious traditions, still
have some bite and can be repackaged for this post-modern era, some who think the modern...
I've probably fallen into that camp as of late.
Well, I think to some extent, yes. So you would be an example of that. Others who
think the Enlightenment project has been a great success, even though it had some philosophical
errors that those can be tweaked as an ongoing scientific project. And so I'm interested in
also thinkers like Carl Popper and Ein Rand and Philippa Foote, who are not so skeptical. In fact,
they are carrying on the modern Enlightenment tradition. And the idea at the end of that
course is that we have a sense of what the philosophical and philosophically informed
intellectual landscape looks like in our time, bringing it right up to current times.
And characterizing it as an effective three-way debate between the moderns, the pre-moderns,
and the post-moderns. And in one sense, we've never lived in better times philosophically
because we have self-conscious, articulate, and very able representatives of all of those traditions
operating in our generation. So bringing all of that in an eight lecture series to
a hopefully large international audience that can access them online. So that's been my intellectual
mission there. Okay. So I'd like to make a case for everybody that's watching and listening for
the philosophical enterprise at a practical level. Regardless, in a way, regardless of whether
philosophy can address the larger questions of life. And I think you have to be in some ways
absurdly skeptical to assume axiomatically that the answer to that is no. It's necessary,
in my estimation, very necessary, regardless of who you are, to understand the nuances of the
thinkers that you describe. Because unbeknown to you, the thoughts that you think are yours are
actually theirs. And so people might wonder what practical use it is to study history. And
one answer to that is, if you understand history, maybe you won't be doomed to repeat the more
catastrophic elements of it. But with regards to philosophy, if you don't understand the thought
of great philosophers, you have no idea why you, that you think the way you do, why you think the
way you do, or what the consequences of that might be. What is the idea that we're all
unconscious exponents of some dead philosopher or some combination of dead philosophers. And so
although we don't understand it, we live within not only the conceptual universe these people have
established, but the perceptual universe that they've established, that they actually have
shaped the way that we see the world at a very profound level. And so if you don't understand
that, then you're a puppet of forces that are beyond your comprehension. And that, unless you
want to be a puppet of forces that are beyond your comprehension, that's not a very good plan.
So does that seem like a reasonable... No, that's exactly on track. I think a lot of people in our
era are more active-minded than people were in previous eras. We have more media, more freedom,
more resources to be able to do so. But even the more active-minded people, I think as you are
pointed out, even if you are to a larger extent independently coming up with ideas, it nonetheless
is illuminating many cases to realize that there has been a smart person who thought of that before
you and in many cases in a more sophisticated form and integrated that with other ideas. So
sometimes you can find a thinker who has gone down the roads that you are going down. And most
of us don't have time to be active intellectuals. We have our full lives. So anything that we can
learn from the philosophers who thought through these issues can accelerate our process down that
road. And then, of course, the other thing is that to the extent that you don't think about these
things, what you are saying, I think is exactly right. In many cases, we are unconsciously guided
in certain directions. Sometimes I think of an analogy to infrastructure. So all of the roads
and traffic lights and lighting systems and so forth, and we grow up with them and we're like
the fish in the water, we just take it for granted that we're surrounded by these things.
And we have automated operating inside the certain kind of infrastructure system.
But at the same time, it is illuminating to step back and think that somebody thought through every
aspect of that infrastructure system. And in many cases, I'm being directed perhaps in ways that are
not healthy. And how can we make that infrastructure system better? That's going to take people who
are aware that in many cases, they are being guided by that infrastructure.
So that's a good thing to focus in on, I think, too, at the moment. And this is where we could
have a discussion about postmodernism and modernism and maybe what comes next. So let me lay out
a couple of propositions for you and tell me what you think about this is maybe the nexus of what I
was hoping to discuss with you. So I'll give the postmodernist devils their due to begin with.
And you can tell me what your opinion is about that. So I think that we are on the cusp of a
philosophical and maybe a theological revolution. And I think it's in part because the postmodernists
identified some of the flaws in enlightenment thinking. And so the fundamental postmodernist
insistence, as far as I can discern, is that we inevitably, we by necessity, see the world
through a story. And so I've been trying to figure out what that means. And the large language model,
emergence of the large language models have helped out with that. So imagine that
and I want you to correct me if I get any of this wrong. The rationalist presumption is that we do
see the world through a framework. The empiric presumption is that we derive our knowledge of
the world from a set of, in a sense, self-evident facts that emerge in the domain of perception.
But there's a problem with both of those notions is the nature of the rationalist framework isn't
precisely specified. And it isn't obvious at all that there's a level of self-evident fact.
In fact, I think the data, the scientific data on the neuroscience and the engineering side
indicate quite clearly that that's just not the case. That you can't separate perception,
let's say, from motivation. You can't separate perception from action because all of your senses
are active while they're gathering so-called data. There's no sense data. And so I've been
trying to wrestle with what that means exactly because one possible interpretation of the idea
that there's no base level of sense data is a descent into a nihilistic or or relativistic
morass. And I don't think that's a tenable solution, either, not least for motivational
and emotional reasons. I think there's a clue to the manner in which this problem might be solved
in the fact of the large language models. So what they essentially do
is establish a waiting system between conceptions. And so in the large language models,
every word, let's say, is associated with every other word at a certain level of probability.
So if word A appears, there's some probability that word B will come next. And then if phrase A
appears, there's some probability that phrase B will appear. And the same with sentences and the
same with paragraphs. And there's literally hundreds of billions of these parameters in those models.
And what they've done is map out the weight of data points. So if there's five facts at hand,
and I could, in principle, use those facts to guide my perception of my action,
I still have to solve the problem of how I would weight the facts. And you might say,
well, you don't have to weight them. And I would say, well, no, that just means you've
all weighted them equivalently. If you have more than one thing at hand, and you have to
combine them in some manner, you have to weight them. There's no option. And you can weight them
all one, but that's also a decision. And it's arbitrary. And so instead, even to perceive,
we have to weight the facts. And as far as I can tell, a story is a description of the structure
that we use to weight the facts. And so that doesn't mean that the facts, that doesn't mean that
our perceptions have no structure and that everything's subjective. But it also doesn't
mean that the facts speak to them for themselves, like the empiricists would insist, or the
behaviorists, for that matter, you know, that there's a stimulus. And then there's an automatic
response or something of that nature. So I know that's a bit of a scattershot, but
I hope you can see what I'm aiming at. And I guess I'm wondering, what do you think of
the proposition that we see the world through a story, for example?
Hello, everybody. So my wife and I are going back out on tour
for my new book, We Who Wrestle With God. I'm going to be walking through a variety of biblical
stories. Now, the post-modern types and the neo-Marxists, they think the story is one of power,
and that is a dangerous story. The fundamental rock upon which true civilization is built is
encapsulated in the biblical stories. And so I've spent a lot of time trying to understand them. And
the point over the tour and the book is to bring whatever understanding I've managed to develop
to as wide an audience as possible.
All right, already we're into heavy-duty customology, right, neuroscience, right,
history, psychology, value sets, including motivation issues and so on. Okay, so,
right, just hold on to that for a moment. So I'm going to say you're right, traditional
empiricism has had problems, traditional rationalism has had problems, and that we cannot accept in
post-analysis sort out all of the elements, and that's a big part of what the scientific
project goes on. But let me start by defending the empiricists for a moment. So what I just did on
the table, right, shocking. Was that Johnson who kicked the stone? Okay, G.E. Moore. Moore, okay.
Yeah, that's Angel, but also, yeah, earlier when he was talking about the...
I refute you thus, isn't that the...
Yeah, that's right. Right, which is, it's in the right track but still too naive. Okay,
but just reflect on that experience if we start to try to defend the empiricists for a moment.
So I smacked the table completely out of the blue, but for anybody who's listening, right,
or watching, that was sense data. You had no motivational set, you had no story in mind,
right, you had no behavioral preconditions to set for you. There was an experience,
and you were aware of the experience. Now, what you then go on to do with that experience is going
to be an extraordinarily complicated thing, and all of the things that you are laying out are
exactly right. So the empiricist's commitment, I think if it's going to be properly done, has to be
that there are such things like the smacking on the table and various other sorts of things that
ultimately, when we get all of the other things sorted out, and sometimes we have to do this in
laboratories where we have isolated all of the variables, there is a residual direct contact
with empirical reality. Right, something that's outside the subject. But even there, the language
becomes very important because we don't want to say that it's subjective, at least as philosophers
use the term, because that then is to say it's not in relationship to what is out there. So
again, we have to get into the technical epistemology very carefully. When philosophers talk
about the subjective, sometimes they just mean anything that is happening right on the subjective
side. But if we were doing epistemology or knowledge, then we say subjectivism means
that the terms for what we are calling a belief or calling a knowledge or whatever it is, is set by
the subject, and the external reality has nothing to do with it. The opposite position then is some
sort of revelatory model where the subject has absolutely nothing to do with it and said just
reality smacks that person in the face, and as you put it, the story doesn't need to be told,
it wears on its face what the proper interpretation of it is. What I think the proper starting point
for any good epistemology is not going to be either of those. So we have to understand consciousness
as a response mechanism to reality. It's an inherently relational phenomenon,
and you always have to talk about reality and the conscious response to the reality.
What very quickly happens in so many philosophies is people think, well, if the subject is involved,
then there's no way for us to be aware of reality. They retreat to some sort of
representationalist model or they start going internal, and then they start talking about
motivations and theory ladens and other beliefs that you have, and once you make that divide,
there is no way to get out of the subject and back to reality. On the other hand, if you try to
react to that and say the subject has can have nothing to do with it because we really think
there is such a thing as knowledge, then you try as desperately as you can to erase the subject,
to pretend the subject doesn't exist, to turn the subject into some sort of super shiny mirror
that just reflects things or some sort of diaphanous reincorporation of exactly what's out there
happens inside the subject, but that also is an impossible model. So what I want to say is the
empiricist's commitment, and historically the empiricists have struggled to work with, work
this out. This is the ongoing project. In the early modern era, I think they had very weak
accounts of sense perception, and that was part of the part of the big problem. And I think,
as you rightly pointed out, postmodernism centuries later is the end result of teasing out
the sometimes very subtle weaknesses in those, those very early, those very early models. So
what I would just say is the first project for empiricists is to argue that there is a residual
base level in contact that can serve as the basis for knowledge and the test for everything else,
no matter how sophisticated it, it, it, it starts. But that as an epistemological claim has to work
with a certain understanding of philosophy of mind. You can't do the epistemology entirely in
abstraction from some sort of neuroscience, some sort of understanding of the psychology,
the relation of the mind to the body, and both of them to, to, to the other, to, to, to reality
rather. And I think the important point here is to see consciousness as a relational phenomenon,
and that's a philosophy of mind claim. It's not so let's, let's talk. Let me just say it's not
a shiny mirror that simply reflects reality. It's not a preexisting entity that has its own
nature and just kind of makes up whatever it wants for itself. It's a response mechanism,
and all of these other things have to come out of that. Let me just say one more thing. I think
we talk a lot about epistemology and epistemological concerns really have dominated modern philosophy,
modern psychology, the modern scientific project. And I think that's, that's fine to define that
for people epistemology, the theory of knowledge. So we try to figure out, so the ology part is
to give an account of something or an explanation of in this case, it's the Greek word episteme,
right, for, for knowledge. When do I really know something? We have all kinds of beliefs
kicking around with a difference between imagination and fantasy and perception and
falsehood. That's right. And just having been conditioned to do certain things. So how do I
really know that I know something? And when should I say that I don't really know something and
developing self-consciously what the standards are for, for good knowledge? And this involves some
reflection on sense perception as we're starting to talk about now, a good understanding of language
and grammar, logic. And then when we start talking about stories and we say stories do in some sense
inform us and we can, can really learn about the world through, through stories, what's the place
of narrative in a, in a proper epistemological framework. So we've been thinking through those
things very, very systematically. Now that though is where the language of empiricism and
rationalism and various kinds of synthesis and skepticism that says we don't actually have any
knowledge, all of that language is epistemological. But I think we can't do epistemology in isolation.
We always have to do it in context with metaphysics, that is to say, we have to also be talking about
the nature of reality. So we want to say. That's ontological question. That's right. What's the
furniture of the universe, so to speak? What's, what's real and what isn't real? And the question,
so the question is anytime I want to say, you know, this is true or this is real,
this is a fact, right? Or whatever. That's to make a claim about reality. And then the follow-up
queen always claim, always says, well, how do you know that? So you're making the claim,
but you're also making a justificatory claim. So reality and then broadly speaking, when we try to
say things about what's true about reality as a whole, then we are doing metaphysics. You know,
the special sciences say we're studying physics or chemistry or biology. But if we can step back and
say, are for example, space and time features of the universe as a whole? Is the universe eternal
or infinite in various dimensions? Does a God exist or not? Those are all metaphysical,
metaphysical questions. So to come back to, and this is just the one more point that I wanted
to make, is that all of the things that we talk about, when we start talking about sense perception,
informing concepts and grammar and logic and stories and statistics, all of that has to work
right from the beginning with doing some philosophy of mind. That is to say, what is this thing that
we call the mind? And one of the things that early modern philosophy, now this is 1400s,
1500s on into the 1600s, was simultaneously struggling with was understanding the human
being. And if, for example, you have what was common for many centuries, let's say a dualistic
understanding of the human being, that the human being is a body but also a soul or a physicality
plus a spiritual element. And that these are two very different metaphysical things. One is subject
to corruption and the other is, in principle, eternal. And that they have different ontological
makeups, different agendas, different ultimate destinies. Then on the metaphysics side, how
do those two come together? How do they work together? How do they fit together? What's the
proper understanding of those two? But that metaphysical understanding of what it is to be a
human being will shape how you think about epistemology right from the get-go. So if you are,
say, an empiricist and you want to say, well, we start in, say, the physical world and I have a
physical body with physical senses and there's a causal story about how those interact with each
other but somehow I have to get that across this metaphysical gulf from the physical to the spiritual
so that my mind, which I think of as being on the spirit side of things or on the soul side of
things, can confront it and then do various things that we think we're going to do with our minds,
our reason and our emotions and so forth. And that metaphysical gulf, if you can't bridge
that gulf metaphysically, is going to cause you problems epistemologically. And so one reason why
we end up in postmodernism a few centuries later I think is not only going to be because
the early empiricist theories had problems, the early rationalist theories had problems,
various attempts to overcome them like Kant led to problems and so forth. It wasn't only that there
were epistemological problems that worked themselves out and led to dead ends but at the same time we
were struggling with the metaphysical problem as I'm thinking of it, the mind-body problem. And
once we said or once we were starting from the perspective that ideas are non-physical realities
or stories are non-physical realities and they're in a mind and we're conceiving of that as something
separate from the physical world as a non-physical world. It's very difficult to try to find how
that then relates back to that physical world. So I would say in your field, for example,
where you come out of professional psychology, it's interesting that professional psychology only
came on board in the late 1800s. And so we say, this is my potted history of your discipline,
we have the early Freudians and the early behaviorists both coming on board in 1900.
And one of the things that they're both trying to do is to say, well finally we can start to study
the mind scientifically. We can have a science of the mind. But what they were reacting against was
still in the 1800s was the idea that the mind somehow didn't fit into nature. It was an extra
natural thing. It was a ghost in the machine and the fitting of the ghost in the machine,
we don't have a theory that works this out. And both of them were of course reflecting on Darwin
and Darwin's more robustly naturalistic understanding of the human being that we're
going to see the mind not as a ghost that's in the wet wearer or in the biological wearer,
but as some sort of emergent phenomenon or a by-bottom. But it's only when we stop thinking about
the human being as a ghost plus a machine to use that metaphor or a spirit plus a body is two
different things as much more of a naturalist integrit, then we start to think that we can do
psychology scientifically. Now the Freudians and the behaviorists, I think they were both
disasters in various ways. They were genius, but this is again the early steps of science.
But what they are starting to do though is say we're not going to study the human being,
we are going to study the human being as part of the natural world. But notice that this is now
into the 1900s and psychology is a very new science. And this is already 300 years after
modern philosophy had been taken over in a sense by the epistemologists and
worked their way into a very skeptical form. So my hope is, if we're talking about where the future
has to go, psychology has been online for a century now, a little more than a century now,
extraordinarily complex stuff as we all know, but we're making progress there. But I think it's
still early days and what the psychologists work out has to be integrated with newer and better
epistemology. It has to be an epistemology that integrates the best from the empiricist tradition,
the best from the rationalist tradition and so on. So that's my summary story of how we ended up
where we are and why I'm not a thoroughgoing skeptic on any of these issues. I see it as an
ongoing scientific project. In a world where life's most fundamental questions often go unasked,
there are organizations making a real difference. Preborn Ministries stands at the front lines
of one of our society's most critical moments when a mother faces the profound decision about her
unborn child's future. Preborn's network of clinics operates in areas where these decisions
are being made every day. They offer something invaluable, clarity through technology. By providing
free ultrasounds, they allow mothers to see their developing child and hear that remarkable
heartbeat, a moment that transforms an abstract choice into a tangible reality. The impact is
remarkable. When mothers receive an ultrasound and witness their child's development firsthand,
the majority choose life. This isn't about politics, it's about giving women the information
that they need to make a truly informed decision. Here's where you can make a difference. Just
$28 provides one ultrasound, $140 sponsors five. And right now, through a special matching campaign,
your contribution will be doubled. That means your $140 gift becomes $280, potentially helping
10 mothers and their unborn children. To support this vital work, dial Pound250 and say the keyword
baby. That's Pound250 keyword baby. Or visit preborn.com backslash Jordan. Preborn maintains a
four-star charity rating and all gifts are tax deductible. Join us in supporting this crucial
work. Visit preborn.com backslash Jordan today. I think the people that we've brought together
on Peterson Academy too are at the forefront of that attempt to integrate. And so that's one of our,
you might say, one of our educational themes as we move forward is to continue that investigation.
John Vervecchi, I would say, is somebody who's on the forefront of that on the psychological
and neuroscience side. So let's go back to your demonstration of primary sensory input,
right? Just hitting the table. So I'll outline a neuroscience approach to that. So, you know,
you might think that you perceive and then you evaluate and then you think and then you act and
that's like the causal chain. But none of that's exactly correct because even when you're responding
to a primary stimulus like that, so to speak, there's a hierarchy of neurological responses
that are operating more or less simultaneously. Now, I'd say more or less because you do have
reflexive actions. So I think the simplest way to understand this is to assume that what you're
detecting as a consequence of the slap that you delivered to the table is a patterned waveform.
Let me just interrupt. Are you talking about my experience of that or your experience of it?
Because I came in with a pre-intention in that case and yours was a different
passive surprise response. Let's get to that. Well, so exactly. So at one level of analysis,
it's the same stimulus, let's say, insofar as it's an isolatable sound that you could record
and duplicate with a phone recorder or something like that. But then, as you said, the fact that
you come to that experience with different expectations colors it. And so there is a way
to think about that. I think the best way to start to understand it is to think about the pattern.
So there's a waveform pattern that propagates in the air, which is the delivery system obviously
for the stimulus. And then there's an auditory pattern. Now, when your nervous system receives
that pattern, it doesn't go to one point place and then another place and then another place and
then another place in a linear progression. There's some of that. But what happens is that
the pattern is assessed simultaneously by multiple different levels of the nervous system.
Right? So the most primary level would be spinal. And there are very few connections between the
auditory system and the spinal response system. And so, for example, if I was on edge or uncertain
about you or about this circumstance and you hit the table in that manner unexpectedly,
one probable outcome is a startle reflex. And a startle reflex is a variant of a predator response
of a response to predation. And it's basically auditory signal on to spinal cord mapping.
And the initial phase of the startle response is you could say it's pre-conscious and it's
pre-emotional. And the reason it's pre is because the time it takes for the signal to propagate
onto the spinal receptors is shorter than the time it takes for the signal to propagate even
to the emotions. And you need that. So, for example, if you're walking down a pathway and
out of the periphery of your eye, you detect a snake and you have really good snake detectors,
especially in the periphery in the bottom part of your vision. It's different in the top part,
by the way, because there are more snakes on the ground than there are in trees. If you
take the time to move your eyes, the center of your eyes, so that you can see the snake
and then you evaluate the snake emotionally, by the time you've done that, the snake's already
bitten you. It's too long a time. Whereas if you use these peripheral receptors that map
right onto your spine, you can jump before the snake strikes, hopefully. Cats can do it.
If you're a cat, yes. Well, we're pretty good, too, as it turns out. Yeah, but not as fast as cats,
but fast enough to often escape from snakes. And so you get this first level response that's
almost entirely reflexive. That's what the early behaviors were discovering, too, when they were
talking about stimulus response. There are somewhat automatic response systems that are
very primordial and basic that do almost a one-to-one mapping of sensory pattern onto
behavioral output, very few neural interconnections. And the disadvantage to that is that it's a
rather fixed response pattern and the advantage of is it's super fast. Okay, so now the same
pattern propagates up. So imagine the pattern propagates down on your spine and you can react
very quickly. Another part of it propagates into the auditory cortex or the visual cortex,
and that's what you see with. And those are actually dissociable. So there are people who have
a phenomenon called condition called blind sight. So if you ask these people if they can see,
they tell you no. But they still respond. Well, if you hold up your hand, for example,
they can guess with more than 90% accuracy, which hand is up. And it seems to me because
it's their visual cortex that's damaged and not their retina. And a lot of the vision
pathways into the brain are still intact, but not the one that mediates conscious vision,
which is dependent on the visual cortex. But they still have kinetic perception with their eyes.
So one of the things I'm doing when I watch you is that I'm picking up where your body is located.
And I'm mapping that onto my body. And so if I'm seeing you with blind sight with your hand up
like this, I'll have a sensation in my body that corresponds to your body position. And I can read
off that. So it's not exactly vision because I'm not seeing you, but it is a form of vision.
And it's even more sophisticated than that. So if you take these people with blind sight,
and you show them faces that are angry or afraid, and you assess their galvanic skin response,
which is a change in sweating, basically, that's associated with emotional arousal,
they'll respond differentially to emotional faces. Even though they don't know that,
that's blind sight, that's part of blind sight. And so when you hear or see something,
that pattern is being assessed at multiple levels of a very complex hierarchy. And it's not just
bottom up because that hierarchy also feeds backwards. So for example, by the time you're an
adult, most of what you see is memory. You just use the sensory input as a hint to pull up the
memory. That's also how you get habituated to things. You know, when you see something
for the first time, it's got this glow of novelty, this numinous glow of novelty.
And what happens is that you, and that's complex and difficult to process. And then as you become
accustomed to it, and you build an internal mental model, you replace the perception with
memory because that's faster. The problem is that the memory that you see is only the fractional
meaning of the phenomena that's relevant to the encounters that you had. It shuts everything
off and it de, what would you say? It takes the magic out of the world. As you replace
raw perception with memory, you take the magic out of the world. That's a reasonable way of
thinking about it. That's why there's a novelty kick, for example. And so the reason I'm bringing
this up is because even that relatively straightforward demonstration that you made,
that sound that seems self-evident, it's, you said right off the bat that there was a level
at which both of us experienced that quite differently. You experienced it differently
because you knew you were going to do it. It came as a surprise to me. That surprise was
moderated by the fact that I know you. I know your profession. I know your professional status.
I know the purpose of what we're doing here. I know the probability that what I know about you
indicates that you would do something that was surprising or dangerous, which is very, very low.
So even though it was unexpected, it's bounded in its significance by all of that knowledge.
And you might say, well, that's independent of the sense data, but it's not like that's a very
tricky thing to establish, right? To get that independence, to figure out, well, what's the
raw sense data and what's the interpretation? It gets worse than this. You can train dogs to
wag their tail when they receive an electric shock they're happy about. And so you think electric
shock, that's pretty basic sense data. It's like, yeah, yes and no. If you reliably pair a shock,
now it depends on the magnitude of the shock, obviously. So there are some boundaries around
this, but you can train a dog to be excited about the receipt of an electrical shock if you reliably
pair it with a food reward, because the a priori significance of the electric shock might be pain
response, right? Indicative of the potential for physiological damage, because that's
approximately what pain is. But if you associate it with the receipt of a reward,
then it takes on a dopaminergic cast, which means that the shock becomes indicative of the
receipt of a reward. And that's a positive emotion phenomena, and it can override the shock.
It's also the case that if you take animals like rats that are pretty intelligent,
you put them in a cage, they'll deliver electric shocks to themselves randomly just because they're
bored. And so they'll, and horses will do that as well. Now, as I said, it's magnitude dependent.
Humans too. Yeah. Yes, well, of course, people do that. People do that par excellence. And so
all of these, it's very difficult to specify a level of analysis where there isn't an
interpretive framework simultaneously active as the raw sense data makes itself manifest.
Now, I mean, your demonstration was very, what would you say it cut right to the chase because
a sound like that is, you might say, is not subject to an infinite number of interpretations,
right? There's something there. But it's always nested. It seems to be that it's nested inside a
hierarchy of interpretations, a very high level hierarchy of interpretations.
Let me say, all of that is great. All of it is beautiful. All of that is directly relevant. So
to tie that back into what our philosophical intellectual predicament is now, if we want to
say postmodernism as a skeptical project that's given up on everything versus those who see it
as an active ongoing project that we're learning more and more, that's going to give us a better
and better epistemology. All of that, that is great. So I'm a kind of empiricist, but what I
would say is that everything that you have said was in the early days of empiricism not known to
any of the empiricists. So in many cases, they had very crude understandings of what memory would
be, what reflex would be, what emotions would be, perception right, and so forth.
So naturally, then it makes sense that they're trying to insist that we actually are in contact
with reality at a basic level. But then very quickly, they are speculating about what's going
on in all of these other areas, and their theories are faulty, and it's the weaknesses of those theories
that then lead people to start to say, well, empiricism is a failed project. Instead of
seeing it as an ongoing project. The other thing I would say, actually there's two other things,
one is that as you described the process, you know, you say out there, there's the slap,
there are sound waves, we are making realist claims. There really was a slap, there really are
structured energy patterns, and we really do have in our ears or in our hands, receptors that are in
place that respond to some energy patterns and don't respond to other energy patterns.
And all of that, we are making reality claims, and we're saying that then there are causal processes
that go on inside the physiological system of the human being. Some of them, as you say,
are operating parallel, they have feedback loops, right, and so forth. I think I'm a very minimal
empiricist on this, is to say that empiricism only insists that there really is a reality,
well, there is a reality, and it has these patterns that we're not making up those patterns,
and we're not imposing those patterns on the reality. Instead, what we call our sensory receptors
is an array of cells that if there are certain structures in reality, they will respond, but
they're not making up those structures in reality. So my nose, for example, has no...
Or at least sometimes they're not making them up.
Well, okay, but sometimes comes later, okay, and we can come to that. So my nose, for example,
has all kinds of chemical structures out there. It doesn't have a pre-existing theory that out there
in reality, there are dead rotting things, right? It's just that if I happen to encounter
dead rotting things, then certain chemicals will be roughing, and then my nose will respond,
and things will happen in a certain way. And that's important, whether you say what our noses
are doing is kind of imposing a structure on an unstructured reality, and that takes you down the
skeptical road versus... Yeah, the noses are a particularly good example, because...
Right, versus saying that the structures are there, and what we have are just latent reception
structures, that if those structures happen to be present, will be responsive. And that thing is
all of them, the empiricists are saying. Now, all of the other stuff where we say, okay,
the background set, I came to the slab with a background set, you came with a different
background set, and we started to say, what all goes into that background set?
That's where philosophy starts to become... Well, I think that's where philosophy is important,
and as philosophers, I think, articulate. Well, we have reason, we have emotions, we have memory,
and there is something that physiologically goes on. I have a body, and it's all worked out,
and that it's going to articulate the main capacities or the main faculties,
but I think at a very general level, and I think the philosophers have to work
hand in hand with the neuroscientists and with the psychologists, because...
And this is my complaint about early modern philosophy, it's not a very strong complaint,
but that they were trying to do philosophy of mind, anti-pistemology 300 years before we knew
anything about neuroscience, and 300 years before we really knew anything about psychology.
So it's a lot of failed experiments along the way, or failed theories along the way.
The other thing, though, I would want to say is, as we go on to develop what I think will be a
better understanding of the mind, both epistemologically and metaphysically, is that we stop turning
virtues into vices as I think of it. So to say, for example, that we have... And then you talk
about the base level. The slap happens, or there's something moves low to the ground,
and there's a direct automated, something that you didn't think about, didn't feel about connection
to the spine, and your body reacts in a certain way. I want to say that's a good thing that has
happened to human being, that we have evolved certain automated physiological responses to
certain kinds of sensory stimuli, rather than turning that into a vice, or a bad thing,
and seeing that as, oh, well, if the human being has certain automated reflexes in place,
that means we have to go down the road of subjectivity, that we're not really responding to
reality and so forth. Or if we say we have emotions, which we do have emotions, and I think
emotions are positive, they certainly have an important role in our evaluate of structure,
figuring into our overall understanding of the meaning of life. And we also know that sometimes
we can use our emotions the wrong way, let them use us instead of using them. So emotions come
with pitfalls, but rather than, as many early epistemologies have done, and said, well, we have
emotions, and emotions are on the subject side of things. And the enemy of reason. That's right.
And so, yeah, that's so they're irrational. And we turn something that is a very valuable
tool in human psychology into the enemy of human psychology, you know, you see that a little bit
attention man who still believe in the American dream in a world gone mad, the precision five
from Jeremy's razor stands as a beacon of sanity. Five blades of superior engineering
offer a shave is unshakable as your faith that the nation's best days still lie ahead,
experience an exceptionally smooth remarkably close shave and a testament to the fact that
merit still matters. Stop giving your money to woke corporations that hate you. Get Jeremy's
razors precision five instead, available now at Jeremy's razors.com, Walmart.com and Amazon Prime.
You see that a little bit with the evolutionary psychologists who claim that because we
evolved for a substantial period of time on the African plains that are emotional and
motivational systems are no longer properly adapted to the modern world. It's like,
I find that that's a variant of the argument that you just laid out and that it also has
the echoes of that rationalist, some variants of rationalism, that proclamation that emotion is the
enemy of reason. It's like emotions are unbelievably sophisticated. They're low resolution and they're
quick. They're not as quick as say spinal reflexes, but they're faster than thought and they're also
broader than thought and they also enable us to evaluate when we don't have enough information
to think and they have their pitfalls like everything human because nothing human is
omniscient and so we're going to make errors. But the idea that there's a fundamental antipathy
between the emotional, the id, let's say in the ego, because that's a variant of that psychoanalytic
theory, that is a misunderstanding of the way that the nervous system is integrated. So let me
run something else by you. Since we've laid out this, I want to run a proposition by you and
it's sort of the variant of the meme theory, although it takes into account the idea that
so-called memes, abstractions, compete across historical and evolutionary time. So imagine this.
So this is memes in the darkened sense. So imagine that there is this level of sensory input that
is as close to corresponding with objective reality as we can manage. And then imagine that
that's interpreted within this hierarchical framework that we described. Levels of abstraction
that rise up to ineffability, essentially. That would be something like the meaning of the fact
that you hit the table in this particular context. So now imagine you've got this. Imagine that every
level of that hierarchy and the totality of the hierarchy competes across evolutionary time.
So one way of grounding our thinking in data is to assume that all of what we know emerges from
raw sense data. But there's another way of thinking about it, which is that the data is
interpreted within a hierarchical framework that's full of feedback loops. And there's
variant forms of those, those upper level hierarchies. But those forms compete across time.
And the more successfully they compete across time, the more they become instantiated
physiologically. That's a Baldwin effect selection mechanism. The higher order interpretive
structures that produce the best reproductive outcome across time are more likely to become
automated at an instinctual level. Emotions would be like that. They're not as automatized as
spinal reflexes, but they're quite automatized because the sets of emotions that human beings
have are very similar. Anger, fear, surprise, joy, etc. Everyone feels those. When and where
is different, but the fact of the emotions is the same. So then imagine that this is something like
the domain of iterable and playable games. So imagine that there's a variety of different
interpretive frameworks that we lay upon more basic sensory data, but that a relatively small
subset of those interpretive frameworks has the capacity for sustainable improvement.
So you could think about this. Think about this in the context, let's say, of a marital
relationship, right? There's a very large number of ways that your marriage can go wrong. Like
an indefinite number of ways that your marriage can go wrong. But then there's a constrained
number of ways that it will go right. And that's because it's a difficult target. Imagine that
the specifications are something like, for your marriage to be successful, the micro routines
and the macro routines have to be such that you're voluntarily okay with them and your wife is
voluntarily okay with them. And they bond you more tightly together across time. And this would be
the optimal situation. As you lay them out together, they improve. Okay. And so you can imagine that
as the basis for an optimized contractual relationship of any form. But then you could also
imagine that the number of variants of the way that you can treat each other for all of those
conditions to be met would be low. There's a very small number of voluntary playable games that are
iterable across large spans of time that improve as you play them. Okay. So then you'd get an
evolutionary pressure as well on the domains of possible philosophy, right? That they'd fill
up something like a space. And that seems to me to be reflective. It's weird because that's also
reflective of an empirical reality, but it's not the reality that's associated with basic sense data.
It's more the fact that there is a finite number of complex games that are voluntary playable
and that improve. And that's also a fact, right? I mean, and that would be, I think that's partly
why there are patterns of ethics that tend to emerge in many different cultures, even independently,
right? It's, it's, and that also makes a mockery in some ways of a really radical relativism. It's
like, it's not that the value space, the philosophical space isn't relativistic, because there's
a finite number of interpretive frameworks that actually have anything approximating productive
staying power. And that is reflective of something like the structure of reality. It's more sophisticated
reflection than the basic sense data. And so, see, I'm, I'm, I'm saying this because I'm trying to
mediate between the postmodern claim that we see the world through a narrative, which I think,
I think that's true. I think all the neuroscience data points in that direction.
And then you might say, well, any old story goes that it's like, no, just because we see the world
through a story doesn't mean that the stories themselves aren't constrained by empirical
reality in its most sophisticated sense. And it also doesn't mean that the stories,
even though their stories fail to correspond to reality.
That's extraordinarily rich, everything that you're laying out there. Let me just
start with one thread to pull. I do not like the language that says we see reality through a narrative.
I understand the attraction of it. I can make a more technical description.
No, no, no, no. If we just start with that formulation, I think that is,
I think that's a dangerous formulation. I do think the postmoderns are on board with that.
But notice what it says is there's a we, there's a me, and then there's a narrative,
and then there's reality out there, and that I have to go through this narrative.
Like a screen.
That's right. And it might be, it might have some chinks in it. It might be opaque.
But also what this narrative is, this has got a huge amount of stuff built into it.
All kinds of background expectations and theories and slippery terms, right, and so forth.
What I would say is, to use this language, is that narratives are things that we use to see
reality if the narrative is true. So sometimes narratives get reality right. Sometimes narratives
are wildly on the basis, right? Yeah, that's in keeping with this idea of competition.
That's for sure. But rather than seeing the narrative as a screen or as an obstacle or an
intermediary, it itself is a tool. It's a state that our psychological conscious apparatus is in
when we are relating to reality. That's if we get it right. But if we mess it up,
then it does become something that we try to see reality through and we are in a problematic
situation. Okay, so let me reformulate the description and then let's see if that
rectifies that problem. And then let's see where we can go with that problem because I'll
object to your objection and see where that goes. So I would say a narrative is a description of
the structure through which we see the world, right? That's a different claim. So because
it's not a narrative until I tell it. But then you've dropped reality out of the picture.
Well, that's exactly why I want to have this discussion because I don't want it. I think it's
very dangerous. It's kind of obvious to drop reality out of the situation. But you're right that
the danger of the postmodern formulation is, which is that we see the world through a narrative,
let's say, is exactly that, is that the reality drops out of the equation. There's nothing but
the text, let's say. Like if there's a competition between narratives for their functionality,
let's say, reproductive and otherwise, that would go some way to addressing that problem
because there'd be a Darwinian competition between narrative structures that would prioritize
some over others. But the idea that it's a description is relevant. So imagine that
wolves in a pack, at a perceptual level, the wolves distinguish the rank order of the wolf
that they're seeing. They do that extremely rapidly. Highly social animals are unbelievably
good at that. And so the story of the dominance, the story of the hierarchy of the wolves is
implicit in the perception of the wolves. And if you describe that, it's a story, but
it's not a story before it's described. It's whatever a story is before it's described.
It seems to me like it's something like the weights in a neural network returning to that idea is that
there are certain facts, let's say, that present themselves to us that are much more heavily weighted.
And that's axiomatic. It's built into the system. And those would be facts for you. Imagine that
evoke emotional response very rapidly. They're weighted and that weighting has a biological
element and a cultural element. That's not a story. But if you describe that, that's what
a story is. The scientist who's studying the wolves is creating a story. That's right. No,
not really. I want to say constructing a story. Yes. Or it's a story about something that's not
happening mediated through stories in the wolves. Yes, right. For the wolves, it's a pattern of
behavior and a pattern of perception. So imagine this is when you go to see a movie,
you take on the weighting, the value structure of the protagonist. Now, human beings are very
good at that. Like, we look at each other's eyes and we see what people are attending to,
and we watch their patterns of attention and we infer their valuation and their motivation.
We're unbelievably good at that. And that's what you're doing when you're going to a movie.
Watch how the protagonist prioritizes his attention and his action, what his priorities are,
and you infer from that the perceptual structure that, well, that's the question. Does it bring
some facts to light and make others irrelevant? And if so, is it a screen? Like, most of the world
we don't see, most of the world is screened out from our perception. Some of that's biomechanical.
I can't see behind my head. But some of it is, I'm looking at you so I can't see the faces of
the camera men right now, right? So that's a choice that's dependent on my determination of how to
focus my attention. Now, the fact that I'm prioritizing you, I can see your face. I'm using the
foveal center of my vision. And I can't see these guys because they're in my periphery. That's kind
of like a screen, right? The place where it's most open is the central point of vision. Over here,
it's obscured. And over here, it's just gone completely. So now, you objected to my characterization
because you said, you know, observer, screen, reality, and you didn't like the proposition of the
intermediate, intermediary screen. And I know the screening ID isn't exactly right.
But on the counter side, we have this problem. Some things are central to our perception and
other things are peripheral. And that's dependent on our values and our patterns of attention
and our actions. So, well, I'm curious about what you think about that.
Well, I think you're putting two kinds of examples out on the table. We're going to be
related. I think the first one where we are looking at a human being, say an actor on a screen,
putting ourselves in that person's shoes and reading all sorts of things.
Reading the world.
I think that's very extraordinarily complicated. And I think the interesting thing there is going to be
while you say that we humans are very good at that, the interesting thing is going to be how
much of that is learned because it doesn't seem to be a highly fallible process. Because I know
I just don't want to get too personal here, but there will be lots of times I've been in social
circumstances. And I think I'm pretty savvy about reading people, but I'll be with my wife and she
will say, you know, after we've had a conversation with someone, boy, did you notice how upset
that person was about blah, blah, blah? Women and their interpersonal perceptions.
So there may be sex, gender differences that are going on, but also at the same time,
it's not to say that I couldn't learn how to do that. So when we say people are very good at that,
I think that's true, but we still have to epistemologically unpack everything that goes into
what makes us good at being able to do that. And I think that's going to be a very,
very sophisticated story. But then the other example, it takes us back to perceptual cases
where you're talking about, are you looking at me or me looking at you? And we're also aware
that we're in a room that there are other people in the room who are feeling and so on.
But getting right down to issues of if I choose to focus on one thing, then it is true that everything
else goes pales by comparison. Yeah, that's right. And pales is metaphorical. So if we're
not, if we're going to try to then unpack the metaphor, I think we would say we focus and
unfocus. And then we can give descriptors of what the state of unfocus is and what the state of
state of focus is. And I would prefer using that language to the language of screen,
because screen really is something that is in the way. It's a thing itself. That's another
obstacle. So if there's a dressing screen between the two of us, and I'm dressing
for privacy, the whole idea of the screen is that it's blocking. So the metaphor is too simple.
Sorry, that would be different from, and I think a better metaphor would be to say to filter. And
sometimes our sensory apparatuses are engaging in filter. They're just
attending to some things and not attending to other things. But a filter is different from a
screen and also, but also just to stay on this one issue here, the issue of focus and unfocus,
I think is not, it's not a filter either. Are you tired of feeling sluggish, run down,
or just not your best self? Take control of your health and vitality today with balance of nature.
With balance of nature, there's never been a more convenient dietary supplement to ensure
you get a wide variety of fruits and vegetables every day. Balance of nature takes fruits and
vegetables, they freeze dry them, turn them into a powder, and then they put them into a capsule.
The capsules are completely void of additives, fillers, extracts, synthetics, pesticides,
or added sugar. The only thing in balance of nature fruit and veggie capsules are fruits and
veggies. Right now, you can order with promo code Jordan to get 35% off your first order,
plus get a free bottle of fiber and spice. Experience balance of nature for yourself today.
Go to balanceofnature.com and use promo code Jordan for 35% off your first order as a preferred
customer, plus get a free bottle of fiber and spice. That's balanceofnature.com,
promo code Jordan for 35% off your first preferred order, plus a free bottle of fiber and spice.
I have a metaphor for you. Tell me what you think about this. Well, I've been thinking about this
a lot because I've been studying Old Testament stories. And I think the tabernacle in the Old
Testament is a model of perception. Okay, so tell me what you think of this as an analogy,
better than screen and better than filter. Okay, remind me what element of the tabernacle.
I will, I will lay it out. Good. Okay, so the tabernacle at the center of the tabernacle is the
arc of the covenant, right? So there's a center point and it's sacred. Okay, and if I remember
correctly, in the early ceremonies that were associated with the tabernacle, the high priest
was only allowed to go into the holy of holies, the center once a year. So there's a center,
then there's a structure of veils around it, like so that there's a center and then it's veiled,
and then outside of that is another veil, and then outside of that is another veil,
and then outside of that is another veil, and then outside of that is the community. And so
that's the sacred central point of the community. And the center is the, what would you say, the
point of focus, the fundamental point of focus, and then the significance of the periphery
is proportional to the distance from the center. Now, there's a variety of reasons that I think
this is the right metaphor. It's partly because- So this is a metaphor for what?
For object perception, for any perception, for any perception. So here's partly why. So I was
referring to the visual system, for example. So the way your visual system is constructed is that
at the very center, every cell in the center of your vision is connected to 10,000 neurons
at the fundamental level of analysis. And then each of those 10,000 is associated with 10,000.
It spirals up exponentially very rapidly, but the foveal tissue in the center of your vision
is very high cost. It takes a lot of neural tissue to process it, and it takes a lot of energy.
A lot. If your whole retina was foveal, your head would be like alien sauce.
Eagles have two fovea, by the way. They have extremely sharp vision. And so now because
high resolution vision is expensive, you can move your eyes and you dart this very high
resolution center around. And so every time you move your eyes and you do that unconsciously,
because they're always vibrating unconsciously, because you can move them, and in consequence
of emotion as well. So if you hear a noise off to the side that startles you, you'll look,
and that's unconscious. Lots of things direct your visual attention, but everything you look at has a
center, dead center, where everything is extremely high resolution, and then it's surrounded by
lesser and lesser spheres of resolution until at the periphery, there's nothing. Right? Okay,
so like out here, if I just hold my hand steady, I can't see it except as a blur. If I move it,
I can see the fingers. So out here, I can detect movement. That's how dinosaurs saw, by the way.
Dinosaurs, frogs still, they can't see anything that isn't moving. They have vision like our
periphery. So out here, because the tissue in the periphery of my vision isn't very highly
innervated, I prioritize movement, because my assumption is if it isn't moving, I don't have
to pay attention to it. You know, it's a default assumption about what's ignoring the world.
We live in a dynamical environment. Right, exactly. And so if you're going to prioritize
peripheral vision, the priority is if it moves, look at it. Otherwise, ignore it. Okay, so every
perception has a center and then a gradation of resolution until it fades out into nothing. Yeah.
And that tabernacle, as far as I can tell, is a model of the perceptual center. It's a model of
the community center as well, but it's a model of perception as such. So that's different than
a screen, obviously. Well, you do have these veils that you construct.
That's true. That's true. That's true. And it's, you see, the veil idea is an interesting one because
the perceptions we have in the periphery are nowhere near as intense as the perceptions that
we have in the center. And so these perceptions, one way of thinking about them is these perceptions,
peripheral perceptions, are veiled out here behind me. They're veiled so intensely you
can't even see them, but the veils are graduated. So it's, well, so tell me what you think about that.
Yeah, let me try a different, I don't want to use the tabernacle example. I'm not as familiar with
it, but suppose you think of the difference between a place, say you're walking through,
this is an example I heard from another philosopher, you're walking through an
unfamiliar neighborhood at night and you think it's a slightly dangerous neighborhood.
And so what you're trying to do is take in as much as you can.
And so the language that comes to me more naturally is the language of a field.
It's a magnetic field or electric field. Yeah, the phenomenon just like that idea.
Yes, that's right. And in that case, what I'm trying to do is not focus on any one thing in
particular, like I might when I'm reading. So then I'm using my visual attention,
and I'm focusing on this particular thing, or I'm an artist, and I'm trying to catch the,
do the glint on the eyeball for the, for the finish. So my eyes are wide open,
and I am, and I'm concentrating, and I'm trying to do this and everything else is in the field.
But that I think is co-extensive in terms of how our perceptual faculty works as if I am in the
bad neighborhood at night. And what I've tried to do is just expand my attention to encompass
this whole field so that if anything moves in that entire field, then I can zoom in on that.
That's a good objection. That's a good objection. I guess I could make that initial analogy more
sophisticated because I would say then that the tabernacle structure, center and periphery,
is characteristic of explored and familiar territory. You're making a case that there's a
different perceptual mode in unexplored territory, and there is. So birds have a prey eye and a
predator eye, and the predator eye acts like the painter that you described who's focusing on one
thing, because you zero in on the thing you're after. The, the I'm prey eye, so that would be the
birds, the other eye is scanning in exactly the way that you described, deprioritizing the center,
amplifying the input from the periphery, because yeah, and that's, that maps onto the hemispheres.
So the left hemisphere does the perceptual mapping that you just, this is in right-handed people,
the left hemisphere does the focal perception that you described that's detail-oriented,
and that deprioritizes the periphery, and the right hemisphere does the opposite. And, and you
know, that's, that's, I suppose you could say at a biological level, that's because it's eat or be
eaten, right, in the most primal possible way. And so there's a perceptual system for things you're
going to eat, and there's a perceptual system for you might be on the menu, right, right, right.
And, and yeah, so that's, see the thing that's so curious about that, and that you just highlighted
is that the ceremonies for taking possession of a territory that are anthropologically specified,
it's usually driving a stake or a central point, a flag, a standard, a staff, into the ground,
that signifies camp, right, or it signifies the possession of that territory. That establishes
a center with a set of peripheries and with foreignness at the, you know, at the, at the edge
of the periphery. And that does establish a certain kind of perception that's associated with
security. So the tabernacle style of perception would be the perception that's associated with
explored territory. That's exactly right. That's, that's the perception of order. Like order is
where the things you want are happening. That's a good way of defining order. And chaos is where
you don't know what will happen when you act. And there are two different perceptual mechanisms
for those. And so the, the second one, the danger one, the unexplained one, the foreign territory one
is there's less filtering and there's less specification of center because you don't
know what's important, right? You're walking through that dangerous neighborhood. It's like
you're on alert and you don't know what's insignificant. That's part of being on alert.
So there's no identifiable center. That's a high stress situation. Yeah, yeah. Okay, okay.
Now where I think it immediately gets more complicated and you psychologists know more
about this than, than I do is even if we stay with those examples, the question about what happens
automatically and what is under our volitional control is another dimension that has to cut
across. Even if we grant that in both cases, whether I'm focused or whether I'm diffused
attention, I'm aware of reality in some direct, direct sense. It is true that if in either of
those cases, if I'm the artist focusing on the particular dot and my child suddenly screams,
then I will involuntarily or automatically lose that focus and go, go to attend to attend. Yeah,
that's been quite mapped out neurophysiologically, right? The Russians did a very good job of that
starting in about 1960. Sokolov was one of them and a woman named Vinogradova and they were
students of a neuropsychologist named Luria. They mapped out what they described as the
orienting reflex and that's exactly what that is. It's like you're focused on a task and something of
pragmatic import. Yeah, yeah, of implicit significance distracts you from your goal.
And you do. So there's a hierarchy of gradated responses that are part of that orienting reflex.
But then even another interesting case would be you're the artist and you know that sometimes your
kid cries out and screams, but you've given yourself a signal. I'm angry at my kid right now.
He's been a brat. I'm going to ignore him when he screams. So I'm focusing the exact same scenario,
kid screams. I register it, but my reaction is quite different. I say,
well, that shows you how malleable even those relatively low level instinctual responses are.
That's right. Yeah, that's going to be a back feed loop. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. Well, that's
and that's part of the consequence of the higher order brain centers feeding. Like there isn't
a primary level of perception that has no top down modification. It's even the primary visual
cortex, say where your fovea meets the visual cortex for the first time is tremendously
innervated by multiple. Well, so here's an example. So when you look at a object, when you look at a
pen, for example, let's say that constitutes a visual pattern, it's, it's represented on the retina
as a pattern, it's propagated along the nerves, then it branches out. One of the places that
information ends up quite quickly is the motor cortex. So when you see almost all the objects
that you see in the world, you see because they're definable in terms of the action you
take in their presence. So like when you see this pen, the grip motion that you would use to use it
is directly disinhibited by the sight of the pen. And that's part of the perception. It's not like
you see the pen and think about its use. That is not how it works at all. You see its use
directly. And so that's another thing that's very strange about object perceptions. Like
you don't actually see objects in the world. What you see are tools and obstacles. And well,
then there's all the things you don't see. And the tools and obstacles are defined in relationship
to your goal. So, you know, your goal, for example, the one or the example you used is you're not
happy with your child. So the goal there has shifted from respond to distress cries. It's shifted
from that, which might be the default, right, to certain probability that distress cry is false,
right, or manipulative, therefore ignore very different interpretive framework,
very different social landscape, and capable of modifying even almost the base level perception
you'll still hear the cry. I mean, I guess that would be even curious is like if your child is
highly probable, if your child is likely to emit distress calls that are false,
my suspicions are you'd be less likely to hear that, to actually hear it, not only not to respond
to it, right, because you'd have built an inhibitory structure that says, well, despite the
instinctual significance of that, it's irrelevant, right, right, highly likely.
Yeah. But to come back to like your pen example, and the issue of as sophisticated cognizers,
when we are perceiving the world that we have their use function kind of built into the perception,
yeah, I'm going to put that in quotation marks, right. And then the action that's going to be
embodied in that use, also in many cases seems to be built into the perception. I think if we
unpack that more, there's still going to be a very sophisticated set of learning we have to do about
what is built into the physiological system and the psychological system, right, at birth,
and how much of it is learned, because I don't definitely, yeah, because I don't think we want
to say that, you know, even in the 21st century, where we come into the world born with kind of a
pre-cognized understanding of pens. Right. And how do you use pens?
We probably have a pre-cognized understanding of tool.
I don't even know if we have that. Instead, I think we just, we have a certain physiological
structure that, right, and a certain conceptual structure that's built on that, such that,
and it's going to be very flexible and amenable to different environmental circumstances to adapt to
and conceive of things, whatever their intrinsic properties as potential tools.
Yeah, well, a lot of that.
So, let me just try another example to get to, because I like the earlier movie example and
the male-female difference. One thing that comes up in couples is how they learn to be
tuned to each other's voices and the sound of their own voice. So, couples who, before they met
each other would go to a loud party and they would be talking to each other.
Yeah, that's a really good example.
Yeah, that's right. And, you know, there's just, there's just noise and it's a big decibel level,
right? But then once they become couples and they have heard each other say their name, I say,
Jordan, Stephen, right, well, whatever, they can be in a relatively loud party separated across the
room, right? And the guy's wife says, Stephen, right? And he can pick that out of that incredible
room. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's the room of sounds.
Yeah, well, that's what you do if you're in a restaurant that's bustling with conversation.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
What's so remarkable is if you're sitting with someone and there's conversations everywhere,
you can tune yourself so that you hear the person that you're sitting beside, you hear them,
but then you can turn your attention to a conversation beside you and it'll prioritize
that. Or you can turn your attention to your own thoughts, right? And it is this,
and I would say that's something like the imposition of that tabernacle-like structure on that
plethora of potential interpretations. That's what the postmodernists would point out.
There's an infinite number of potential interpretations in a restaurant that's
bustling with conversation. It's like fair enough, but you prioritize one, that's what it means to
pay attention to it, right? Is that you prioritize it, you make something a center,
you make everything else a periphery, then you learn to do that automatically, right,
with practice. I think maybe the best example of that for literate people is the fact that you
can't see a word without reading it, right? Yeah, because you've automated certain.
Yeah, that's right. You've automated it, exactly. So that centers now into the presentation.
What the postmodernists do is that they take what I think is a virtue. We can automate all of these
things and we can learn to detect various things and focus on this, that and the other thing,
all of which are great strengths of the human consciousness and they turn them into negatives,
they turn them into vices. So what they say is, right, an interpretation then becomes in their
language because they've already got a epistemological theory, a negative epistemological
theory as something that is necessarily subjective. And the idea for them then is that somehow,
if we were going to be actually aware of reality and not through this interpretation,
we would have to not have any interpretations at all that somehow reality would just have to
stamp itself on our minds without any intermediary actions. Or what they will then do is to say,
I can choose to prioritize this, right, over that in my visual field, they will say, and they're
right to say this, that that's a value judgment. I think this is more important now, and this is
more important over that. But then by the time they start using the words values, they're coming
out of very sophisticated negative values of theories that say values are just subjective
and have nothing to do with any sort of external reality. So for both of them, it's on the cognition
side and on the evaluative side that they're deep into subjective territory and so those then become
negative words for them. Instead, and this is my only hope as a philosopher, I think philosophers
have a very small part of this project just attending to the language that we're using at
the foundations of cognition. These are all these metaphors of screens and filters and
tabernacles and visual fields and so on. That's where we have to get that sorted out,
because we don't get those foundations correct, then we're going to be going to be messed up.
But yeah, come back. Okay, well, so two things there. So you pointed to the fact that
the postmodernist description of the subjective, but tell me what you think about this.
See, the postmodern insistence, despite the fact that they claim that there's no uniting
meta-narrative, which is a specious claim in my estimation, because I don't know where the uniting
ends. If everything's a narrative, there's uniting narratives at every level of analysis,
but more than that, their proposition, at least implicitly, has been that the narratives that
we do utilize are predicated on power. That's part of the reflection of the subjective. It's like,
I'm prioritizing in keeping with my desire to exercise power. And by power, I don't mean ability
to maneuver in the world. I mean force and compulsion, and that what we have in the postmodern
world is a battleground between different claims of power, and that's all there is.
I think the weakness in that, first one weakness, is that it's a confession rather than a description,
but the other one is that power games are not iterable and productive and improving across time,
they're self-defeating. And so, you can play a power game, and you can win short-term victories
with a power game, but it's not a sustainable, iterable, medium-to-long-term, viable strategy.
You know that Franz de Waal, for example, the primatologist studied chimpanzees,
so we have this trope, and I think it's a consequence of Marxist influence on biologists
that the hierarchies of chimpanzees, for example, which are masculine hierarchies in the main,
are predicated on power. You know, the alpha chimp is the most powerful tyrant, and he dominates
all the others, and that's why he's reproductively successful. De Waal showed very clearly that
there are alphas who use power, but they have short range, fractious communities, and they're
extremely likely to suffer a premature, violent death. So it is a niche in that you can force
compliance, but the stable alphas that De Waal studied were the most reciprocal
male chimpanzees of the troop. They made the most lasting friendships, and so that's a whole
different model of the mediation of attention, let's say, than one that's predicated on power.
So do you think it's fair when you're assessing the postmodern corpus, philosophical corpus?
You talked about the subjective element. Where do you think the claim that, the postmodern claim
that power is essentially the dominant narrative? Where do you think that fits in with this claim
with regards to subjectivity? That's a good question. I think the postmodern use of the word
power is another example of turning a virtue into a vice. I think power properly conceived
could be co-extensive with our ability to get stuff done. And our cognitive powers,
if we have a good healthy epistemology, should be augmented to enable us to survive and flourish
better in the world. Even cooperatively. That's exactly right. But then if you, however, are
skeptical, if you do start with the epistemology, all of the postmoderns do come out of an
epistemological training. It's a striking fact. The big name postmoderns, so we mentioned Derrida,
Leotard, Foucault, Rorty, and the others. They are all PhDs in philosophy. They're all doing
heavy duty work in epistemology at their graduate and doctoral level work. And that does come to
become the foundation. And because of the time that they are working in, middle part of the 20th
century was an extraordinarily skeptical phase for philosophy. The revealing theories and paradigms
that everyone had been excited about had collapsed at that time. So they came of age. Now, what that
then is to say is, if you don't think that human beings can know the world as individuals, then
you don't think of developing your reason, developing your capacity for logic, for rationality,
for understanding is the most important thing about human beings. So what then is it to be
a human being? And to the extent that you devalue the human cognitive apparatus, then we are going
to become closer to chimps. And then the social models that are prevalent about how we think
chimps are going to operate in the world are going to become more predominant. Or even lower than
chimps, baboons. Yeah, it's more of a baboon model. Fractious fascists. I think this though
shows the absolute importance, though, of these cognitive issues that the psychologists and the
philosophers are trying to work out positively. Because to the extent that we can show that we
have cognition, that it is efficacious, that it is competent, that our brain, mind is an enormously
powerful tool. And if we learn to use it well, we will survive and flourish better as individuals
and socially, we'll start to work out the win-win positive, some social things. Otherwise, we will
regress socially and evolutionary to chimp and baboon kinds of levels.
That regression becomes the use of power as the meta-narrative that the postmodernists
hypothetically abandon. That's right. They're all left with it. Yeah, that's right. That's what
they're left with. You're getting rid of human cognitive power as a positive thing.
Then you ask, well, what's left? If it's not the case that I think my human cognition,
my mind, puts me in touch with reality, and that I can work out reality, and that your cognition
puts you in touch with reality. And of course, maybe we're initially focusing on things, we have
different frameworks, but that we nonetheless have the cognitive tools to talk about these things,
to do the experiments. I can visit what you've experienced. To take each other's position.
That's right. In service of some higher goal. That's right. And that we can work all of these
things out to, in effect, have an agreed upon understanding of the nature of reality. Then,
if that's not what's going on, that cognition is about trying to use our minds to understand
reality, reality starts to drop out of the picture. And what the postmodernists then do is either say,
well, I make up my own reality. That's what's going on here. Or some of them are more passive,
all of the influences of more environmental deterministic understandings of human beings.
What we call learning and cognition is just being conditioned by your environment or your
social upbringing, right? And so on. So again, we don't have an autonomous patriarchy.
Yeah. Very cool. Or it could be any sort of social structure from their perspective.
But that then means that what we are interested in is primarily social relationships.
It's not me in relation to reality. And other people are part of reality. So I have to work
that out. But rather, the assumption is that I am inextricably molded by and shaped by my social
reality. And so the dynamic between us socially is the thing that comes to be, and the word there
that becomes most important is the power word. It's a kind of social power. So that
tilts them towards that social constructionism. Oh, yeah, absolutely. Well, yeah, it's the
social construction theory that leads them to have that social understanding of power.
But the power for them cannot be the positive some kind of power that we're talking about.
Because that understanding of positive some power depends on we can figure out the way the world
works and do science and technology and make the world better place and empower ourselves.
We can learn better nutrition to make our bodies more powerful. I can understand that you're a
rational person. And you can understand that I'm a rational person. So I have to treat you a certain
way conversationally, socially, and so forth. So all of the positive some social stuff is going
to come out of that. But the postmoderns have cut all of that away. All you're left with is
beings that are conditioned and trying to recondition each other in a social world that is
totally social world. And what they then call power just is the influence or tools,
including the tools of language that are now understood as have nothing to do with the nature
of reality, but as being socially constructed themselves and tools of power. That's right.
And so it becomes then necessarily a zero sum, socially influencing and controlling game.
And they reinterpret everything in terms of that. Yeah. Okay. Okay. So I think what we'll do
is stop there. We've come to the end of the time for the YouTube section. I'd like to continue
this discussion on the daily wire side. But what I would like to talk about with you there is
power in service of what? Yeah. Right. Because there has to be, unless you, I mean, you could
hypothesize that power in itself is a desirable good, but then you have to define power in a way
that would make the desirability of itself evident. Alternatively, you have to say that you want power
for a reason. So I want to talk to you about that, your thoughts on that. That can take us back to
the Peterson Academy courses too. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, you, that maybe we can close
with that too. You had, you've taped three additional courses. I've done five courses. Yeah.
Three are in post-production too. Okay. And what are the three that are coming up?
One is on modern ethics. So what has happened in the modern world is it has become more diverse,
more global, more multicultural and more critical in some ways of traditional models that have come
down to us. So it's a much more wide open world. What's interesting about the modern world is how
little we have, what I think of as kind of a homogeneous cultures where everybody's by and
large on the same philosophical religious race. That's the collapse of that meta narrative.
Yeah. That particular meta went away. And so we have a huge number of people trying to work out
what is good, what is bad, what's right, what is wrong, what's the meaning of my life,
how should we organize ourselves socially. So what I did was chose eight completely different,
but extraordinarily influential modern moral philosophers and devoted a lecture to each of
them. Okay. So it goes back to people like David Hume wrestling with the is-ought problem and
Emmanuel Kant with his strong duty focus, John Stuart Mills, utilitarianism and so on in through
the 20th century up to very contemporary times. So that's one course, modern ethics. And all of
these people are giants. They all disagree with each other, but that's the contemporary landscape
within which people who are doing serious thinking about morality need to position themselves.
The other two courses are 16-letter lectures in total, but it called The Philosophy of Politics.
And here what I'm interested in is obviously we have political science, we have political theory,
political ideology, practical day-to-day understandings of politics. But what I'm
interested in is the philosophers' contributions to those debates. And one of my background
assumptions is that a lot of times when people disagree about politics, they're not actually
disagreeing about politics, they're disagreeing about something more fundamental. I think that's
become evident to everyone. That's right. And in many cases, it doesn't get brought to the
court. So I don't want to talk about the recent election, but really it's about culture more
fundamentally and not about many particular issues and underlying culture. And both the other courses
are dealing with that. Right. So one though picks up with the French Revolution, which is perhaps the
landmark event in European or at least continental European history, why that political revolution
happened. And there's a lot of philosophy that matters there. But then also an important
theoretician, Edmund Burke, and a launching of a kind of modern conservatism in response to that.
But then we go through all of the big name philosophers who have pronounced
influentially on politics. So we go through Hegel and Marx. And as we get into the 20th
century, we talk about the fascist Mussolini and Gentile, who was a PhD in philosophy and
Heidegger and the national socialist Friedrich Hayek, John Maynard Keynes. And that one ends with
World War II. So French Revolution to the World War II. The next course picks up at the end of
World War II and the Cold War. And it starts with Rand and Robert Nozick at the height of the Cold
War. How can we defend some sort of robust liberal capitalism in this context? So it starts with them,
goes on to John Rawls. We also talk about James Buchanan, who won the Nobel Prize for Public
Choice Economics. We also do some international, because we're living in a global society,
that cliche and so on. But the Islamist revolutions and the philosopher, the Egyptian philosopher
Said Kutbe, whose brother was a professor of Osama bin Laden, extraordinarily influential.
Ayatollah Khomeini had Kutbe's works translated into Farsi before he became Ayatollah. We go to
Russia in the rise of Putin and the role of the thinking of Alexander Guggen in that framework
as well. And then we end that course with a contemporary version of conservatism, Roger
Scrutin's meaning of conservatism, which came out a few years before he died. So the idea here is
to say, these are the big name political theories you need to know, but they're all big name ones
because they have a philosophical bite behind them by some very deep people and integrating that
with the history in each case, how some of them are urging history in a certain direction or
trying to make sense of major events like French Revolution or the Cold War or the attacks.
Right. So if people
watch all the courses that you have offered, so all five of them, they're going to get
a pretty decent overview of the major thinkers of the last 500 years in the philosophical,
ethical and political realms. That's my ambition. Yeah, that's a good deal.
That's a good deal. I want to watch those courses. There's lots of things that you're
lecturing about that I don't know about. I'd like to know the nuances. I'd like to know the
details. So yeah, so I'm very much looking forward to that. So well, thank you very much for coming
to Scottsdale today. A real pleasure. Yeah, it's great and it's great to have you on board on
Peterson Academy too. So it's good. And I think we'll talk too on the daily wire side a little bit
about the perils, pitfalls and opportunities of online, highly produced online education
because I'd like to get some of your opinions about that too. All right, so we'll do that.
Thank you very much, sir. Oh, I should give this to you too. So yeah, this is my new book,
which is coming out on the 19th and so we wrestle with God. And so I'm making a case in this book
fundamentally that, well, we talked about the relationship between story and perception,
but I'm trying to explain in this book why the notion of sacrifice is the central story in the
biblical corpus, making the case that sacrifice is equivalent to work and that sacrifices by
necessity, the foundation of the community, that those two things are so tightly associated that
they're equivalent. There's no difference between sacrifice and community. They're the same thing.
So anyways, I'd like to get that to you. All right, I will dive into it. Thanks. Yeah, yeah,
well, I'd certainly be interested in your thoughts on it as well. And so it's coming out very soon.
And I tried to make sure that everything that I wrote in it was hopefully justifiably
theologically and traditionally, but also scientifically, like I wanted the stories to
make sense at both levels of analysis at the same time. So, you know, that's a
tight triangulation, so to speak, but and who knows if it's successful, but that was the rule of thumb.
So anyways, very good to talk to you today. A pleasure. So yeah, and I'm looking forward to
our continued collaboration on the Peterson Academy side. Me too. All right, so all of you
watching and listening, you can join us on the Daily Wire side. We're going to talk about two
things. We're going to talk about the practical and hypothetical future of online education.
And we're going to talk about the relationship. What would you say the value of power from the
postmodern perspective? Why would people be interested in power? You might think that's
self-evident, but lots of things that appear self-evident aren't at all on more detailed
analysis. So you can join us for another half an hour of that discussion, if you would.
Thank you to the film crew here in Scottsdale today and my producer, Joy Holm, for putting
this together. She's been working extremely hard on the set side and the production side. And,
you know, the podcast is improving in quality quite dramatically in consequence. And we've
got all sorts of new things lined up for you in the very near future. There'll be some announcements
on that front very soon. Thank you very much for your time and attention today.
