This segment covers ring behavior, one of the more mysterious aspects of logically determined
design.
I'll show how to analyze ring behavior.
We'll see a series of movies illustrative of ring behavior, and I'll present a spreadsheet
to help analyze ring behavior.
Some people think I've lost my head, but I know exactly where it is.
A ring is a pipeline of oscillations that closes on itself.
Here we have a pipeline of four oscillations, one, two, three, four, and the output of the
pipeline goes back to the input of the pipeline and closes on itself forming a ring.
To analyze the behavior of a ring, we break it into five components.
The first component is an oscillation itself.
This is a single complete oscillation.
Then we break the oscillation into two components.
The first component here is the bubble path, and it goes from an enable rank through the
completeness back to the previous enable rank, and the wave front path, which goes from the
enable rank to the next enable rank through the combinational logic.
If we put these two together, we get the complete oscillation.
For the ring as a whole, we combine the bubble paths and the wave front paths.
Here, this is the wave front path, the ring wave front path, and it's just the combination
of all the oscillation wave front paths.
We just add all those up, and we have a path around the whole ring, which is the path that
the wave fronts flow over through the combinational logic.
Then the bubble path is the combination of all the bubble paths.
We combine all the bubble paths of the individual oscillations, and we get the bubble path around
the ring.
You'll notice that the bubble path does not include the combinational logic.
In other words, it flows around the combinational logic around the ring.
With these five components, we can analyze the behavior of the ring.
The numbers for ring behavior analysis are derived from the five components of the ring.
The slowest oscillation period is just the period of the slowest oscillation in the ring.
The wave front rejoin period is the total delay of the ring wave front path, and that's
how long it takes a single wave front to propagate around the ring without any weights.
The bubble rejoin period is the same for the bubble.
It's the total delay of the ring bubble path, and that's how long it takes a bubble to
propagate around the ring if it doesn't encounter any delays.
The wave front population period is how long it takes all the wave fronts in the ring to
populate through the slowest oscillation in the ring, and the bubble population period
is how long it takes all the bubbles in the ring to propagate through the slowest oscillation
in the ring.
The number of bubbles is the number of oscillations in the ring minus the number of wave fronts.
The ring is always full of either wave fronts or bubbles.
Wave fronts always come in pairs.
There's a data pair, data wave front, and all wave front pair.
You can have one bubble, but you cannot have one wave front in a ring.
The behavior rationale is that each member of a population flowing around the ring chases
its population around the ring.
The question is whether it catches up with that population or not and has to wait.
If a member does not catch up with its population, it flows around the ring without any waiting.
There are three components to ring behavior.
The wave front flow, the bubble flow, and the slowest oscillation period in the ring.
And the behavior of the ring depends on who has to wait on who and who doesn't have to wait.
In the wave front limited, the bubbles in the slowest oscillation period waits on wave fronts.
The wave fronts don't wait on anybody.
They free flow around the ring.
In bubble limited, the wave fronts in the slowest oscillation period wait on bubbles.
Then the bubbles don't have to wait on anybody.
They free flow around the ring.
In delayed limited, the wave fronts and the bubbles have to wait on the slowest oscillation period.
and the slowest oscillation period doesn't have to wait on anybody.
It always has wave fronts and bubbles to flow through it.
The delays around a ring can be arranged such that the ring is perfectly balanced.
In other words, everybody arrives just in time and nobody ever has to wait on anybody,
and the ring just keeps flowing with no weights.
A ring can also deadlock.
Wave fronts flow into bubbles, and if there are no bubbles to flow into,
the wave fronts can't flow and the ring is deadlocked.
These numbers and relations are captured in tables and a spreadsheet
that can be downloaded from the website.
The table includes the delays around the ring,
the number of oscillations in the ring,
and the number of wave fronts in the ring.
And from these are derived the other numbers,
the number of bubbles in the ring,
the wave from population, the bubble population,
the wave rejoin period, the bubble rejoin period.
And from those are calculated the period of the ring
and the frequency of the ring.
And in this last column over here,
we indicate the behavior mode of the ring,
whether it's wave limited, bubble limited,
whether it's in perfect balance or it's deadlocked.
And these are delays for a perfectly balanced ring,
and we see the table for a perfectly balanced ring down here,
and we'll talk a little more about this in a bit.
And in this example, there is,
the function is one oscillation in the ring
that's slower than all the other oscillations
than the buffers.
This table assumes that all the other oscillations
are buffers with the same period.
And we have the reverse bubble delay
and the forward wave front delay
for each function oscillation and the buffer oscillations.
And from that, all the other numbers are calculated.
For a given configuration of delays,
the behavior of a ring is quantized
because it consists of wholenesses interacting
within the restricted environment of the ring.
You can't have a partial wave front
and you can't have a partial oscillation.
And the ring is closed,
and these exist within the limited environment.
On the graph over here,
you can see that we have the nodes of behavior,
and we've connected those with a line
to form the curve of the graph,
but there is no behavior on the line.
There is behavior only at the points on this curve.
We can change the delays of a ring
and it will change the shape of this curve,
but there will always be exactly 11 behavior points
on the curve for a 24 oscillation ring.
Now we have a set of movies
that illustrate the behavior of a ring,
and the movies give you a God's eye view
of the ring behavior.
You can see the whole ring
and all the behavior in the ring all at once.
And this is something you can't do
with majoring signals in an electronic circuit, for instance.
So this is very useful to illustrate
and understand how a ring behaves.
So in the movie, the spaces in this diagram
are oscillations and the lines are oscillation lengths.
The wave fronts flow this way,
and the bubbles or the closures flow this way.
Red is a data wave front,
blue is an empty or a null wave front.
Pink is the data closure,
and teal is the empty or null closure.
The initial state of the ring is
one data wave front, one empty null wave front,
and an empty null bubble going all the way
around the ring to the data wave front.
When the ring starts flowing,
the data wave front starts flowing
into the null empty bubble.
The completeness is detected,
and the closure or request for null
starts flowing backwards,
and the data wave front continues flowing forwards.
These flows continue, and the flows continue
until the closure gets to the linkage,
enables the link to allow null empty to flow,
and this becomes a data bubble at that point.
And this is still a data wave front,
because this is enabling data.
So from this point forward, this is a data wave front.
From this point backwards, it's a data bubble.
So now the null empty can flow into this data bubble,
and the null empty starts flowing into the data bubble.
The data wave front continues flowing.
We get another completeness here,
and the request for null begins flowing back,
and we get the completeness of null here,
and the closure for data begins flowing back.
And these flows continue,
and now this closure for null
has finally gotten to the link,
and this becomes a data bubble,
and this is a wave front.
So this is a data wave front,
and from here back is a data bubble now.
And this is a null wave front,
and this is a null bubble.
Now, when this data closure gets to the link,
this will become a null bubble.
Okay, so now this is a null wave front,
and from here on back it's a null bubble, and so on.
Here we have two movies that illustrate
wave front limited behavior.
Over here is extreme wave front limited behavior.
There's only one data wave front
and one null empty wave front in the ring,
and over here we have five data wave fronts
and five null empty wave fronts,
and it's a slightly wave front limited behavior.
Now, you'll notice over here
we're talking about 22 bubbles,
and in the previous slide we talked about one bubble.
So now we're talking about this
as being 22 null empty bubbles,
and previously it was one null empty bubble.
How you talk about that depends on,
you can talk about it either way,
but the thing about bubbles
is that they're hard to identify.
If you look over here,
the ring is flowing,
and we have data bubbles,
and we have null empty bubbles around the ring,
and if you look at here,
this is a null empty bubble.
It's hard to tell how many there are.
I mean, we'd have to get down into the details,
but you'll notice that this is a little longer
than these bubbles are,
and what that means is that these null empty bubbles
are waiting on wave fronts,
so we're slightly wave front limited.
But anyway, bubbles are strange beasts.
They're difficult to understand,
and it takes a bit.
So down here we have the initial state of each ring.
We have the movie,
and you can download these movies,
watch the movie, and single step the movie
to get a feel for ring wave front behavior.
So here we have two movies
that illustrate bubble limited behavior,
and over here we have extreme bubble limited behavior.
We have 22 wave fronts in the ring,
and only two bubbles.
So all the wave fronts are jammed up
waiting for bubbles to get to them
so they can flow,
and here are the two bubbles flowing in the ring.
Over here we have slightly bubble limited flow,
and you can see that there's more flow activity going on,
but here you have the wave fronts are flowing this way,
so here you have two wave fronts that are not flowing,
they're waiting for the bubble.
So we're going to get a completeness here,
and the bubble will flow back,
and it will allow this wave front to flow.
So the wave fronts are waiting on bubbles,
and it's slightly bubble limited.
So here's the initial states of the two movies,
and again you can download them.
So here we have three movies
that illustrate delay limited behavior,
and there's one oscillation up here in the corner
that has a longer delay in it.
Eight steps, sixteen steps,
or 24 steps in relation to all the others.
And this is in flow,
and you can see that wave fronts are jamming up
waiting to get through the slow oscillation,
and you can see that bubbles are jamming up
waiting to get through the slow oscillation.
You can see that down here
all three initialization states
are exactly the same.
The only difference in the movies
is the delay in that one oscillation.
There's a spreadsheet table
set up to match the delay ratios
of the ring movies,
and this is a graph showing the
throughputs of the various configurations
of the ring with various populations
of wave fronts in the ring.
And the blue is the ring
where all the oscillations
have the same period.
There's no slow oscillation.
The ring is an eight delay,
an oscillation with an eight delay.
This is a twelve delay,
and this is a twenty-four delay.
And you'll notice that
when we're delay limited,
there's a plateau
where for different wave front populations
the throughput is the same.
So this is delay limited.
With fewer wave fronts
we become wave front limited,
and with more wave fronts
we become bubble limited.
And there's the slowest wave front in the ring.
There's always this
delay limited plateau
of throughput limitation.
So there's a verilog simulation
set up to also match the delay ratios
of the movies, so we can illustrate it
with wave forms here.
So here there's the ring with
one wave front in it,
so we're wave front limited.
We get one wave front every so often.
So this is a data null
wave front pair.
We have two wave fronts, and we get two wave fronts
every so often, the throughput doubled.
Here we get three wave fronts
during the same period,
the throughput tripled.
And now here we're on the delay limited plateau.
So all the wave fronts are flowing
at the rate of the slowest oscillation.
And here we're still
on the plateau,
and all the wave fronts are still flowing
at exactly the same rate.
So we have exactly the same throughput
for all four of these
conditions.
So over here we're at 16 wave fronts
and we'll start to be bubble limited.
So now
our throughput is slowing down.
So now we have
four wave fronts
in the period.
Here we have three wave fronts,
two wave fronts, one wave front,
and here we're deadlocked because there's no bubbles.
There's a spreadsheet table
in a simulation set up with delays
to make a perfectly balanced ring.
And here you can see
the throughput of a perfectly balanced ring.
There's a peak behavior
and then we fall off on
wave front limited and bubble limited immediately.
So this is the simulation
with the 12 wave fronts
and the 12 bubbles, which is
the highest throughput.
And here we're starting to be
wave front limited and here we're bubble limited.
And you'll notice that
with wave front limited, the weight gap
slants up towards the right
and with bubble limited
the weight gap slants up
towards the left.
Most rings in a practical system will be
three oscillation rings
or four oscillation rings.
So we have a spreadsheet table here
which allows you to put in the relevant delays
for each oscillation
individually.
So this is a four oscillation ring
and this is the bubble path delay
in a wave front path delay.
And this would be a three oscillation ring
and this is the bubble path delay
in a wave front path delays.
This is the code in ring 24.v
that implements the 24 oscillation ring.
We have 24
dual buffs
one for each stage of the ring
and we have
dual rail variable
of 24
vector 24 long
and the variable ties
to the stages.
So A0 flows to A1
A1 flows to A2
A2 flows to A3 and so forth
until 22 flows to
23 and 23 flows to 0
which connects back
to the beginning closing
the ring.
Now the dual buffs
you can configure the ring
by setting the dual buff
to D0 or D1.
This will initialize
a one rail in the ring
and this will initialize a zero rail.
And you can also
add delay 8, 16
or 24 after dual buff
and
this stage will have the delay.
So you can put
a D1, D0 delay
anywhere where there's a dual buff.
Don't change the dual buff
dot dual buff ends.
Those are the null wave fronts
between the data wave fronts
for initialization.
So
if you take
all these out and just have
one dual buff D1 then you have
one wave front in the ring.
This has 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
wave fronts in the ring
and you can add whatever you want
to these dual buffs down here to change
the configuration of the ring.
