And I was driving home from Melbourne last night
and I was listening to a podcast that was speaking
about the massive shift there seems to have been
in who believes what in the last sort of 10 to 20 years,
maybe slightly more than that.
I look back at the 70s and I see the rock and roll
as like the lefties who were very free speech,
very small government, very leave me alone.
And it was cool.
Like you look at that rock and roll scene, you go,
I really liked that they're against the system.
And it seems that same mindset, that same thought process
has completely switched and somehow the conservatives
in my opinion seems to have become the really cool ones
in the last few years.
And it's so incredible to watch just how a certain mindset
held by a certain group of people seems to have been
completely passed over to a different side of politics.
And I was just interested to pick your brain
around what you think has happened there
because it's a very strange transition.
Yeah.
Well, yeah, that's a big question.
But I think part of it is that the political shifts
that we're noticing and we have arguments
about every time there's an election cycle and so forth,
those are always downstream from cultural trends
and downstream from high intellectual trends,
particularly as in the Western world
where we're becoming more and more educated,
young people are spending more time in formal education,
K through 12 and then a significant number of people
now getting back towards degrees.
So what's happening in the intellectual environment
is exerting more control over broad cultural trends
and political trends as well.
So I think it's fair then to say that what we need to do
to understand that phenomenon, the various flip floppings
is what has happened in the intellectual world
over the course of the last generation.
And essentially you mentioned the 1970s.
So I'm a child of the 70s, that's the music of my youth.
It's when I started university
and then became a professor.
So I've been inside this world all of my career.
I think it's fair to say that the people on the left,
part of the culture was a counterculture element.
But at the same time, it recognized it was drawing
on a culture that was in fact progressive,
that there were in fact true values
that we should be aspiring to equality for all people.
And that's a universal value and it's a real value.
It's an objective value, really believe in equality.
And we think that we can figure out the problems
that have come down to us from history.
So we can do history objectively,
learn our lessons from history
and then hopefully do our social science
to figure out what we need to do
to change social institutions,
to bring about an objectively more progressive,
more egalitarian, more free society.
And that was the prevailing ethos.
And so to the extent that the current society
of the 60s and 70s was still making progress,
but maybe too slowly, right?
Or that there still were a significant number
of reactionary elements in society
were counter to those people.
And in some cases we want to be in their face
counter to those.
And so the rebelliousness of young people
takes a particular form.
Now that I think is a kind of leftism,
but it was also shared by a large number of liberals
and classical liberals.
And even some people I remember growing up in Canada
and the conservative party rebranded itself
as the progressive conservative party
because they wanted to distance themselves
from old fashioned reactionary kinds of conservatives
and so on.
So I think your description of where things were
in the 60s, 70s and on into the early 80s is right.
But what happened was an intellectual revolution
that started in the 60s and in the 1970s.
Now we call it postmodernism, right?
But the label is important here
because it's saying that we need to get beyond
all of the assumptions, even the fundamental assumptions
of the modern world.
And it did come out of the left,
but the left is always a big tent.
But this was coming out of a part of the left
that was extraordinarily skeptical and cynical.
And it no longer believed that there were such things
as objective values or truths
or that we can genuinely learn from history
or that there are laws of social science
and we can figure out what those institutions are.
And this philosophical framework that was very skeptical
then said, we are committed to a certain kind
of left values, but we no longer believe
that we are in a society that's going to make progress.
It's just going to be a constant battle
between different groups that have their own
subjective values.
Nobody knows what's right.
It's just that some groups have more power than others.
But we, because of our value set,
then are operating in a different kind
of counterculture psychology, right?
So it's not that we just need to stick it
in the face of the old reactionaries.
It's that the whole society we think is corrupt.
We want to overturn the entirety of the society,
but we don't think this is a matter
of getting people to be idealistic about values
and teaching them those values
and that we're going to work together
to make the world a better place.
It was a cynical power play understanding of the world
and that came to dominate.
Now, some of the big names here are people
like Michelle Foucault and Jacques Derrida
and others, they sound a little old fashioned
because they are a generation ago,
but they were extraordinarily influential.
And they then trained an entire generation of people
who then became cultural leaders
and professors at leading institutions by the time.
We get to the 80s and on into the 90s.
Those ideas stop just becoming high theory.
You see them infiltrating law schools, education schools,
various other professional schools.
And they are then training an entire generation of teachers
and the next generation of professors
and then all of that then means
we have a generation of people who are going to university
and they are being taught a certain philosophical,
skeptical, cynical, in your face,
adversarial understanding of the way the world works,
but they are just entering into what they see as a battle
on behalf of a certain set of values.
And then suddenly we're aware of everything
being very different.
Just let me say one more thing
and I'll kick it back to you.
Earlier today I posted a result of the Harry study.
It's Higher Education Research Institute.
And it's an internal studying what's going on
in higher education.
And so they've done these longitudinal studies
asking faculty, for example,
what do you think college education
or university education should be about?
And so they asked professors in the 1960s,
should it be about career training?
Should it be about developing people
into being well-rounded individuals?
Should it help people encourage their self-development
so they can figure out who they are
and what they want to do with their lives?
Should it be that we are training people
to be agents of social change in society,
including political change?
So you have a whole array of values.
Now in the 1960s, it's true to say
that there were more people on the left
than there were on the right among higher education.
So the content of their politics then was different.
And the left was dominating in the 1960s.
But set that aside, at that point still,
80% of all professors said
that education should not first and foremost
be about social activism.
It should be about developing individuals
who can think for themselves,
who are going to be well-rounded individuals
who can have a productive life.
And of course, also, as one of the values,
be a participant in society.
Be a good voting citizen
and do all of the various kinds of institutions as well.
So that then is to say, 80% had what we think of
as kind of a traditional understanding
of what education, higher education should be about.
And there were only 20% of professors in the 1960s
who said higher education should be essentially
about training social activists.
My job is to teach people who are going to go out
and take charge of social institutions
and political institutions and change society
in the direction that I think it should go.
Now, that's the late 1960s.
You go to our one generation later,
say the year 2010 and on into the 20 teens,
that survey had been done every year for 10 years.
By the time we get to the year 2015,
80% of college faculty are saying,
my number one job is to train social activists.
So you put those two together, right?
That then is to say, we're not training people to think,
really, and to think for themselves
and form independent judgment
and look at both sides of an argument
and do historical analysis and so forth.
We know what's true or what we believe to be true.
We know what the values are.
And education is to teach people those values
so they get fired up and will go out
and do something in society.
And that is a huge, huge change in higher education
in one generation.
And that is what underlies the phenomenon
that you are talking about.
Suddenly we've got a very different cultural landscape
and the political landscape,
but it's due to changes in the intellectual atmosphere
and higher education.
That's incredible.
That last 10 years of the increase in the expectation
that a professor should be prioritizing social activism.
I guess it's no surprise.
I watch people like Charlie Kirk or Ben Shapiro,
Candace Owens go into almost any well-recognized
university or college across,
whether it's Australia or America,
or Candace can't even come to in Australia at the moment.
And you see the pushback to the ideas
that they're there to share.
And you go, okay, as a foundation,
I thought these places were set up
for very different reasons,
but perhaps based on the description you just gave,
it's in fact no surprise.
Like if these group of students have been educated
or at least a push towards this idea of social activism,
then the idea of an opposing view
is a very dangerous subject
rather than just another perspective.
Yeah, I can speak to my personal experience on this.
I don't know how representative those clips are
that you are mentioning,
but it doesn't surprise me that that's the way it is.
Because I do know that just among my colleagues
at various universities,
younger PhDs who are joining the faculty there,
the new junior faculty,
they will quite proudly say that they've not read
the great works in the literary tradition.
I've never read Shakespeare, I've never read Chaucer,
I've never read anything before 1950.
And then I'm a PhD in literature
or I'm a philosophy person or I'm a history person.
And that used to be a badge of shame
to admit that there are some of the great works
that you have not read firsthand.
And the idea then is that I don't think
we need to read across the spectrum on various issues,
whether it's religious or politics
or any other cultural thing.
I know what's true
and I'm just going to teach my narrow set of books.
So it doesn't surprise anyone then that students
will come out uneducated and not expecting debate,
not even recognizing in many cases
that there are multiple interpretations.
So, but I recall the various universities I went to
when I was an undergraduate and then grad school
in my first couple of teaching positions,
it used to be common that the Christian evangelists
would come around,
literally get up on their soapbox and start preaching
and people enjoyed it.
They would have arguments and discussions
about biblical passages and just that and the other thing.
And then the Republicans would have their speakers
who would come around the Democrats,
the Marxists would be there.
I even heard a fascist once
at my undergraduate institution.
And people would say, this is serious stuff,
but at least we should listen to these people
and sharpen our own argument.
So the expectation is that all of the major positions
are going to be out there,
that students are going to be exposed to them
and you want them to learn how to think through all of them
and make up their own mind.
That to the extent that that has gone away
has been a disaster.
It's interesting to hear you say you saw one fascist.
I think anyone who disagrees with what the mainstream idea
of what you've been taught to believe
is now labeled a fascist.
So some students have seen hundreds over the last 12 months.
Yeah.
Well, I think that's part of the debasement
of the political vocabulary.
If you don't know how to argue,
we all know this when we're in the schoolyard,
when we're in kids and we get frustrated,
then we just start throwing words out at people.
The worst insults that we can imagine,
it doesn't matter if they are true or not.
But if everybody's a racist or everybody's a fascist
or everybody's a sexist, then those words are debased.
And it says a lot more about the person
who's just casually throwing them out there.
You know, you're not dealing with a sophisticated
or educated person.
Yeah, and yet it's such a common go-to.
I mean, I noticed this more than ever
during the COVID period here in Australia.
I know Canada and Australia seem to have
quite a similar approach with the way that they dealt
with it from a government perspective.
And I remember anyone who had legitimate questions
about the way that the government were going
about mandating whether it was vaccines or lockdowns
or whatever, was very quickly labelled
an anti-vaxxer and a skeptic.
And you're right, like I saw some lovely people
who were smart people, very reasonable,
lovely people who, you know, had questions
about the way that it was being pursued.
And yet the idea of just pigeonholing them
so you didn't have to deal with any of their points
as reasonable, it certainly seems like a good tactic
if you don't want to have an actual honest conversation.
I think that's a very good example.
And it's pointing up about the purpose of language
and how language is being used.
So if we say in the prior generation,
we think that language is about teaching individuals
to carve up the world and categorize the world
and be able to understand the way the world works
in increasingly sophisticated ways.
So learning how to do grammar and logic
and carefully define your terms
and present a case for your position.
And at the same time, recognizing
that a lot of these things are very complicated
so you expect that people will have different ways
of conceptualizing the world
and you have to learn how to navigate your vocabulary
and their vocabulary and find common ground
and be willing to change your mind and so on.
So that then is to say that that is to think of language
as a tool of cognition for figuring out
the way the world really works
and that we then are going to develop norms of civility
and conversation to the extent
that we're trying to do this socially.
We're going to have conversations and debates
and specialized institutions.
But this is where the skepticism becomes important
because if you have a philosophical movement
and the post-moderns are the clearest example of this
where you don't think language ever tells it
or maps on to reality,
that reality is just not knowable to us instead.
All we have is these subjective values
and subjective frameworks and subjective narratives
and nobody's narratives are better than anybody else's.
Then it doesn't make sense to think about languages
trying to figure out the way the world is.
It also then doesn't make sense
that we should try to use language cooperatively,
jointly to try to communicate with each other.
So the post-moderns quite forthrightly
reconceptualize what language is
and it just becomes a weapon.
But it's just one more tool that you use
when you're trying to overpower other people.
So if you find you use language in a certain way
and that gets people to shut up,
then that's a success.
Or if you can use language in a way
that pushes people's emotional buttons.
So then we know that people when they get emotional
and they don't think clearly
and that that sabotages their cognitive process.
So if you learn how to push their emotional buttons
with language, or if you learn
that there are certain logical techniques
like attacking people personally
or appealing to various authorities
or muddying the water in various ways.
And those also sabotage someone else's cognitive process.
Then that's fair game.
Language for you is a weapon against your enemy
and any use of rhetoric that disarms
or weakens your enemy is something that you want to do
rather than saying that all of those things
are sins to be avoided because they get
in the way of clear thinking and good communication.
Yeah, so like with that perspective applied
like on a post-modernist,
how are they even attempting to find truth?
Or is it something that's completely irrelevant?
Like the idea of truth is just out of reach
regardless of how well you research, how well you look.
It's not something you can actually find for sure.
I guess that's probably the problem
so many post-modernists have with
like the religious organization
or maybe one of many problems that they could point to
is the fact that it seems quite dogmatic
and ironically they seem to share so many of the traits
that they apparently stand against.
And yet, yeah, that's one thing that I struggle
to sort of wrap my head around
because the idea of using words so effectively
to disarm your opposition's ideas
but not in a way to actually point towards
or help discover truth, it almost seems like an irony.
Yeah, well, irony is a favorite word of post-modernists
because they will often say that
they're sort of taking an ironic stance.
So they'll use certain words,
but at the same time you are backing away
from the literal use of those words
because we don't wanna go down this philosophical road
but there is something self-contradictory
about saying the truth is that there is no truth, right?
Or it really is the case
that we don't know what's really out there, right?
So how do you formulate those things
without immediate self-contradiction?
So a kind of ironic stance is often a fallback position
for those attracted to post-modernism.
But I think maybe the best analogy
is if you think about a courtroom
where rhetoric becomes important.
So someone's on trial for something or other,
we have a prosecution and a defense
or a plaintiff and a defendant
and maybe we have a jury and we have a judge
and in one sense this is a powerful institution, right?
So something very bad is going to happen to someone
or something very bad has happened already to someone
and we're trying to sort out what we're going to do
in response to that badness.
But we're familiar with two kinds of lawyers, right?
There's one kind of lawyer who says,
look, there are facts of the matter here.
Something happened and we really need to use
all of the best cognitive tools available
to figure out what the truth is, what the facts are
and to put them together in a story
that best describes what happened in reality.
So that commitment to facts and objectivity
and truth is fundamental to that kind of lawyer.
And much of our Western legal system is built upon
that cognitive commitment to facts and facts and truth.
But also the idea here is that we are striving for justice
and we all know that sometimes justice fails
and we don't get things right, but really,
there are such a thing as right and wrong, good and bad.
There are good people, there are bad people,
there are evil people, there are victims.
So all of these normative distinctions
are important and valid.
And what we really want to do is figure out the truth
so that we can do justice.
We can really find out who the bad guys are
and punish them appropriately, whatever that is,
or who has been victimized and compensate
the victim appropriately.
And that is what my commitment is.
And that is then to say that that kind of lawyer
is going into the practice of law
with a philosophical commitment.
I believe in facts, in truth, in logic.
I believe in the civil procedures of the law
and I believe in justice.
And those regulative standards then guide
his or her activities in the court.
But we also know, of course,
that there's a whole other species of lawyer
who will say cynically, that's all crap.
That's all nonsense, right?
There is no truth and courtrooms are not about
figuring out truth and justice.
Courtrooms are about who can tell the better story,
the sexier story, right?
Who can, in some cases, pull the wool
over the eyes of the jury.
And I can use all kinds of rhetorical tricks
in order to mislead them down this road
or obscure various things that the other side came up with.
And the issue here is not whether I'm saying things
that are true or not, but what can I get away with, right?
Before the other lawyer objects,
before the judge strikes me down.
And so I'm just using language as a tool of power.
I want my side to win.
It doesn't matter if my side has truth
and justice on its side, it's all about power.
And the language I'm using in the courtroom
is just to get the power of this institution
on my side and against the other side.
That's the difference between the mainstream
of Western civilization for the last 2000 years
and what the post-moderns
and some of their allies are attacking.
Yeah, well, that was one of the most interesting things,
I think, from having an armchair view
of the American election period
over the last six to 12 months
was maybe the blessing and the curse,
depending on what side of politics you stand on,
is that every moment of you speaking is now captured.
And so the idea of a politician,
regardless of what side they're on,
being able to get up there and say something
and then immediately change their mind
depending on the audience or the people
that they're speaking to
and seemingly having no accountability
to the things they once said
is something that I think I definitely struggled with.
And I mean, it's interesting, I'm 37 now
and perhaps it needing to be careful
that you don't fall into ideas of just well-trained thoughts
and the assumption that you know how things are
and moving towards cynicism, but you look at politics
and you can see where the idea
that politicians are just lies comes from
because I mean, I saw about,
I was watching a Kamala Harris clip
where she was talking about gun ownership at one stage
and how we got every right to be able to take guns.
And then six months later, she's a proud gun owner.
And people, I remember just reading people saying,
hang on a second, like, where do we stand?
And I mean, I'm completely open to the idea that,
and naturally I change my mind from time to time.
And I hope I always will if my beliefs actually change,
I can be public and open about that.
But the idea that there's 15 in a short space of time
makes your question, you know,
whether you believe anything you're saying
or as you say, you're just trying to win an argument
or win an election in this case.
Yeah, I think all of this carries over
to replies in lots of different cultural spheres.
But I think you're quite right to say
the debasement of political discussion in a democracy
as exemplified by the last perhaps couple of elections
is an illustration of that.
I think a couple of things I think are going on.
I think one thing is politicians have always done this.
That's true.
So part of it just might be what you're talking about
is now that we all have, you know,
the cameras and everything is instantly recorded
and beamed around the world,
that we are as consumers of politics, so to speak, right?
The people watching what the politicians are saying,
we have better access to catching them
when they are doing this sort of thing.
And so in some sense, we can be surprised
that it happens as often as it does.
I think aside, it's not simply a technical issue
about our being better able to detect it when it happens.
But I think that the expectation that politicians
will tell the truth has declined as well
over the course of the last generation.
It's been encouraged precisely by the intellectual trends.
So rather than saying we are going to hold scientists
and journalists and politicians to a higher standard,
those standards themselves have been debased.
And so to the extent that those standards have been debased,
the next generation of politicians say,
well, why should I even try?
And so it becomes a vicious cycle
rather than a virtuous cycle.
Yeah, you see it through not only politics,
but like a lot of mainstream institutions.
I know you've probably had a front row seat
in the academic world through college, university.
But I mean, whether you're a newspaper
and news outlet, a politician,
the level of distrust that the public has over,
I mean, I can only speak from the last 10 years
when I've been paying more attention,
seems to have dropped dramatically even in that time.
And it's been a real power struggle here in Australia
currently where in a really interesting time,
I think we've got quite a,
like a so-called progressive government at the moment,
our labor government.
And there's been a number of things
that they've attempted to pass
that the Australian population have voted against,
but the most current one is like a misinformation bill.
So the idea that the way they're floating it
is at the moment we're trying to ban social media
for kids up to the age of 16.
And I mean, I've spoken to a few parents
and on the surface, like everything, you hear that
and you go, okay, it makes sense.
Like it's taking a lot of their time.
There's pretty clear graphs that represent
the drop in mental health between their use of technology
and a couple of years down the track.
But then Elon Musk posted about it.
He's going back and forth with our prime minister,
just speaking about how it seems like a backdoor attempt
to control what information the general population
has access to.
And I mean, if there's one thing
that those institutions for a large part
seem to have an issue with,
it's the fact that alternative ideas are being expressed
that maybe make more sense than, you know,
what their so-called trusted institutions
are telling us to believe.
Yeah.
No, I think the decline in the trust of institutions
is a healthy thing because it is so well-deserved.
So one of the great things about social media
for all of its, you know,
we're all going up the learning curve,
including young people about the risks
as well as the benefits of all of these tools.
But one of the benefits has been exposing,
just, you know, the outright cynicism,
the outright lying by so many people
in powerful, trusted institutions.
And you're quite right to say it's not only politics,
it's also in journalism and the idea of higher education
as an institution of truth-seeking.
You know, it's almost hard to say that
with a straight face in many departments
of higher education.
I don't want to be too cynical.
I think in many, many universities around the world,
beautiful, wonderful truth-seeking things are occurring.
The natural sciences are still, by and large,
healthy, many of the professional schools and so on.
But there are outright intellectual sewers,
so to speak, in almost every university around the world.
So I'll just kick it back to you
about where you want to take the conversation next on this.
Yeah, well, I actually had a question
that I've sort of pinned in my mind
about something you said at the outset of the conversation.
And correct me if I'm wrong,
I think you were speaking about post-modernist.
But you mentioned that history is something
that we can't learn from necessarily.
This wasn't your words, obviously,
but the example of the post-modernist,
so yeah, as I said, correct me if I'm wrong.
It's an interesting thing because obviously,
we look back at history and we do say
we learned from our mistakes.
And I can say time and time again in my own life,
I'll see mistakes that I've made in the past
and I'll aim to correct it.
And I'll have the best intentions,
and yet six months later,
an opportunity comes up for me to correct the mistake
and I fall into the same trap.
And it's a very small example,
but one thing that I'm interested about
is there's no doubt we can learn from history, surely.
Like we see the errors of our way,
but whether it's on an individual level
or on like a world scale,
there does seem to be a trend that we go back towards,
like there's a spectrum between capitalism
and communism, for example,
or the spectrum between that liberal
and that fascist style government.
And it's sort of hard to wrestle with
because you say that surely we learned from history,
but the truth is we do seem to stumble
upon the same mistakes time and time again.
Is that just a generational thing
and the fact that so many of us don't read back
beyond say the 1950s,
like the young PhDs at some of these things?
Yeah, what is going on there, would you say?
Yeah, I think that's a complex question.
I mean, you're right to point out that at the individual level,
it can be hard for us to sort of,
what we did in our lives and remember it accurately
and figure out why we did what we did
and if the results were good
to try to turn that into a habit,
if the results were bad to change
whatever thinking process or experiment
or bad habit that led us to do that.
So that's always an ongoing and difficult project
for us as human beings.
And it does require that one has good cognitive habits
and that you develop those cognitive habits,
but it also requires a value commitment.
You believe that improvement, progress,
self-development is possible.
So you have to have a personal philosophy to do all of that.
But then it becomes even more difficult
when we start doing some of these things socially
because if it's you and I together
are trying to figure out what happened
and what we are going to do
and what went wrong and what went right,
then not only does each of us individually
have to do all of that,
but we have to do it together
with a lot of information exchange and so on.
So it becomes a difficult problem
and you scale that up to 10 people, 100 people.
So all of these, just to take one example
about from the business world,
it's one thing to be a solo practitioner.
You have to manage yourself
as soon as you start hiring other people,
the principles of management
for running a 10-person organization
that's already daunting for many of us
to scale that up to a 1,000-person organization
or 10,000 and international
with all of the cultural differences.
These are huge, huge, huge challenges.
So one of the issues is just the scaling up.
And that does require to the extent that we scale up
that we have, again, good cognitive habits,
but here we're talking about being able to think abstractly
in terms of more and more general principles.
And that is a learned skill
and it's a difficult learned skill
and something that requires ongoing practice.
But I think also another part of your question
that you mentioned along the way
is that it is generational.
So I think that when we talk about we learning from history,
part of it is that every 25 or 30 years,
the we is not the same we, right?
And so the point then is that one generation comes along
and it gets its education.
It learns how its culture works.
It learns certain ideas about religion
and science and politics.
And in many cases is innovating
and doing a bunch of new things.
And so it adopts things from the previous generation
and then moves things in a certain generation.
But it's important to remember that every new generation,
they're all born tabula rasa.
They don't know any of that.
And so they learn from their parents,
they learn from sports, they learn from schooling
and they learn from their own experiences
and playing with their friends and so on.
But I think to the extent then that the older generation
fails to educate effectively,
we will expect that the younger generation
will be prone to committing more of the same mistakes
that previous generations made.
So figuring out how, this is what good parenting
and good schooling is all about,
to pass on the hard one lessons of history,
both good and bad.
And then also to teach young people
how to assess the lessons of history.
And then also to be able to exercise good judgment
about what new experiments and what innovations
to introduce, that's really hard work.
And so to the extent that you have a debased education system,
I think we would expect the next generation
to seem to be going backwards
and committing a lot of the same mistakes
of earlier generations.
So I think also though that part of it is,
I think philosophy is difficult.
I'm a philosopher by training.
Politics is difficult, religion is difficult.
I think even if we do figure things out,
I think there are a number of philosophical positions
broadly speaking, that it's easy to make a case for it.
It's easy to make a case, for example,
for a secular humanist outlook on life.
It's easy to make a basic case
for religious conservative outlook on life.
It's easy to make a case for especially for young people
who have psychological damage in various ways
for a cynical skeptical adversarial outlook on life.
And so I think there are philosophical frameworks
that every young generation of people,
significant numbers of them will first hear
of that framework and it will seem reasonable to them.
And since life is short,
they want to get on with their own lives.
They will adopt that framework.
So my expectation though is that sociologically
we should expect that every generation,
there's always going to be representatives
of kind of all of the major philosophical outlooks
that are there.
And what happens that determines the direction
of that society for that generation is going to depend on
which of those frameworks has the best arguments
in that generation and uses the institutions of learning
and the institutions of culture the best
to convince the most number of people in that generation.
But there's nothing fixed about it
and nothing deterministic about it.
And so even if we are progressive,
and I think we have been progressive
for the last 500 years or so,
in many cases it is going to be two steps forward,
a step back or three steps forward,
two steps sideways and so forth.
So it's a work in progress to use a cliche.
For sure.
For sure.
I mean, it doesn't seem to matter what scene you're involved in
whether it's a sporting team or like a religion,
politics again,
there's no shortage of things that we can disagree on.
And so even if we go into it with like use religion
for an example, like at my church,
you might say the core tenets are, okay,
people believed in Jesus' life and death and resurrection.
Okay, that's like a pretty fundamental part
of what it means to call yourself a Christian.
And yet you go a little further down the line,
you go, okay, well, there's,
you've got a Baptist church
and you've got a Pentecostal church
and they've split based on the fact that there's slight
variations in what you believe about certain scripture.
And I mean, that split has gone on for hundreds of years
and through thousands of different denominations.
And it is interesting that even when you do have
some core tenets that all of you would agree on,
you can still disagree on the minute details
to such an extent that you're not going to meet
with those people on a Sunday,
you can go and start your own congregation.
Like it seems like it's a difficult world to navigate
when there's so much to disagree on.
Well, yeah, that's right.
But it's better to have those difficulties
than to be in a world where you're not allowed
to try to navigate those difficulties
or think about those difficulties.
So, you know, we know that there are societies
that are self-stultifying.
You mentioned dogmatism earlier,
where the dogmatic philosophy becomes dominant
and then it institutionalizes itself
in all of the major cultural organizations.
And then people just don't think anymore
and kids don't learn the thinking skills.
And so that becomes a stagnant, a stagnant culture.
So in one sense, if we want to have an open society,
we will have to accept the messiness that goes with it,
including having to navigate hundreds and hundreds
of issues.
And our best hope is training enough young people
to have the cognitive skills and the emotional resilience
to be able to do that more or less successfully.
Yeah, I'm glad you brought up cognitive skills again
because it was something you said earlier
and I liked the phrase, when you say cognitive skills,
like when it comes to our thinking,
what are you referring to?
How would you actually develop cognitive skills
that are going to help you navigate some of this terrain?
Yeah, well, let's try,
I don't know, let's try a parenting example.
So suppose you're a parent, right?
And we'll just talk about style.
So if you're a parent of young, you've got your young kids,
you're basically tired all of the time.
So we'll start there, right?
So maybe you work, right?
And you work hard and then you get home
and you love your family and you want to spend time
with your family, but kids also are exhausting, right?
You have to look after your house and blah, blah, blah.
And so kids are kids and they're all these bundles
of energies and you've got four, six and eight year olds
and all of them have a million questions about everything.
All of them want to do things their own way.
So what we then have, so to speak, is a mini society
that we call a family.
But if we think about just the standard parenting styles
that we are familiar with,
I mean, there's one kind of parent
who will very patiently say,
the important thing here is my kids need to grow up
with some independence, with an active mind.
I want them to be curious.
I want them to be emotionally resilient.
So I'm going to have to tolerate, right?
My kid asking, why, why, why, why, why, why, why, why, why?
All of the time and try as much as I can,
even when I'm tired to answer as many of those questions
so the kid can understand to the level
of the kid's ability, what's going on,
what the evidence is, what the objections are,
what the uncertainties are and so forth.
And that sometimes the screen would be
that I don't know what the answer is.
And then I'm going to want the kid to say,
well, my parents are not the know-all authorities.
Maybe I'll just need to live in uncertainty for a while
or try some experiments to see whatever.
And sometimes things are going to work out
and sometimes they are not.
And that's okay.
It's okay to cry sometimes.
It's okay to be happy, right?
Various times.
And so dealing with the emotions
and talking through them and so on.
So we can talk about the principles behind that
if you think that's the right model of parenting,
how to do that well and so forth.
But we can also imagine,
we all know that there are parents who say,
in this situation, my kid starts asking why
the kid's challenging my authority.
I'm the parent here and kids should be listening
to what I say.
I already told the kid 20 times,
this is the right way to do this
or what the answer to that question is.
And sometimes kids should just be quiet.
They should shut up and give us some peace and quiet.
And so I'm going to then develop
a more authoritarian parenting style.
Here are the right answers.
These are the truths.
When your father or mother speaks,
they should only have to say it one time,
you agree with that and you do what they say.
You don't challenge your parents.
And by and large, the answers are worked out.
Here's the recipe, the things that you're supposed to do,
the things that you are not supposed to do.
And I train kids habitually to follow the recipe in life.
Now already we've got two very different parenting styles.
It's just in this very small unit that we call the family.
But we can imagine those being blown up
to broader social philosophies and political philosophies.
And that's part of what happens.
But we also know there's another parenting style
where we say, I'm a parent and I recognize
I don't have my life together.
I'm a mess, right?
The only reason...
That's the category I mean.
Oh.
The only reason I have kids is that I got drunk at the bar
and I hooked up with this woman right there, right?
And so forth.
And I don't particularly want to be a parent
and I'm not the right person to give advice.
And so I'm, so to speak, a non-parent.
And so I avoid parenting as much as possible.
And maybe, you know, I put a roof over the kid's head
and send them to school in some minimalist tariff.
But really I'm just a dropout.
And so I'm, so to speak,
I'm just gonna put this in quotation marks.
I'm an anarchist dropout kind of parent.
And the kids are just gonna have to work it out themselves.
And so in effect, my own personal,
not having my act together becomes the rule
for that society.
And then kids gonna have to learn the society as chaotic.
And who knows when dad's gonna come home drunk
or drop out or be there and be reliable
or not be reliable or blow up emotionally or whatever.
And that's the philosophical world in which the kid learns.
Now the cognitive style,
and this is the question that you were asking about,
of those three kids is going to be very different.
If they, you can imagine,
a kid raised in a dogmatic authoritarian household
from age zero to age 18,
versus one that's raised in the dropout anarchist household
from age zero to 18.
And by then your mental way of thinking about things
and emotionally reacting things is largely set
versus a kid who's had good hands on parent
who taught kids how to think and handle their emotions
and develop good habits and so on.
I think I threw myself into that final category
of parenting too early.
Then you got to the real dark stuff.
I must have under the past.
It took the stereotype and ran with it.
No, I mean, to steal your example, sorry to jump in.
My mum would be very open about this.
My granddad, who was, he was 83 when he passed away.
This is 10 years ago now.
He was perhaps that old school classic dad.
Like he was that authoritarian parent.
It's like children, my mum, he would have told you this.
My mum will tell you this.
It was very much like children should be seen and not heard.
You listen to what I say when I say it.
And it's really interesting to see
my mum's one of three kids.
There's her and two brothers.
My mum's a real rule follower.
Like if someone says you do this, that's what my mum does.
And I think to a fault sometimes,
and she wouldn't mind me sharing this,
but I often look back at my granddad, Harry,
and I can kind of see the origins of that
because he was the kind of guy that,
especially when he was young and big and she was little,
he was an authority, not just in how he spoke,
but in how he held himself.
And so the idea of arguing back to that
came with serious consequences.
Do you know what I mean?
So I see her now and we often clash
because I would say that I'm maybe the opposite of that.
I'll sort of dip my toes in the water
of a little bit naughty from time to time
just to see what happens.
And she laughs at me.
She goes, I can't believe how differently you and I
are in temperament.
Like, so it is interesting, even from,
well, I guess that's that 30 year period again,
30 years between my granddad, my mum, and myself.
There's some real changes in the way that,
you know, the way you were influenced as a kid
has changed the way you approach life as an adult.
Yeah.
Oh yeah, for sure, absolutely.
Let me throw one other example.
Let's talk about it in a family model
and I think we can all relate to that.
But how this scales up into broader cultural models
and not yet to go into politics per se.
So I'm from Canada originally
and now I'm living in the States
that's where mostly I've spent my time.
So one thing I've noticed when I've done teaching
and lecturing around the world
is that there are cultural differences
about something as simple as crossing the street.
So for example, things that's standard
for Canada and the United States is you come to a street
and suppose there are traffic lights there
and the light is red.
And you will look at the red light and it says,
so you don't cross.
But pretty much what you do is you will say,
well, how busy is the street and you'll look both ways.
If there are no cars coming in either direction,
it's safe to cross.
You'll cross the street, even though it's a red light
and that's fine.
So that's just kind of a standard practice here.
Now, my wife is from Argentina.
So we're spending a certain amount of time in Latin America.
One of the things that struck me
was when I went to Latin America was
how initially dangerous it was for me to cross the street.
Because down there, this is a slight overstatement
traffic signals have no meaning, right?
What's the word?
And so it's like, yes, there is the traffic signal.
A part of it is a certain amount of anarchy.
Oh, you're telling me I can't cross the street here
or I have to, just in order to give the finger,
I'm just going to cross whenever I want
and whenever I feel like.
But also, part of the ethos is in North America,
if you're a driver and you see a pedestrian crossing the street,
you'll slow down and accommodate,
let that person go, even if you have the right of way.
That does not apply in Latin America.
You take your life into your hands
and you get no quarter from drivers down there.
So there's an aggressiveness in play there.
Now, then we can say that this is in part
that Latin America has a certain cultural style,
a certain attitude with respect to rules.
And part of it is that rules, we try to flout them
whenever we can.
But we think that we're in a more adversarial culture.
Me versus you, and that comes out in the driving style.
Whereas in North America, if someone's having a bad day,
then yeah, we will say they have road rage.
But by and large, it's a much more benevolent culture.
And with respect to rules, rules are in place,
but you can break the rules when it suits your judgment.
But I remember contrasting that with a couple of times,
I've been a visiting professor in Poland,
which is emerging from the first generation after communism.
And communism is very much a dogmatic rule-following
institution.
And to draw this right back to the example
of crossing the street, I can remember coming back
from a restaurant late at night with some colleagues
who were Polish academics.
The streets are completely empty.
Everybody is home.
And we come to a street and we're
going to cross the street to get to our hotel.
But there's a red light, and there's
the little red man who's saying, don't walk up at this point
here.
And so I'm doing the North American thing.
I'm looking both ways.
It's a short street.
No cars are coming.
Let's cross.
All of my Polish colleagues are standing there,
and they absolutely will not cross the street at that point.
Because the sign is red.
And I remember joking with them about this.
They're like, come on, let's cross the street.
And they say, no, very seriously.
We cannot cross the street.
And these are older people who grew up under communism.
So the rule is the rule.
And the idea of individual judgment or flouting the rule
is just culturally alien.
So just another working example with the family example.
It's a great example.
I mean, it's amazing.
You don't even have to cross cultures
to be able to experience it.
I live in a coastal town, little place called Point
Lonsdale, about an hour and a half outside of Melbourne.
And if you go into a shop here with no shoes on,
people just assume you're a surfer.
And then you take that same approach
in the middle of Melbourne.
You go into a shop with no shoes on,
people assume you're a drug addict.
It's a really weird dynamic to see,
like even with 150 kilometers difference.
The rules bend and change.
It's very interesting.
It's very interesting.
How have you dealt with the, I guess, the criticism,
for lack of a better description,
that some of the big colleges have received over the last few years
with reference to what we were speaking about earlier?
Like that seeming like increasing the approach
to social activism and teaching around that.
Because I think sometimes, and I've fallen into this trap,
you throw the baby out with the bathwater
in whatever field it is that you're looking at,
when really within each of these institutions
are like a lot of very reasonable people
who have got the best intentions to help the students.
Yeah, for sure.
And I think this goes across much of the political spectrum,
if we focus on that, and much of the religious spectrum.
I think there are people on the left,
people on the right, people who are liberal, conservative,
I would say moderate socialists,
who are nonetheless still committed
to the liberal arts ideal,
as it was developed in the college.
You want to develop a well-rounded person.
You're going to trust that ultimately,
each student has to make up his or her own minds.
They have to train their reasonable faculty,
understand all of the big issues are controversial,
and people need to know both are all sides of a controversial.
And particularly if we are in an innovative culture,
at the front end, the cutting edge, so to speak,
there's always going to be things that we don't know,
and lots of debate.
And so we are, despite political differences,
in many cases, despite religious differences,
jointly trying to educate the next generation of students
to understand and then become contributors
to the ongoing cultural work.
But then at the same time, we do know
that there are dogmatists
on a significant number of them.
Now in sort of mainstream universities,
in our generation, most of the dogmatists are on the left,
and they are coming out of the far left.
There are a significant number of more religiously oriented
institutions, and there there's a lot of dogmatists there,
but then they're typically coming out of the political right
and obviously a certain religious perspective.
So partly I want to say there is a demographic shift,
and we should be aware of the demographic shift,
and I don't like the demographic shift,
that we have more dogmatists than we should
in self-regarding institutions.
At the same time, I'm not totally pessimistic about this
because I recognize from history
that philosophical waves occur,
that we go through sometimes areas of dogmatism,
sometimes areas of skepticism,
sometimes areas of liberalism,
and it depends on which of the brightest intellects
in each generation or two have the best arguments
or the most interesting new theories and so forth.
So in one sense, it's natural to say that,
okay, philosophy and closely related disciplines,
when I was a student, were in a very skeptical
and cynical place.
A lot of the leading theories and paradigms had just failed
and nobody knew what to do
or what was going to replace them with,
and so a lot of people then just take a leap of faith
or dogmatically say, well, I'm gonna go for social activism
and just do my own thing.
And we are in either peak social activist phase right now
or perhaps I hope we're on the downside of that.
And that's part of the natural evolution
because what happens is a better generation
of intellectuals come along and new paradigms
and new better new theories
that solve the problems of the old ones come along
and people get excited about that.
But then at the same time, students say,
look, I don't wanna just learn social activism
and to hate other people because they are the wrong race
or because they're rich or whatever I want to get along
with people and build a better society.
So students stay away from the social activist courses,
the angry indoctrinating courses.
Donors learn to the extent that governments
are funding these institutions,
the politicians learn that they're just funding dogmatists
and so they start to put correctives in place and so on.
So as messy as the last 10 years have been
and at the same time, I do see signs of health there
just because it takes a while for people to regroup
who actually want to do education
and there are new institutions coming into existence.
There are reform movements inside the academy.
There are brand new colleges and universities
that are being formed saying,
look, we're gonna get back to education.
We're not gonna do woke crap
and we're not going to do indoctrination anymore.
And at the same time, parents and students themselves
are learning about some of the horror stories
about what's actually going on in universities.
So they are becoming savvier consumers, so to speak,
choosing more carefully which universities
they send their kids to,
supporting the new institutions,
seeking other avenues and so on.
So there are corrective and innovative entrepreneurial
ventures coming along and I'm optimistic that in 10 years,
we will be looking back, I think,
from a more healthy, cautiously optimistic perspective.
Yeah, speaking of those new institutions,
just before I let you know,
I don't know if we're recording when I said it,
but last night I heard you and Jordan Peterson speaking
about the fact that two of your eight classes
or two of your five classes on the Peterson Academy
have been released.
That's a pretty exciting prospect.
It seems like a big project that's being undertaken,
but is that like a main focus of yours at the moment?
Are you still speaking or are you still teaching
in colleges in America or in Canada
or in the United States?
Or in America or in Canada or where are you at with that
right now?
Yeah, well, yes and no.
Now, the Peterson Academy connection has been just great.
They were going to figure out,
partly for all of the politicization issues
that you are worried about,
how can we create an institution that's actually going to
teach all of the controversies in religion,
apologics and psychology and philosophy and so on.
But how also can we do lower cost education
so that students are not spending tens of thousands
or in some cases over $100,000 or $200,000
to go to traditional universities
and those don't fit for everyone.
So low cost, nonetheless high quality
and then also the technological materials
that we have available.
We can bring world class lecturers in who are area experts
and have them teach a course in their area of expertise.
It's a certain amount of time commitment for that person
to go to the studio in Miami, teach the course.
But once it's done,
then you have first rate production values
and it's timeless and it can be viewed all around the world.
So there was a lot of very careful strategic thinking
that went into that.
So I'm happy to be a part of it.
And then just in their first month,
they had 35,000 paying students.
So it's already, it's a good size university
by anyone's standards.
So I think that's a great experiment.
It is for me a part time focus.
I've got other lecturing that I do at other institutions.
I've been transitioned from my current university
in this year, 2024,
where I've been teaching for some years.
So there's no short answer to your question.
I've got, I think three or four big projects going on.
Peterson Academy.
And as you mentioned,
there's three more courses in the pipeline.
They're in post-production right now,
but I'm actively monitoring how that experiment is going.
And we're talking about the future as well.
So all I can say is just stay tuned.
We will, we will.
Steven, I really appreciate you making the time.
I really enjoyed that conversation.
Thank you so much.
Yeah, good fun.
Yeah, lots of great questions.
And we had some laughs along the way,
even though we're talking about serious, serious stuff.
