I just recently watched one of your videos of you debating with transgendered protesters
at U of T free speech rally in October and one of the protestors, one of the comments
one of the protestors said to you which was in particularly very chilling was why do you
have the right to determine whether an individual is worthy of you using their pronouns.
The scary thing to me is how common this type of view is among radical left wing protesters
on university campuses who feel they have the right to tell other people what they can
think, what words they can use and what speakers they can or cannot listen to.
The even scarier part is that our government is creating legislation to back up their ideologies
which is evident through Bill C16, M103 and Bill 89.
So my question is what do you think the end game is in all of this because it seems every
year-
We're in the process of finding that out, you know, and I'm sorry, I'm sorry, okay.
We're in the process of finding that out, I don't, I mean I think the end game that
underlies all of that in my estimation is best summed up by Jacques Derrida's criticism
of western civilization.
It's phallogocentric.
Now we've already talked about what the logos means, right, and so for Derrida that was
a sign of its utter, what would you call it, utter despicable dominant nature of western
culture.
Well that's what animates the postmodernists.
Now they may not know that because an ideology gets fragmented across its adherents and then
it only acts as the coherent ideology when all those adherents come together in a mob
and then you see the animating spirit.
So I think that there's a battle going on that's a battle exactly at the level that
Derrida described and that's a theological battle with a philosophical implications and
out of those philosophical implications come political implications but it's not primarily
political and it's not primarily philosophical.
It's deeper than that and the postmodernists are out, their criticism was designed to be
fundamental and it also emerged out of Marxism and let's not forget that the Marxist criticism
was not only fundamental but just about resulted in the nuclear annihilation of the world.
These are not trivial issues and we're back in the same boat and so what do I think should
be done about that?
Well I thought about that way before any of this happened and I think that what we should
do about it is we should tell the truth because there isn't anything more powerful than that
and that's the right theological answer because the spoken truth brings good into being.
Well that's the phallogocentric idea and I'm trying to revisit that to explain to people
what it means and to see if they think that's a good idea.
That's what we have to figure out is that an idea worth adhering to or not?
The alternative is the, see for the postmodernists the world is that landscape of pyramids that
I described but there's no transcendent vision that's over above that and all of those pyramids
are equally valid and it's a war of everyone against everyone.
It's like the nightmare of Hobbes, Thomas Hobbes, except that it's not individuals, it's groups
and everyone's a group, you're a group, you're whatever your group is, it's like that's
death as far as I'm concerned.
It's utterly reprehensible and we better sort it out because if we don't sort it out
we are bloody well going to pay for it.
So thank you.
