We're going to begin.
I would like to welcome to the stage, ready?
I'd like to welcome to the stage a man you just heard from,
Dr. Stephen Hicks.
Pick it up.
Welcome him back to the stage.
You just heard from him, so I'll refrain from repeating
his biography and instead just mention very quickly
a little bit more about Stephen's work here
at the Atlas Society.
During his tenure with us here,
he has presented in the past bi-weekly sessions
called Atlas Intellectual Sessions.
Some of you may remember them.
His courses are still up on the Atlas Society website.
They are a wonderful trove of information and knowledge
on topics like capitalism, anti-capitalism,
postmodernism, philosophies of education.
So I encourage you to go to atlasesciety.org
and under the Atlas University tab on the top of our website,
you will find his Atlas Intellectual Sessions.
And without further ado, I want to turn the mic over
to him for the rise of woke from postmodernism
and critical theory to today's identity politics.
Thank you.
Thank you.
In my view, if we're going to make the case for doom
following up on the previous panel,
current academics, subsectors, humanity, subsector,
people dealing with abstract ideas
is the thing that we should be most worried about.
So we're all familiar with woke.
Woke means a number of different things.
There's lots of schools and so on.
Some of them are a little more healthy than others.
But woke as an applied activist movement
of many of the trends that have been incubating
in the academic world for the last 50 years, 60 years,
depending on how you count, it is a malignant intellectual
and activist force.
And so what I want to do is just do a quick tour today
of how we got to where we are, what
some of the core operative ideas are.
If you do the demographics of what's
going on inside the intellectual activist world and so on,
the three dominant, am I working here?
Good.
Where do I point this, by the way?
Anywhere.
There we are.
Big words, race, class, and not quite anywhere, apparently.
Sex.
Those are the big three.
Dominating.
If you just do the Google and Graham
counts of journal articles published of all of the things
with respect to the human condition, the natural world,
and so forth that we can and should be focused on,
these are the three that are dominating,
getting the most attention.
And naturally, then the students who
are picking up these ideas and they
want to make the world a different place if not a better
place, those are the things that they are most focused on.
Now, where did this particular subset of issues
come to be dominant from?
And what is the content?
Of course, there are legitimate issues about race, sex, class,
and so on.
So look at some data here.
This is some wonderful data mining.
David Rosado is a New Zealand data scientist.
They can take all media that are published and then just
do a word count.
How often does a given word appear in the New York
Times, Washington Post, L.A. Times, and so on.
So this is the words racist, racist, racism.
And what we have then is a timeline.
So starting in 1970, of course, we've
been interested in these issues for a long time.
But then suddenly, 2012, 2013, 2014, huge spike.
Suddenly, all of the major journalistic outlets,
and this is just the sampling, are
talking about this as an issue.
And of course, we're going to have to say, well, either this
is because in the culture, suddenly, there's
a huge amount more racism and racists
that are going on in the journalists
are merely reporting what's going on in the culture.
Or the other hypothesis is that we
are into a new generation of professional journalists who
have an agenda and race and racism of a certain sort.
And for the certain agenda is what
they are interested in talking about and pushing.
And that's what we are starting to see.
So what happened then in the lead up
to training that generation of journalists and so forth?
Now the same thing, if we look at issues of sex and sexism,
1970, some ups and downs.
But again, exact same time period, 2012, 13, 14, 15,
huge spike journalistically in discussion
about sex, sexism, and often from a certain perspective.
The issue of trans, same thing.
Issue of white privilege.
And we put all four of them together.
So I'm having some issues with this guy.
Is it the Francois era?
Yeah.
I think there's a delay is what there is.
OK, good.
So if we generalize then to issues of sex, race, and class,
these are then the exact same trend line that is going on.
So we're into a new cultural era.
And that explains why, when we go on our social media,
watch the news, talk with people,
these are the issues that are our focus.
Putting this in context, while the negativity surrounding
the way in which we are discussing
those three sets of issues is predominant.
Nonetheless, we are in the context
where if we just focus on the issues of class, which
is largely issues of poverty, we've
never had it so good.
We've gone from a time period where two, three centuries ago,
90% of the world's population lived in poverty.
And more importantly, the vast majority of people
believe that poverty was a natural or divinely ordained
fact of human condition that was not going to be solved.
Two, a time where perhaps, if you keep your measures
of poverty constant, less than 10% of the world's population
is living in extreme poverty.
And correspondingly, we've had a mindset shift
where we actually believe poverty can be solved.
And if there is poverty, real poverty,
we are shocked by it, and we are wondering
why this problem hasn't been solved.
So we have largely solved the problem,
and we believe that the problem is a solvable problem.
But nonetheless, from the academic world
that is driving much of the public policy discussion,
we would get the impression that it's worse and worse
than not being solved at all.
Here's some more data here on the extreme poverty.
This is now going back two centuries early
in the age of enlightenment post-industrial revolution.
But 90% of the world population living in extreme poverty,
and that's usually defined as just a few dollars a day,
and then steady progress over the course of the last two
centuries, rather, to now, then this is still
eight, nine-year-old data, a small percentage.
On the issues of sexism, and there, of course, is sexism,
and sexism has been a terrible problem historically,
but all of the trend lines with respect to women,
women getting an education, being able to have
their own bank accounts, being able to move freely
about the world, being able to go into pretty much
any profession that they want as trends.
Women have never had it so good.
Nonetheless, from academic quarters,
when we talk about feminists, and there's lots
of different schools of feminism, but the center
of gravity of most of them is times are worse
than they have ever been, and things are problematic.
On issues of racism and the closely related issue
of slavery, again, huge progress on this issue.
Three centuries ago, where people didn't particularly
have a problem with slavery.
It was, again, a natural or a divinely ordained fact
about the human condition, but we've made huge progress
in getting rid of slavery, relegating it to the less
civilized parts of the world, sending it underground,
and correspondingly, attitudes with respect
to racism, significant improvement there.
So, what we have then is a academic subculture
that's been enormously influential,
and spilling out into the more general culture
with a certain views of those three things
that lie in the face of the philosophical
and actually material progress that we've made
on all of those issues.
So, the question is why this has happened.
Now, the big word for the last 40, 50 years
has been post-modernism, and what we find is people
on the far left, and now increasingly on the far right,
are targeting the enlightenment.
So, I think the foil has to be making sure
that we're clear on what the modernists
and the advocates of the enlightenment
did, in fact, accomplish.
This is a chart from one of my book,
and there's a long historical story
and a long important philosophical story,
and all of these are revolutionary moments
in human history, how much was accomplished intellectually
and practically.
To go back to the early 1600s, standard philosophy textbooks
say, here are the father of modern philosophy,
Descartes, Bacon, Locke, and so forth,
and they really were revolutionary in arguing
that human reason is foundational and competent,
and that it is widespread among the population,
and this is against centuries and millennia of.
Take things on faith, take things
because they have been dictated by higher theory,
or they are written in an old book that
has the imprimatur of God, but you do not think for yourself,
you follow the elite, and the vast majority of people,
according to that traditional view,
are incompetent to think about those most important issues.
To have all of that millennia of ways of thinking about thinking
overturned in a relatively short period of time,
and the 1600s was, in fact, a philosophical revolution,
pretty much all of modernity follows from that.
Once people become rational, we are encouraging people
to become rational, and it becomes important to give them
the freedom to think for themselves, the literacy
and the other tools so that they can, in fact,
think for themselves, and then we
start to trust people to make their own decisions
with respect to politics, and we get into the Democratic
and Republican era.
We think that people are competent
to run their own economic lives, so we're
going to have free market societies.
We think people are competent to run their own religious lives,
so we have widespread religious freedom and religious
toleration.
We think that we can figure out the way the world works,
so science starts to take off, and then
once we get all of that knowledge,
we apply it in engineering, and the Industrial Revolution
takes off, so this is an enormous amount
of revolutionary transformations taking place
in the world over the course of just a couple of centuries.
The modern world, the most astonishingly revolutionary era
ever in human history.
And the Enlightenment is the age at which it
became to intellectual maturity, where they partly
recognized the significance of all
of the philosophical revolutions that had occurred,
put them together into a package, gave it a label,
and then had the self-confidence that we
take all of these ideas and now forthrightly apply them
to all aspects of life and society
and make the world a better place.
That's the Enlightenment.
That's precisely what the post-modernists are attacking.
So the two most famous names are French,
as it turns out, I almost said French, of course,
but that's a post-reaction.
So these are just cherry-picked quotations, of course,
from Michel Foucault, the most famous of them.
If you take all of social science literature
for the last 100 years, the most cited
works in social science literature,
Michel Foucault has two of the top 10 books.
He's just everywhere dominating humanities
and social science.
The reason is the ultimate language of madness,
and there's a typical post-modern double-edged point.
But basically, the distinction between the sane
and the insane is an artificial construct,
and we can break it down, and we are going to subvert reason.
Reason and power are one and the same.
It's not that we are rational, and we
are going to figure out standards of goodness,
and we care about justice.
Rather, we have value agendas, the argument,
and we want to increase our power on behalf of the values
that we just subjectively hold.
And reason really is just a matter
of rationalizing the power value agenda that we already have.
So all of this enlightenment language,
that reason is powerful, that it is competent,
that everybody has it, that we can use reason
in the service of justice to make the world a better place.
All of that is replaced by an extraordinary cynicism
on all levels philosophically.
So again, we have another philosophical revolution
in more detail, commercial advertisement by my book.
Now the word woke, I see this as an applied word,
because post-modernism is very broad, very abstract,
very intellectualized.
We started to talk about the politically correct.
And those of you who are a little older
will remember when we had the big debates
over political correctness.
And that was a transition phase where it was very clear
that it was an anti-enlightenment,
anti-modernist agenda that was trying
to be imposed upon many of us.
But the politically correct label literally
came out of the Marxist tradition.
And many people who were opposed to free markets,
capitalism, the modern world, and so forth,
were at the same time trying to distance themselves
from traditional Marxism.
So we needed a new label.
And so they drew on critical theory
and some other movements that were going on
to talk about false consciousness, which had also
come out of Marxism.
But someone who strips off the distorting lenses,
strips off all of the false consciousness,
strips off all of the conditioning
that the capitalists have put on you
to see the world better, more accurately,
from your group's perspective, that's an awakening moment.
And so the woke initially was a self-description,
but then it's also become a pejorative for people
who are opposed to that.
So what we find, though, in the mainstream of moques
is that they are not interested in rational debate.
This is cancel culture all of the way down,
rather than participating in discussions
and in welcoming discussions from a variety of perspectives.
They are explicitly on the opposite of that.
So the modern creation of liberal arts education
and that ideal of, we're going to expose students
to all sorts of positions on all sorts of issues
and have professors who disagree with each other.
And the students will be exposed to all of that.
But we're ultimately going to train the student
to think for himself and increasingly herself
and leave the student to make their own final judgment.
All of that at the heart of liberal arts education,
which really is a creation of the modern world,
is under assault.
We're not interested in doing that.
And that's because rationality is set aside.
What you find is the rise of identity politics
and other aspect of the overall woke package.
We don't really see people as individuals
with their own agency.
People are members of groups.
And then finally, this idea that we're making progress,
that the progress is being widely distributed,
that it's open to all, that we're making the world basically
for everyone better a place, is replaced by a cynical view
that we are at each other's throats fundamentally.
And if there is an apparent gain,
that always must mean at the expense of someone else.
And whoever that someone else is,
we're on the side of that someone else.
And the argument then is going to be also
that we're not going to be able to solve these
by the traditional liberal methods
we need to do various authoritarian methods.
So as a descriptor of the animating premises
of the woke movement, they are clearly coming out of
intellectually the postmodern tradition,
and they are opposed to the fundamental premises
of modernism and the Enlightenment.
Now this is a big sprawling wide movement.
I think one thing that's also interesting
about postmodernism as it stops simply being
an intellectual movement and starts to guide strategy
is that it's not a strategic movement in the sense
that most previous intellectual movements
became strategic movements.
Most previous movements had a doctrine.
These are the things that we believe.
These are our firm principles,
and we will apply them in terms of a strategy.
We need to do this, we need to do that.
Once we've accomplished that, we will do this, that,
and the other thing, and then we will reach our goal,
whatever that is, whether it's our religion,
whether it's Enlightenment philosophy,
or whatever it is.
Postmodernism is because of the nature of it,
suspicious of any sort of unified strategy,
or any sort of unified view of the world.
So what makes it particularly difficult
to wrap our minds around is that it is instead
of a step-by-step strategy that is articulated clearly
that it is a more opportunistic movement.
So if we think about old-style war,
where there were the rules of war,
and both sides knew what the rules of war were,
and we would meet each other,
and we would follow various rules and procedures
and well-worked out strategies,
and then we would figure out who won and who lost.
Postmodernism is much more like guerrilla warfare,
where you don't have a strategy worked out.
What you are simply doing, though,
is looking for a weakness in your enemy,
and any weakness, intellectual or cultural,
that happens to emerge first.
That's the thing that you will attack,
and then you'll see how well you do,
and you'll do a number of hit-and-run attacks,
and then when you get beaten back on that one,
you come back and you look for a new weakness.
So I'm just going to focus,
since there's, you know,
cultures are extraordinarily complicated
on just one such strategy.
One big strength, of course, of modern society
has been its attitudes toward race and racism.
We've been extraordinarily progressive
on race and racism over the last two centuries.
Nonetheless, it comes packaged with a weakness
that we are sensitive,
and often close to feeling ashamed and guilty
about much of the history of race and racism
in our own culture,
and the residual amounts of race and racism.
So this is an area of opportunity
for the postmoderns to attack.
Attack people on race.
They immediately go on the defensive, they get worried,
they start to feel a little ashamed,
they start to feel a little guilty.
Those people are psychologically in a place
where it's much easier to argue with them and attack.
Put people on the defensive.
So I want to focus just on the race and racism issue
and make the connections to woke and postmodernism.
This, I think, though, is on the positive side,
something that we should be celebrating
and not be being defensive about.
The idea that there was something wrong with racism,
something wrong with slavery,
is such a new idea in human history.
You talk to the anthropologists,
and they will say human beings have been around
for 300,000 years, or whatever the number is.
So you take 300,000 years, and you say,
what's 10% of that?
That's 30,000 years.
What's 10%?
That's 3,000 years.
What's 10% of that?
That's 300 years.
So it's like 10% of 10% of 10%.
It's a blink of an eye in human history,
but it's not really until the 1600s, the 1700s,
the first century of modernity
and laying the groundwork for the idea
that you find people, first time ever,
saying there's something wrong with slavery.
There's something wrong with racism
and the easy assumption that people who look like me
and behave like me are just automatically superior
to people who don't look like me
and don't who behave like me and my group.
Now part and parcel is that there's a philosophical
groundwork that had been laid.
We started in the early modern world to say
we should really be seeing people as individuals
and not just members of a certain class structure,
a certain family structure, or a certain ethnic structure.
Treat people as individuals.
When you start to see people as individuals,
then racism seems problematic.
Once you start taking individuals seriously and say,
people have their lives to live, right?
You're not just here to serve society,
serve the king, serve the church,
serve for your tribe, right, whatever,
but people have their own lives,
then slavery starts to look very problematic
because that's a huge number of people
who don't have their own lives to live.
So you start to find increasing number of individuals
saying both racism and slavery are morally problematic.
They don't fit with our new, modern,
more enlightened understanding of human history.
There are just a few voices initially,
and then something significant starts to happen
in the late 1700s for the first time, again,
ever in human history.
You start to see the formation of societies.
Those isolated individuals start to get together
and say maybe we should do something about this,
form an activist society to start getting rid of slavery.
The very first one in human history
was founded in Pennsylvania, Benjamin Rush,
Benjamin Rush, Benjamin Franklin,
soon became the president of this association.
The year after, sorry, two years after,
there was a society for the abolition of slavery
founded in England, and then more broadly in Britain,
and then one year later, a society founded in France
for the abolition of slavery.
I'm dwelling on this point because
this is the first time in human history,
and it's just a few centuries ago
that we have people saying let's do something
about this moral stain on the human condition,
but still vast numbers of people in the society
don't have much problem with it.
The dates, I think, also are important.
This is the 1780s, right?
So this is 1776, Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations,
Declaration of Independence,
fighting for the new country,
the French Revolution is about to start,
and so all sorts of stuff is happening,
politically, economically in the 1770s and 1780s,
and it's all part of a piece,
a new kind of society we need to fight for,
and an important part of that is getting rid of slavery,
freeing all individuals so they all
equally have the same rights.
And it's also the case that all three of these societies
at first enacted anti-slavery movements
were the nations where the Enlightenment ideals
were the most strong.
Britain, France, and the United States,
when you look at the histories, they dominate,
they are the places where a significant number
of intellectuals are,
advocates of the new modern Enlightenment philosophy.
So this is an extraordinary accomplishment,
I think something that should be celebrated.
So here's William Wilberforce, 1789,
skip right over Diderot, as an example.
There he is.
So kind of a representative American,
a representative British individual,
a representative Frenchman,
arguing on moral grounds that slavery is wrong
and we ought to do something about that.
Now, by the time we get into the 1840s,
there's all sorts of legislations
that have started to occur.
So we go from a bunch of individuals
to a certain number of groups that are now associated.
Cultural education, so people start to change
their attitudes, textbooks are rewritten.
Educational opportunities are afforded to individuals
who are slaves or recently were slaves.
They are allowed to increasingly to form their own churches,
to keep family units intact.
There's legislation to say we're not going
to import slaves anymore.
We're going to say, all right,
we can't do very much about the current generation of slaves,
but anybody who is born of a slave
is automatically going to be a free citizen.
So there are dozens and dozens of legislative
and cultural activities that are going on,
late 1700s, early 1800s,
and then it starts to spill out into active war.
So after, what does that mean?
Was that for me?
No, okay.
I still have some minutes here,
so I'm going to go with those, right?
The British get a huge amount of credit here
because after they dealt with Napoleon,
they had the biggest navy in the world,
devoted huge resources to stopping
the international slave trade across the oceans,
both on the Atlantic side and the Indian ocean side.
Great kudos there.
International Treaty,
Emancipation Proclamation,
we're familiar with that one here.
The Civil War largely fought over the issue of slavery,
and then the trend lines show something like this,
from 1750, and this is shocking for us to think about.
But as little as two and a half to three centuries ago,
over 90% of the world's population
was either a slave or a serf.
Stunning.
And that's the way it had been for much of human history.
So to go to now, where it's a tiny percentage,
and we by and large know what parts of the world,
it's the unenlightened, unmodernized parts of the world
where most of the remaining slaves are.
Rand and her philosophy of one of the Enlightenment
philosophies par excellence.
It makes perfectly good sense.
If you think that human beings have reason,
and that the glory of moral agency
is exercising your reason
and governing your own life,
and that all human beings have this capacity
and that individual right to live your life
by your own judgment is morally fundamental.
Racism is just a huge slap in the face against that,
because it means the exact opposite
of treating individuals as morally self-responsible agents.
It says, well, there's some superficial thing
over which you have no control,
and really does not govern anything
with respect to the important value choices,
character choices, and actions that you make,
that I'm going to say this is the most important factor
with respect to how I'm going to deal with you.
That's an irrationality of a huge proportion.
It's interesting that Rand wrote this in 1963,
and the character judgment issue is highlighted there.
Martin Luther King's famous phrase, also 1963.
Obviously, Martin Luther King is not an objectivist,
although there are significant overlaps there,
but the issue of moral fundamentality,
the content of your character is fundamental.
That is an individual, self-agency, moral-worth fundamental.
That's what we should be judging on,
not on the basis of superficiality.
This becomes a widespread common point,
and of course, we're all born into that generation.
So, what happened?
Now, there's other schools of dealing with racism,
some of them more or less individualistic,
some of them having religious connections,
some of them arguing that, yes, by and large,
we want to be individualistic,
but maybe we need a little bit of collectivist,
affirmative action medicine for a generation or so
to solve the remaining problems and so on.
In my final moments, though,
I do want to focus on critical race theory,
which is the new kid on the block,
and it is coming directly out of a combination
of postmodernism and critical theory,
which are two very closely related movements.
So, just to give you some talking points
on this issue as well.
And so, here is, oops, Richard Delgado.
He is widely recognized as one of the co-founders,
the three or four most important names
founding critical race theory,
and its approach to race theory.
So, here's from a book, a handbook
on critical race theory that was published.
And notice the date, 1995,
this is when the academic groundwork
for critical race theory is being laid.
Postmodernism as more abstract theory, 1960s, 1970s.
By the time we get to the 80s and 90s,
we have a whole school of academics
who have been trained as postmoderns
and closely related movements
who are now interested in taking the high theory
and applying it to different cultural sectors,
race being one of those cultural sectors.
So, here's Delgado, law professor,
unlike traditional civil rights.
So, what he means exactly right there
is Martin Luther King Jr. as traditional civil rights.
And so, we're signaling,
we are rejecting the Martin Luther King approach,
which embraces incrementalism and step-by-step progress.
So that the way that we need to do is step-by-step
as we've been doing for the last two centuries,
eliminating racial double standards and so forth,
and that we are making progress.
We are rejecting that approach in its entirety.
Critical race theory questions,
that's the academic speak for saying rejects.
All right?
The very foundations of the liberal order.
So, what if you take the liberal order
to mean philosophically, and we all know what that means.
We are rejecting the foundations of the liberal order.
That is to say, we are rejecting the enlightenment,
we are rejecting rather the entire modern project,
including equality theory,
the idea that all people are going to be equal
with respect to their rights,
and perhaps in terms of some outcomes as well,
we're not about equality.
Legal reasoning, notice that,
we're rejecting legal reasoning, right?
Evidence, logic, the idea that a jury of our peers
can sort through a huge amount
of conflicting testimony and arguments on both sides.
That we are going to, in a stylized way,
make sure that both sides get a chance to speak
and to contradict each other.
All of the apparatus of applied reasoning,
we are rejecting that.
The enlightenment rationalism, well, there it is.
And neutral principles of constitutional law.
So, the very idea that we should not have
any double standards in the law,
that they should be neutral with respect to the parties,
we are rejecting that.
And so, we know what the opposites
of all of those things are going to be.
So, it's going to be unequal application.
It's not going to be a legally rational,
evidentiary process, due process, and so on.
We're not going to be enlightenment reasonable people
about this, and we're not going to be neutral.
We have our racial group, it has its agenda,
it's in opposition to the other racial groups
and their agendas.
So, it's going to be some sort of unenlightened process
that is going to bring about the results.
So, that's Richard Delgado in a,
there we are.
Okay, death by PowerPoint, I won't read you this whole thing,
but this is important.
So, this is Richard Delgado in the 1990s,
saying, well, where did this movement come from?
And he's doing an interview now that he's a famous guy.
And he says, I was a member of the founding conference
that's up there, and I've got some things
that are asterisk with the red that are down here.
So, it was a bunch of us law professors
got together at this place.
And he mentions Kimberly Crenshaw,
and he says that for some reason,
the place where we were meeting,
their offices were in a converted convent, right?
So, he was remarking on the irony,
we're a bunch of atheists,
but we're meeting in this conference,
and he says, an odd place for a bunch of Marxists.
So, the self-description is,
we're a bunch of Marxist law professors
getting together to found critical legal theory
as a movement.
And we're going to work out a set of principles.
Again, Crenshaw is mentioned,
Matsuda, Charles, Derek, Bell, right, and so on.
So, I wanted to just follow up on these asterisk point.
So, this is Richard Delgado,
another co-founder of the movement,
is Kimberly Crenshaw,
but law professor at Columbia University,
and she also is reflecting on the same founding movement
in the 1990s, where the academics come together,
35 law scholars, and it's going to be grounded
in critical theory, and that's a term of art.
We'll come right back to that one as well.
Responsive to the realities of racial politics in America,
indeed, the organization coined the term,
critical race theory.
To make it clear that our work locates itself
at the intersection of critical theory and race.
So, what we're doing is taking critical theory,
and there are a number of versions of that.
There's critical race theory, critical environmental theory,
critical feminist theory, and so on.
But we're taking critical theory, whatever that is,
and applying it to racial issues,
and we also know that it's Marxists in law school
who are interested in forming this new movement.
So, backing up, what is critical theory?
And here we have to go back to two philosophy PhDs,
and these are the guys who are the founders
of critical theory.
They are both German, Max Hochheimer, and Theodor Adorno.
They co-published a book in 1947
called Dialectic of Enlightenment,
and the argument there is basically that the enlightenment
does not really lead to liberalism in a free society
and a progressive society.
Instead, the enlightenment leads to Nazi Germany,
and it leads to Soviet Russia.
So, kind of the exact opposite of what you might expect.
And so, what we have, though, is two guys
who were themselves Marxists,
and I need to say just a little bit about their bios,
so we know.
Max Hochheimer, some of you, I'm just gonna say this
for the younger people, especially.
Maybe you've not read a huge amount of Rand,
but who is the philosopher, Ein Rand, hates the most?
There we go, bingo, all right.
Hochheimer wrote his dissertation on Kant.
Adorno, when he was a teenager and young,
was in a, precocious, really smart young guy,
in a reading group with a number of other
leading intellectuals in Germany,
and he talks about the transformative experience
he had reading through Kant's critique of pure reason
in his teen years.
Now, these are the two most famous critical theorists.
There's also Herbert Marcuse, Walter Benjamin,
and a few others, and what you will find is
that all of them are Marxists politically,
every single one, but they are recognizing
by the time we get into the 20th century
that classical Marxism has some problems
and they want to repackage Marxism
or do some modifications to keep the core spirit
of Marxism, but find a new effective intellectual strategy
for carrying on the fight against capitalism,
liberalism, Western society in general.
And this might sound flip, but the kind of arguments
you have there, they don't all believe exactly
what the others believe, oops, I don't wanna do that yet.
But what you will find is that all of them will say,
Kantian epistemological philosophy
and some portions of its moral philosophy are fundamental,
those are axiomatic.
Marxist political philosophy
and some of its cores are axiomatic,
but then you will find some variation,
some will then argue it's Kant plus Marx,
but we have to add some Hegel.
And others will say, no, no, no, you're all wrong,
it's Kant plus Marx, plus we have to add some Nietzsche.
Or that's wrong, it's Kant plus Marx plus Heidegger,
that is the right mix.
And this is the range of opinion
inside the critical theory.
Now this is 1940s, 1950s, if you're reading in the 1960s,
Herbert Marcuse, another Frankfurt School critical theory guy
becomes very prominent in America
and then they train a number of intellectuals who,
by the time we get to the 1990s,
Richard Delgado, critical race theory,
Kimberly Crenshaw, then we fast forward 20 years,
critical race theory as a movement well established
in the academic world, then spills out into journalism,
it spills out into the broader culture
and we're all aware of the debates over critical race theory.
Now I don't wanna end on a negative note,
so I'm gonna take just two minutes to say,
we really are making progress.
And this is one of the things
that we do need to worry about, critical theory,
critical race theory, but the postmodernism behind it,
pay careful attention to it.
But this is now data from about 10 years ago
about if we really are worried about race issues.
This is a series of questions that were asked
of people all over the world, a huge data gathering,
what are your attitudes with respect to race?
Are you fine with, I don't know,
working with people of other races?
Are you fine with people of other races
living in your neighborhood?
Are you fine with your kids dating people of other races
and so on, so getting a whole bunch?
And basically what you find is the blue areas,
most people, and by most people,
we mean the large majority of people are not racist.
They're fine with working with other races,
they're fine with dating other races,
they are fine with everything.
And of course they still have some races.
So we know where the races still are,
but at the same time, we can congratulate ourselves
on the enormous success of the Enlightenment Project
over the course of the last two centuries.
And also, let me take a couple more minutes,
if we are worried about often the connection
between race and poverty, again, two centuries,
please go back, oh, 1815, this is two centuries of data.
This is one of my favorite set of charts of all time.
This is, every circle is a country around the world,
big circle, big population, small circle,
small color coded by continent, so red is Asia,
yellow is Europe, green North America.
This is 1850, this is life expectancy at birth.
25 to 40, the longest lived people in the world
that actually is Britain, the first nation of the Enlightenment
with the longest life expectancy.
Along the bottom is a measure of income,
and it's a log scale of 500 to 1,000,
then it doubles, 2,000, 4,000, 8,000, right, and so on.
And every country in the world is in this quadrant, 1815.
America's a young country at that point.
Jump one century, what has happened in the world?
Okay, the green country, that's the United States,
went from small and not in first place to big,
big population, people living a lot wherever,
and adding 15 to 17 years of life,
almost 50% addition in one century.
Never happened before.
We have to pay attention to Canada always.
Trying to catch up to the US, or keep in pace.
And now, young people, your generation, 2015.
Please, there we are.
Okay.
200 years ago, every country was in this lower left quadrant.
There's no one there anymore.
We've taken the whole world, doubled their life expectancy,
huge amounts more wealth.
So when the post-moderns and the critical theorists say,
we are living in a disgusting world,
the Enlightenment has failed, modernity has failed,
reason has failed, science is a threat, et cetera, et cetera.
The data are on our side.
So,
put them all together.
That's the thing.
All right, I'm gonna stop there.
I've only left a couple of minutes for question.
As Abby was suggesting, though,
I am here for the three days,
so do feel welcome at any time to have a sit down,
and we'll talk more about any of the things.
But Abby, please.
Yeah, so we're gonna take one quick, yeah.
Give her round of applause to Stephen, please.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Let's take one quick question.
We do have a meet and greet with the scholars
right before lunch that is going to be out here
at the registration table.
So you're welcome to meet Stephen there,
or he's gonna be at lunch.
But if we have one quick student question.
We have a question right here.
Okay, we'll go here to a student.
Eric?
Yeah, what's your opposition on the concept
of superabundance, techno-optimism,
and effective accelerationism?
I'm sorry, secular-optimismism?
What's superabundance, techno-optimism,
and effective accelerationism?
Yeah, well, I like the sound of all of those words.
The superabundance thesis, I know that one,
because I read the book by Marion Tupi
and Gail Pooley in manuscript.
I think I wrote a blurb for it.
That's a great book.
So I think they're doing wonderful work
in documenting the progress that has been made,
and also doing a very good job
about the intellectual history,
what's behind the technology,
behind the political freedoms,
the religious tolerations, the industrial revolution,
and the various other follow-up revolutions as well.
So I think that's a great book.
The latter two I am not as familiar with,
but if those are their self-descriptive labels,
I'd probably significantly onboard with them.
All right, well, that was actually really quick.
I'll take one more quick question over here,
Isabel, you have someone real quick?
Here we go.
Okay, thank you.
That was really interesting.
My question is at the beginning of the talk,
you showed those graphs,
showing the frequency of different words,
like racism, sexism,
and it seemed like there was an exponential spike
around 2015-ish.
I'm just wondering if there's some specific event
you would attribute that spike to.
I wanna say not a specific event.
I think the timeline goes like this,
that in the 60s and 70s,
post-modern high-academic theory is strong
and dominating in academic departments
that are philosophical and closely related to philosophy.
So Foucault, Derrida, Leotard, Richard Wordy,
the Americans are at their peak.
They are very successful at minting, so to speak,
a whole new generation of intellectuals
who are philosophers, some of them,
but many of them taking those themes
into English literature,
into historiography,
and into other academic disciplines,
including education schools, law schools, and so on.
Such that by the time you get to the 1990s,
so this is now one generation,
those people are at the peak of their career,
and then when you do the article counts
also in the academic journals,
it is those ideas and arguments that are predominant.
And another important sign is that it's not just
in academic journals, but also in textbooks
and things that are close to textbooks,
like handbooks for aspiring teachers,
or handbooks for aspiring lawyers.
This is what you need to know
to be a professional in your field.
The handbooks based on those post-modern ideas
now applied in the various areas
start to become prominent.
Now then 1995 then means for the next 20 years
there will be another generation of students
who are educated and they are graduating
and entering into their profession.
They will come out of the art schools,
they will become the teachers,
they will go into journalism, and so on.
So I think that's why at around 2015,
suddenly it's not just in the academic world anymore,
it's in the schools, it's in journalism,
and then all of us are aware of it.
Now more specifically, I've not done this research,
but I do know that at least two of those major newspaper,
there were significant ownership changes
and replacements of core editorial board functions
at two of those newspapers.
And my hypothesis is that what happened was
that these were people who were kind of critical theory type
people or applied post-modern people
who now have the editorships
at important journalistic outlets
and then many other journalistic outlets
are following their lead.
All right, let's give Steven a big round of applause.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thanks for watching.
Want to see some more Ainran?
Hit that subscribe button below.
Like the video and I'll see you next time.
