Hello and welcome back to The Small Print. I'm Brian and Williams and today our guest
is David Pierce. David, will you please introduce yourself the way you like to be introduced these
days? Oh, good heavens. Yes, my name is David Pierce. I'm a transhumanist. Back in the year
1998, I co-founded with Nick Bostrom, the World Transhumanist Association. Now, humanity plus,
transhumanists want to create a trickle-less civilisation of superintelligence, super longevity,
and this is my particular focus, super happiness, life based on gradients of intelligent bliss.
And that's very hard to argue with and those are very, very clear objectives that are quite
inclusive. But at the same time, transhumanism is quite a controversial subject among people.
It gets people quite frightened. So why do you think that is? Let's start with that question.
Why does concepts of perpetual bliss and super longevity and superintelligence scare people so
much? Do you think? Oh, good heavens and so a complicated topic. I mean, for a start, people are
right to be suspicious because if you look at the history of utopian schemes, things have a habit
of going wrong. I mean, take, for example, the eugenics movements of the late 19th century,
early 20th century, early eugenicists didn't set out to be evil. The idea of improving
genetic makeup, yeah, I mean, naively, it seems self-evidently good. But of course, we know it's
led to the horrors of sterilization, forced eugenics, and in the case of Nazi Germany, the
horrors of the Third Reich. So yeah, in one sense, people are right to be suspicious.
And yet at the same time, if we are not prepared to edit our genetic source codes,
then pain and suffering and death and aging will be perpetuated indefinitely. So it's a
bit of a dilemma, shall we say? A little bit. I think that the question where the line tends
to be drawn then is whether this utopia is imposed upon people or whether people are pursuing this
utopia for their own ends. So I had a conversation with Zoltan, who I'm sure you might have come
across, who ran for the President of the United States on the same show a couple of days ago,
and we spoke about the difference in the transhumanist movement between the sort of
collectivist transhumanist movement and the more individualist, libertarian way to the same end.
And I think that that's also an interesting conversation to have, and that the end that
you are talking about, an end where everybody is happy and experiencing the fullness of whatever
life and consciousness is to them, is hard to argue with. But when we get stuck on the means
as to how we get along that journey, things could become a little bit less comfortable for a lot
of people. So maybe you can start by explaining to us where you stand on that path. Should we be
forced to be happy, or should we be allowed to come around to that idea through our own ways?
Yes, good question. No, no one should be forced to be happy, but it never ceases to surprise me.
A lot of people do have this suspicion that someone somewhere is going to try and force
them to be happy against their will, which sadly I regard as fanciful, I say sadly, perhaps not.
No one is going to force you to be happy. No one is going to force you to upgrade your
do it DNA. But at the moment, pain, suffering, aging, death are coercive. And what's a new
technology's genetic engineering AI offer is the prospect of liberation from our coercive
Darwinian biology. Essentially, evolution via natural selection didn't design us to be happy.
Evolution, figuratively speaking, designed us to be discontented a lot of the time,
because discontent, essentially, it increases the inclusive fitness of our genes. And for the
first time, thanks to biotechnology, we are essentially going to be able to choose our genetic
makeup, choose the genetic makeup of our future children. The level of suffering in the living
world is shortly going to become an adjustable parameter. And essentially, yes, we are going
to be able to transcend biological limitations. The details are incredibly messy. But yes,
all transhumanists, whether they can be crudely be scored, called left wing or right wing transhumanists,
are very, very strong on the issue of freedom. But as the whole COVID pandemic illustrates,
we are ultimately all in this together. As we see the debates over whether mask wearing should be
mandatory or not, extreme libertarianism is problematic. Because, yeah, one can argue for
complete liberty for for for Robinson Crusoe, but we're not Robinson Crusoe's. How one reconciles
these dilemmas, yeah, it is obviously horrendously complicated. But I think most if not all transhumanists
would sign up for this this vision of a future society of super intelligent, super longevity
and super happiness. But with different with different emphases, and in some transhumanists,
their main focus is radical life extension, with cryonics as a backer option for people who
suspect that they're not going to make it. Because after all, we can't yet reverse the biology of
ageing. Other transhumanists are focused on super intelligence, which itself is extremely
complicated. Some transhumanists anticipate essentially a so called intelligence explosion
of recursively self improving software based AI, in which humans are essentially going to be
completely outclassed in every fashion by our machines. Other transhumanists envisage
some kind of fusion of humanity with our machines, maybe mind uploading, this is the Curse Vilean
vision. Personally, I think it more likely that full spectrum super intelligence is going to be
us that we're going to genetically rewrite ourselves, augment ourselves with with neurochips.
Yeah, essentially full spectrum super intelligence will be our biological descendants.
Yeah, so I mean, that's that's definitely an exciting thing or concept to talk about. But I
just want to go back to saying what you were talking about there with regards to freedom,
and how it plays into these goals. And I think a way to look at it is that for me, certainly,
freedom is the ability to opt out of whatever is going on. And what you're really talking about
is in our current existence, we're not free to opt out of the birth death cycle at all. So when
you start to think about it, and that's sort of where you can start to see that progressing beyond
the the bounds of us of natural life, and I know the word natural is wrong, because technically
everything is natural, we wouldn't be here to start with. But to progress beyond what is currently
taken to be what life and death is, is actually broadening choice and freedom. This is giving
us an ability to opt out of the cycles that we have been born into essentially against our will.
So I think that that is one way to look at it, rather than seeing that France gracing what is
natural, depending on what your perspective, what natural is, is not reducing freedom. It's
actually increasing the range of options available for us, the huge buffet of life to
choose from. So to be able to choose our degree of suffering, whether you are sort of crazy enough
to want to pick some suffering into your life, should not necessarily stop someone else from
choosing to have less of that going forward. Now I have read quite a lot of your work, and I know
Ludwig has quite a lot too. So we had quite a few questions we wanted to get into with you today.
And I think that one of the way your work really focuses, as you said, is that you tend to focus
on the happiness aspect of transhumanism, rather than intelligence or longevity. And I would tend
to agree with you, because ultimately, isn't achieving total bliss, the ultimate end, right?
And intelligence is a means to that end, you can see it that way, rather than being an end
in and of itself. Of course, different people would disagree with that perspective. But maybe you
can elaborate for us why you think super happiness is perhaps the most important of those three
pillars of the whatever comes next for humanity. Yeah, personally, I think overriding moral obligation
is to prevent, mitigate, and eventually abolish all forms of suffering throughout the living world,
human and non-human. None of us chose to be born. We're born, in a sense, to suffer.
But what I don't want to do is suggest that, yeah, in order to sign up to the kind of the
abolitionist project of getting rid of suffering, that anyone feels they need to sign up to suffering
focused ethics. I mean, personally, I'm a negative utilitarian or a kind of secular Buddhist. That is,
I think, our overriding obligation. But one of the beauties of being able to recalibrate the
hedonic treadmill and ratchet up your hedonic set point and hedonic range is that it's not
necessary to buy into anyone's vision of utopia and the good life. That if your
hedonic set point becomes higher, if your hedonic range is higher, just imagine waking up tomorrow
morning in an exceptionally good mood. Your core values and preference architecture could
remain intact, and yet your default quality of life will be immensely improved. Transhuman is
very keen on this side of recalibrating the hedonic treadmill. There's a distinction between
being blissful and being blissed out. At the moment, yes, each of us has this complex
web of negative feedback mechanisms in the central nervous system that stops us being
happy or very sad, in most cases, for long. But by focusing on recalibrating hedonic set points,
it should be possible for your default level of well-being to be significantly higher.
That if today, schematically, crudely, your hedonic range is, let's say, minus 10 to
hedonic zero to plus 10, in future it would be possible to have a civilization that is, let's
say, plus 10 to plus 30, and eventually maybe even a plus 90 to a plus 100. In a future civilization,
the darkest steps can be far richer than our peak experiences. And who could really argue with that,
right, the whole, like, upward slope? That has been the history of humanity, hasn't it,
been improving our quality of life, not just the quantity of it, over the full course of human
history. Obviously, there have been some rather big bumps on the road, but generally our trajectory
has been on improving the quality and the quantity of life that each of us gets to enjoy.
But I suppose the question then becomes, how do we actually go about this abolishment of suffering
and moving ourselves up that ladder of more beneficial experience for more of us? Is it merely
to sort of stop doing the things that are harming us or should we be exploring ways to
artificially, if you want to say, or more deliberately improve our base level of happiness
and experience? Well, I think our first obligation is to consider before bringing new life into the
world, whether one should use today's genetic crapshoot or whether all prospective parents
should be offered free implantation, genetic screening and counselling, and soon,
CRISPR genome editing, so they can choose everything from the approximate pain thresholds to the
approximate hedonic set points of their future children. Something like, this is just an example,
the SCN9-A gene, the so-called volume knob for pain, dozens of different alleles, nonsense mutations
abolish any kind of capacity to feel physical pain. Using a nonsense mutation would be premature
for now, but if one, for example, chooses for one's children a benign variant of SCN9-A, one will
potentially ensure that the pain thresholds, pain sensitivity of your child is like one of today's
outliers, the kind of person who says, oh, pain, it's just a useful signaling mechanism,
and there are other genetic interventions that are going to be possible too.
So, yeah, that is new life. What about existing humans? Once again, there are going to be genetic
opportunities here. For example, it's going to be possible to use CRISPR to have a one-off
genetic intervention that actually changes the expression of your existing genes. So,
this is going to actually benefit existing people too, but the biohappiness revolution
isn't just going to affect humans. At the moment, humans treat non-human animals in quite appalling
ways. A pig, for example, is ascensioned and sapient as a free linguistic toddler, and yet
we treat pigs in ways that would get the perpetrator locked up for life if the victim were a human
toddler. And, yeah, the biohappiness revolution will almost certainly involve shutting down factory
farms and slaughterhouses and the replacement of today's animal agriculture with cultured meat
and animal products. Now, personally, I would urge anyone right now to quit meat and animal
products, but realistically, the world is going to get veganized via cultured meat and meat
substitutes. The final leg of the abolitionist project on Earth is going to be non-human animals
in nature, that although anyone brought up on a disnified diet of wildlife documentaries,
we'll think of nature as a beautiful place, or perhaps, you know, I think of wildlife parks,
elephants, the beauties of nature. Nature is pretty savage a lot of the time. This is nature,
red in tooth and claw. Most animals in the wild lead short, nasty, brutish lives. They starve
or end up in the jaws of a predator. But thanks to genome editing and AI, the entire biosphere
is essentially programmable. And if we decide that we want to have a low-pane biosphere,
followed by a no-pane biosphere, it'll be possible to use such tools as CRISPR-based synthetic gene
drives to essentially reprogram the living world. I mean, it's obviously tremendously
computationally ambitious, this. And we're looking many decades, perhaps many centuries ahead,
but yeah, essentially the level of suffering nature is an adjustable parameter and we need
to decide what level we consider is ethically optimal. What are you really talking about there
for people that aren't familiar with your work when it comes to genetically editing nature itself to
get rid of the, or at least blunt, the sharp, nasty, brutish edge of what nature currently is?
Well, good heavens. In the long run, this is going to involve everything from
reprogramming predators to, now you might think, well, in a world without predation,
surely there would be malthusian catastrophe, a population explosion of herbivores. And so,
this would need to be combined with cross-species fertility regulation,
using everything from immuno contraception in the case of large vertebrates to tunable
synthetic gene drives in the case of small, fast breeders. This will, to some extent,
it's not just a technical challenge, it's also an ethical challenge too. But the vision is ancient,
you know, one thinks of the Bible, of Isaiah, of a world where the lion and the wolf fly down
with the lamb. To bring about such a world, the peaceable kingdom, we're going to need to do a
bit of genetic tweaking. But these are technical problems. Every single cubic meter of the biosphere
is going to be accessible to surveillance, micromanagement, and control. On the one hand,
this could lead to dystopian scenarios, imagine some kind of global pelopticon surveillance state.
But technologies could be used, yeah, to create a kind of pan-species welfare state in which
all sentient beings can flourish without being eaten or physically molested in any way. And yeah,
if one just uses those out terms like predation, it doesn't sound too bad, but just
even briefly pause for five seconds and try to imagine what it must be like to be eaten alive
or to be asphyxiated or disembound. It's ghastly and the only reason I'm inviting your
viewers to even consider it is that, yeah, essentially it's shortly going to become
optional. And we need to decide, do we want a living world in which sentient beings systematically
hurt, harm, and kill each other? Or do we want a living world in which all sentient beings can
flourish? And biotech gives us the tools for the job if we decide we want to civilize the biosphere.
So you're really saying that if we can do something about suffering, then the moral obligation is
should we? And we probably should if we are able to do so. Obviously, it's slightly different
if we are encountering problems that we cannot fix. And that, I suppose, brings me to the next
part of our conversation. You're talking essentially here about trying to create
intelligently designed heaven here on Earth as an ideal end goal. But obviously, we're not starting
with a blank slate. We are starting with a nasty world that is full of all sorts of problems,
all sorts of material problems, many of which affect people's real bodies. And I'm based in
South Africa. We have huge unemployment rates. We have a lot of poverty. We have illnesses that
are still rampant. Illnesses, never mind COVID, TB and AIDS is still rampant. There is so much
suffering in the world. So my question for you is, what is the first step we take in trying to
deal with the suffering here on Earth? As you're saying, for the wealthy, for people that have
access to really advanced technologies, maybe you can use genetic editing to improve your own
longevity and to increase your own bliss levels. And that's fantastic for those who are able to
access it. But how does it actually affect and help people in the here and now facing real problems
and having empty bellies and needing to actually sort of get through the day? How do we start to
address that base level of suffering? Do you have any comments there? But then I've got a couple of
ideas that I will throw at you based on your work, if we don't get there in your answer.
Essentially, we need a twin-track strategy of environmental, social, political form with genome
reform. And though I might sound like a crude biological genetic determinist, both elements
are essential. Essentially, we need universal basic income, guaranteed jobs, housing, medical care,
for all. Now, essentially, almost everyone these days recognizes that some version of the mixed
economy is realistic. The question is, what kind of balance do you strike? And I gather you've
chatted to Zoltan. Zoltan is very much identified with the loosely the right wing or the libertarian
strand of transhumanism. And yet Zoltan is himself a fan of universal basic income. Apologies,
it's incredibly simplistic, of course, this whole notion of left and right. But nonetheless,
something is too useful to give up. Obviously, there are plenty of people who, when they hear
terms like universal basic income, universal health care, will shout socialism. But as far as I'm
concerned, it's just precondition of any decent civilized society that everyone has access to
health care and a reasonable living income. Okay, well, we can carry on from this. I'm very
glad that you opened the conversation in After a God. So you can talk about things like universal
basic income and universal basic health care. But what those programs would essentially do is just
get everyone up to some sort of basic living standards. I call it sort of universal, fully
automated sort of middle class communism is what we've kind of got to work with based on our
current sort of global economy, if you've deleted up between everyone, which is not all that exciting.
And that's not what the transhumanist promise really is, which is about flourishing to the full
extent that we possibly can. So you have written in the past about a desire for a universal basic
happiness, which is when you start to kind of bring the concepts of universal basic income and
universal basic health care together, to say that future social welfare safety nets and policies
should be optimized around distributing happiness to populations through all sorts of interventions,
not just through getting and just enough money to get through the day, but actually through even
through sort of biochemical interactions and interference through things like happiness pulls,
which of course once again gets people who are frightened about these sorts of things,
their eyebrows raising. So maybe you want to talk about biological interventions through
some sort of medication that can actually raise our base level of existence beyond that very sort
of mediocre sort of idea of communism that gets everyone through the day, but is not
not exactly instilling a flourishing existence upon everyone. What is what is the what is the
thinking around interfering in our psychology and our biology to deliberately raise our living
experience? Yeah, and there are three, very crudely, there are three ways to adjust this.
The crudest is electrodes. This is the idea of why heading back in 1954, Olds and Milner
discovered what were then called the pleasure centers, essentially intracranial self-stimulation,
and this was the idea that a rat or some any other creature would compulsively self-stimulate
its reward circuitry, and this was more rewarding than sex, food, or anything else.
In practice, what are being stimulated, it's not the pleasure centers, but rather the desire
centers. But nonetheless, very crudely, we can talk of one possible strategy for happiness
as the use of electrodes. Now, a lot of people are appalled by this idea. Personally,
it doesn't appall me, but it's not nonetheless, it's not a viable solution for society. It's
not a long term solution because wire heads don't want to raise baby wire heads. We altered it with
die out very quickly. Also, why heading is not consistent with intelligence, critical insights,
social responsibility. In any case, most people don't like the thought of wiring up their
brains and their pleasure centers. So yeah, I don't consider this strategy as fruitful.
The long term strategy will come to the intermediate strategy and alike, I think,
is genetic engineering. Essentially, yeah, we need to rewrite the genome, starting off
with a little bit of light genetic tweaking, not just the well-known genetic diseases, sickle cell
disease, cystic fibrosis, Tay-Sachs, and so forth. But also genes, far, far out gene,
comps gene, and so forth that are implicated in default, a hedonic tone. We've mentioned
pain thresholds. Many, many genes are involved, but the volume knob for pain is critical.
And yeah, essentially, as a civilisation, I think we need a strategy. I mean, the global health
organisation and its founding constitution of 1998, which it recently reaffirmed,
defines health as a state of complete physical, social, and emotional well-being. Now,
by that definition, no one in history to date has ever been healthy. And so I think,
perhaps we should aim for something a little less ambitious, but life-based on gradients of
intelligent bliss, a slightly less ambitious definition of health. It's only going to be
feasible if we're prepared to edit our genetic source code. And I think we need to urge the
world health organisation to live up to its responsibilities in its founding constitution,
good health for all, entails genetic, yeah, essentially getting rid of the genetic
crapshoot and giving parents guidance on how to choose the genetic makeup of their future children.
But, and this is more intermediate, it's not just future, future sentient beings we need
to think about, of course, it is existing, suffering sentient beings. And for the first
time this year, a one-off genetic jab has been used to treat a transthyretin amyloidosis,
which is a very nasty progressive disease. And the one-off CRISPR infusion essentially
knocks out the errant gene and the rogue protein it was producing. And so this is very early days,
actually seems to be effectively treating this otherwise fatal genetic disorder.
And it's going to be possible, looking ahead 10, 15, 20 years, if you have various nasty genes
and allelic combinations, it should be possible for you too to have CRISPR infusion
and actually tweak your existing genome. And one of the most exciting things about this therapy
is that the way that it targeted cells in the liver and only in the liver. I mean, this is precision
and this is precision engineering and it's going to get a lot more precise. And so we need to
we need to have a debate as a society whether people should be, in a sense, compelled to keep
their existing genomes or whether people should be allowed to enhance and upgrade. And although I
said, well, earlier in the sentence, enhanced by the standards of post-human superintelligence,
we are all severely dysfunctional. We are all malware, in a sense. And so perhaps it's best
to use the language of remediation. And sociologically, I think it's very much the case that people
are relatively relaxed about the prospect of gene therapy to correct existing disorders.
They're not nearly so relaxed and, in many cases, hostile to the idea of enhancement. But
essentially, we are all extremely sick. We all have this lethal progressive disorder called
aging. Most of us, not all of us, are predisposed to that anxiety disorders, depression, all kinds
of stuff like that. Do we want to preserve Darwinian status quo? Or do we want to create
a civilisation that is ultimately going to be underpinned by gradients of intelligent bliss?
Let me ask you another question around the goal here. Going back to right at the beginning,
when we were talking about transhumanism wanting to increase intelligence, increase happiness,
increase longevity, in your perspective, is the goal to maximise individual human or conscious
lifespan? Or is the goal rather for collective civilisational life extension of the whole human
life project? I think this is always an interesting question to ask people who do play around in the
transhumanist thinking space. Because somehow, sometimes those goals can come into conflict
with each other, and other times they can work a bit together. What is your perspective there?
What is the goal that we're working towards? Do you want as many consciousnesses as possible
for all flourishing? Or is the goal to merge into a single entity somewhere at the end? Again,
is it the individual life extension? Or is it the civilisational project that we're really
tending towards? Or if you want to take a different tackle together, please go for it.
The Transhumanist Declaration of 1998, reaffirmed in 2009, affirms our commitment to the well-being
of all sentience. Transhumanism, at its best, is universalist. I think that something like
cryonics, for example, should be opt-out. It should be the default. It should be available
to everyone. And so no one need to feel left out of the Transhumanist Revolution. I suspect a lot
of people listening to this discussion will be thinking, well, yeah, maybe one day, humans,
transhumans, great, go old, but it's too late for me. But if we do cryonically suspend people,
and even offer cryothanasia in the case of people with a progressive disease or something like that,
essentially everyone can benefit. And so, yeah, a twin-track strategy of combining
research into preventing aging, rejuvenation technologies with support for opt-out cryonics.
So, yeah, the vision, at least my vision and the vision of many, though not all transhumanists,
would be universalists, the well-being of all sentience.
Very hard to argue with that once again, because that doesn't leave anyone out at all. But there
is that still that sort of subtext that comes in in terms of what you're picking up on there,
in terms of inequality and access to these sorts of services, which is, I think,
at the root of a lot of the arguments against your message. And unfortunately, the history of
humanity does tend to have been driven ahead rather a lot by the unpleasant emotion of envy,
right? We don't want people to succeed if we're not able to do so. Hopefully, of course, we'll be
able to evolve ourselves away from that. But currently, the way the world is set up, if I look
at a lot of the problems in the world, they are based on fear and envy to a large extent.
And quite a lot of the arguments against improvement or against enhancement, as you're talking about,
whether that's enhancement of health, intelligence or happiness, is this concept of unfairness.
It's unfair that some people will be able to get access to these opportunities before others,
and some may never be able to access them, some of us that are alive today.
Now, I'm sure from your perspective, that's not a good argument to prevent those that are able
from going ahead. But how would you speak to that? Because unfortunately, we do live in a messy
world. It's not a perfect place to start with. We're not designing this place from scratch.
And it is true. People that are able to enhance their offspring in the way that you talk about,
intelligently and happiness-wise and all the rest of it are going to be at a huge advantage
to those that cannot. And unfortunately, inequality does lead to conflict, which could
inadvertently end up leading to more suffering, at least in the interim. How do you think about
such really complicated, messy problems? And how do you talk to the people that will be
essentially the collateral damage generations that have to live through this sort of this transition?
Good heavens, yes. A lot to tackle there. We are designed to be jealous, envious,
all these Darwinian emotions. And if you get, let's say, a 25% pay rise and all your colleagues
get a 50% pay rise, rather than being pleased at your pay rise, you're actually going to feel
subjectively worse off. But compare that with a hedonic recalibration crudely. And this is
obviously a very crude example. If you have a recalibration of your hedonic treadmill that makes
your default hedonic set point 25% higher and a billionaire gets it 50% higher, you are going to
feel much, much happier. And there's a fundamental difference here. I said it was a rather artificial
example because I don't know any reason why this should be the case. And yeah, this is the difference
between biological genetic interventions that improve default subjective wellbeing and the
traditional environmental routes. That's, although you touched on the earlier progress
of civilization reform over the past few hundred, even the past few thousand years,
on none of this environmental improvements has actually changed the workings of the
hedonic treadmill. It can't. Nature didn't design us that way. Whereas if we are prepared to tackle
the biological genetic roots of the problem, everyone can benefit. And sure, the rich and the
powerful are likely to get things first. But the beauty of digital technology, information-based
technology is that it's essentially egalitarian. And without being too lyrical and starry eyed
about the digital revolution and information technology, you and I, our collection of video,
our music collection is just as good as Bill Gates or Jeff Bezos. And so, yeah, it is going to be
extremely cost effective, for example, using pre-implantation genetic screening and counselling
for all prospective parents. The first genome to be sequenced, yeah, cost something like a billion
dollars. Now you can get it done for a hundred dollars or less. And so, yeah, although inequalities
in our society are terrible, the worst inequalities of all are hedonic inequalities. And there are
many poor people who are, by Darwinian standards, cheerful and optimistic. And there are rich people
who are depressive and tormented by all kinds of suffering. And hedonic uplift could be global.
All kinds of positional goods, status goods, there is simply no way you can create an unlimited
abundance of positional goods, status goods. But what you can do is create hedonic uplift
for all. That can be universal. I like the way most of what we've spoken about today. You really
emphasised fixing what is wrong with us and editing our genetic code to edit out suffering and to
improve quality of life outcomes for all of us. And I did also want to talk to you about
other interim solutions, because as I have mentioned, there are definitely real problems in
our real world. We are unhealthy. There is crime. There is pollution. There's a whole lot of issues
that we all have to deal with on a day-to-day basis. I don't want to get into that too much.
But one of the alternatives that we can do quite quickly if we want to escape or that is to literally
escape, either by using mind-altering drugs and experiences or by escaping into virtual worlds.
And I know that you have preferences as to those two routes. But maybe you can speak to a little
bit of your critique on people who are anti-Soma and brave new world on the one hand, but also
perhaps also speaking to why conversely, perhaps escaping into virtual worlds to deal with real
world inequality where you can have everyone can have a castle in the sky by donning a VR headset
might not achieve the same interim end while we are dealing with real world problems before we can
evolve ourselves out of that. Those two intro routes, what are your thoughts on that?
Yeah, something like immersive VR is going to get bigger and bigger.
And yes, immersive VR is wonderful, very exciting. A number of problems though, for a start,
immersive VR doesn't by itself recalibrate the hedonic treadmill. And so though the idea of
being able to escape and live in a fantasy world of your choosing might sound appealing,
on itself it would pull and that if you have a relatively low
hedonic set point, you will feel angst ridden or depressive, even in some multimodal immersive
designer utopia. So yeah, I think we will need to combine hedonic recalibration with immersive VR.
Is it possible that in future we will choose to spend all our lives in immersive VR,
escape from messy basement reality? A lot of the time, yes, but I don't think completely so,
because essentially one needs to think about the nature of selection pressure in the basement.
And just as wire heads don't want to raise like baby wire heads, people who live, spend their
lives in immersive VR aren't going to want to have kids and raise kids in basement reality.
So one of the advantages of raising hedonic set points is that we won't need to choose between
escapist fantasy worlds and nasty, messy basement reality. And that if we upgrade our reward
circuitry, essentially it will be possible to engage with the real world and yet at the same
time it won't be as nasty as today. What the long-term mix of life in basement reality and life in
immersive VR is going to be, I don't pretend to know, but yeah, selection pressure is critical.
And then the other side of that question on your critique of the critics of Brave New World and
an old Huxley's idea of how to engineer happiness. Do you have any comments you want to add there
for people that aren't familiar with your views there? I said, yeah, I always find them entertaining.
Yeah, well, yes, people worry, at least some people worry they'll cite Brave New World. They
worry that essentially if there is so much Huxley's ideal pleasure drug or its genetic
equivalents that we will all become contentive dupes of the ruling elites who will be able to
manipulate and control us. Clearly that is a worry, but nonetheless it is worth considering,
I think, what effect having a higher hedonic set point or an ideal pleasure drug is likely to
have on your behavior in that evolutionarily, low mood depression is associated with subordination
and defeat and that other things being equal, if your hedonic set point is raised, you're more
likely to become active and self assertive and a citizen who participates in society and one
can turn Huxley's arguments on on their head in a sense in that, yeah, if everyone is extremely
happy with a high hedonic set point, they're less likely to behave in a depressive subordinate,
keep your head down manner. Huxley did actually anticipate this scenario or something like
this scenario in Brave New World when John and the controller are having a conversation and John,
I think, was asking why can't everyone be a kind of alpha and the controller revealed that this
experiment was tried in Cyprus. Essentially there was a civil war because all the alphas,
they wanted to be top dog and it didn't work, so rather than leading us all to be more manipulable,
it may be that's turning us all into active citizens who don't let ourselves be
bossed around, creates social problems of its own. I suppose that's how far you take it, right,
so if you're up the intelligence along with the with the success drive, then you would sort of
remove a lot of those problems and I think that's the whole point of the transhumanist movement,
is that critics of it are looking out at piecemeal or saying that we ought to have
idiot bliss or you might have sort of evil intelligence rather than seeing how if they go
together, if good things go together, as they tend to do in our real world, whether you look at it
from an economic lens or from a more philosophical lens, generally good things go together and bad
things go together too, unfortunately our world is quite unfair in that regard, that there are
vicious cycles and virtuous cycles and if you look at it more holistically as to say that if we are
increasing our altruism as long with our pleasure and along with our intelligence,
then you get to avoid quite a lot of these problems or at least that's what the intended
goal should be, but I suppose the question that I wanted to end with you today because we are
coming to the end of our hour is saying let's go back to that very very end goal that we're talking
about yet, if we do achieve the ultimate experience would that be the end of the of humanity or would
that just kind of be the beginning, do we achieve some sort of equilibrium, do we continue evolving
and progressing or do we all just sort of disappear into some sort of final bliss bang,
however you want to put it. Talking about the long-term future is inevitably extremely speculative,
but by aiming at information-sensitive gradients of intelligent bliss, that's a mouthful but it's
worth it's worth the mouthful rather than just saying bliss or super happiness, essentially the
more one loves life the more one tends to want to protect and preserve it and rather than turning
us into lotus-eaters a world of this new architecture of mind based entirely on information-sensitive
gradients of intelligent bliss, I think the whole enterprise of knowledge has scarcely begun,
I think the whole enterprise of civilization has scarcely begun, at the moment we're seeing a lot
about this kind of space exploration billionaires in space, but once we have sorted out our reward
circuitry and once we have phased out the biology of experience below hedonic zero, when we enjoy
life based on gradients of intelligent bliss, it's going to be possible safely to explore
psychedelia and I think inner space has far more revelations than outer space, that the idea of
traveling to other planets or other solar systems, we're remembering Star Trek and
sci-fi from the past, whereas the really truly mind wrenchingly exotic stuff is going to come from
exploring alien state spaces of consciousness, today I don't recommend it, I think dark Darwinian
minds are unsuited for psychedelic exploration, but once we have abolished the physical capacity
to undergo any form of suffering, when life is based on gradients of intelligent bliss,
essentially yes, I think there is going to be an explosion of knowledge as we can safely explore
radically altered state spaces of consciousness. That is an incredible place to end this conversation,
I do want to give you the last word if there's anything else or any other point you want to make,
but otherwise if you could tell people where you, they can find you if you want to be found.
Well my original motherload website, stated in the art web design 1997, is headweb.com,
h-e-d-w-e-b.com, headweb.com, in which I set out the hedonistic comparative and the different
strands of transhumilism. But final message, no I kind of wish your listeners well in their lives,
I just hope they get the chance to taste the transhuman bliss that I've talked about.
Thank you so much, you've been an absolute joy to talk to and hopefully we'll continue this
conversation some other time. Thank you Bronwyn, goodbye.
