Welcome to this educational video
on a straightforward model for understanding depression.
There's much confusion about the nature of depression
and this is seen in policy debates.
Several years ago, and I'll reference a blog
in my assignments to you in relationship
to some blogs to read,
there was a big debate in the DSM
as to whether or not they should eliminate
the bereavement exemption.
The bereavement exemption is the notice
that if somebody is experiencing major depressive symptoms
but have recently within the last six months
at various times had experienced the death of a loved one,
then those symptoms could be accounted for
in relationship to that.
The bereavement exemption raises
a whole host of different issues
about fundamentally how are people conceiving of depression
and that's what this video is about.
What it offers is a proposed solution
for conceptualizing depression by describing it
as a state of behavioral shutdown
or a little more clunky,
but actually in the language of the unified theory,
a state of mental behavioral shutdown.
What we're gonna see from this is then
with the proper description of the state of being depressed,
we can then divide people and their situations
into three broad logical categories
of depressive reactions, depressive disorders
and depressive diseases.
And that will be stemming from the logic of the structure.
To give you just a little bit of background
about where this is located
in the development of the unified theory is,
many of you know for my first job following my graduating
from my doctorate,
I worked at the University of Pennsylvania with Beck
and my primary responsibility was being program director
of his project director, I should say,
of a major study that brought individuals in
who had recently made a suicide attempt.
And it was in the context of doing that study,
working with Beck and his formulation of depression,
working with people in psychiatry
and having sort of developed the outline
of the unified theory, which really happens in 1997.
This is 1999 to 2003.
I really engendered on an application of the unified theory
to show how it can provide a way
of understanding the core concepts
and categories in psychology and psychiatry.
I wrote an article that differentiated mental diseases
from mental disorders and central in that argument,
but related to that argument is ways
in which we conceive of the concept of depression,
which as we will see is a very complicated construct.
And it's because we lack an overarching frame
of understanding that we struggle so much
in our capacities to really categorize
this different kinds of symptom presentations
that may have very different causes or presentations.
So let's talk briefly about what we mean
in relationship to depression
and think some about the nature of the confusion.
So in modern terms, we use this word all the time.
So for example, somebody might say,
oh, it's been raining for four days
and this weather is making me depressed.
What do we mean when we say that?
Or perhaps more seriously,
I always felt very depressed
after we lost the championship game.
We then make comments like,
although he acts okay on the surface,
deep down he is depressed.
She often feels depressed about her life.
She suffered a major depressive episode
after she lost her job.
He was hospitalized with melancholic depression.
We'll return to that term.
What I'm gonna suggest here is that there's a continuum.
With also some reasonable divisions.
So one division is going to be
in the colloquial folk psychological use
of the term depressive reaction.
So this is just an experience of a depressed mood
that may last for hours or mild frustration
for a bit of time, maybe a couple of days.
Usually tied to a series of events
that haven't gone that well
and then you just relative to your normal mood,
you feel discouraged, grumpy, negative.
The term is used in that way.
And clearly we would not want to identify these
as examples of mental illness.
On the flip side or on a more severe level
in terms of basic severity or a slightly different meeting,
we see individuals who struggle with depression
as a fundamental part of their life.
And it's tied up with their general feelings
of life satisfaction.
It's tied up with their general,
what Zach Stein might call the nature of their insolment,
which means sort of how they deeply relate
to their emotions, what are the image
and meaning that they have in their lives.
And then finally, we see sort of pervasive symptoms
that then dramatically impact somebody through and through,
including their overt presentation.
And so there is at some level a degree of severity
with these breaks.
And that is a, and I think we can see that
in our everyday common sense language.
And what I'm gonna argue is that a deep understanding
of mental behavior, which the unified theory argues
that it can provide.
Sets the stage then for where these,
this dimension of severity comes from
and why we might want to divide up this,
sort of if we had these six bullets
into three different categories.
So there's an enormous amount of struggle,
basically trying to get at what we should consider
the true nature of depression to be.
Is it just a normal reaction to adversity?
Is it a normal reaction to be saying marginalized
or disempowered or living on the street
or losing one's job or being divorced or being lonely
and feeling that life had so much potential
and that could never be realized?
Is it a psychological disorder?
Or is it a biological disease?
So these are three broad frames of reference
that are operative in everyday terms.
And they're also operative in different scholarly domains
or within scholarly domains that elicit debate.
So the answer of those three questions
fundamentally depends on who you ask.
So if you go to biological psychiatry,
many people there have a view of depression
akin to what Judd described as,
most people in our society no longer view depression
as a mysterious sickness of spirit or emotional weakness,
but rather as a disease of the brain
and an important health problem.
So one frame is that depression is a disease of the brain.
There are behavioral psychologists, social workers
and other mental health professionals
who basically argue this is completely erroneous
that we should actually consider it to be a myth
that the depression is a disease of the brain.
And argue that there are patterns of psychological functioning.
I actually have a presentation
where I have six or seven more quotes from psychologists,
psychoanalysts, social workers, feminists,
multicultural theorists, indigenous psychologists
who all offer particular angles on the concept.
I shortened that and here emphasize the debate
because when I gave this lecture,
I think back in 2017,
the lecture that this slides are based on,
there was much debate about the bereavement exemption.
That actually may go back a little further than 2017.
I can't really recall.
But anyway, in the context of the debate about the bereavement,
like whether or not we should eliminate the criteria,
which I actually argued we should,
but it actually was in conjunction
with a fundamental redefinition
of what we meant by the term depression.
Is that when is depression a mental disorder
and when is the reaction to difficult life circumstances?
All of these different, there are societies
as well as Alan Francis.
I guess actually, yeah, it's a lot longer in 2017.
That's actually, yeah, I guess it would be DSM-5.
All of these individuals weighed in
with different opinions about if the depression
is clearly tied to say the death of a child
and somebody is two months into a death of a child
or six months into the death of a child.
Because I believe the data are indicative
of somebody who loses a child.
That's the hardest death or most likely death
to result in a complicated bereavement
that would be associated with depressive symptoms.
Should we think of this as a mental disorder?
So just to continue with our frame of understanding,
here are a couple of sentences, statements.
We actually, Mariafe Panizio and I,
for her master's thesis, she's a doctoral student,
Ken's advisor who recently defended her dissertation
this past year on the concept of personality disorders.
She was here for her psychological sciences degree.
And in the context of that did with me a master's thesis,
great master's thesis,
that explored practitioners beliefs about depression
and asked things like on a one to seven scale,
what do you, do you endorse this statement?
So do you endorse the idea of depression
as a disease of the brain?
Depression is a normal reaction
to an environmental stressor.
Depression is caused by maladaptive psychological patterns.
If a person is grieving,
they should be exempted from being diagnosed.
It's a myth that depression is a disease like cancer.
Given that depression is biological in nature,
people are not responsible for having depression.
Depression arises not from being able to,
as a result of being able to not meet
the socially constructed standards of the good person.
This was from a quote from a social constructionist
who looks at power differential.
So we took all of these and we asked the results,
in fact, in a separate presentation,
we would, we shared all those results.
The implications of how we answer this are enormous
because depression is found by the World Health Organization
to be the leading cause of disability worldwide.
And it's one of the great major contributors
to the global divergent of disease,
putting quotes here,
not by the World Health Organization, but by me,
because if we don't agree that depression
is a disease of the brain or a medical disease,
then that raises all sorts of questions.
So the bottom line here, folks,
is that so many areas of the social sciences,
humanities, and psychiatry, psychology, social work,
we have a very, very central concept
that has enormous implications,
that then has come at or angled at
in a wide variety of different domains,
by a wide variety of different domains,
that has lots of serious implications
for how we think about this condition,
and there are lots of broad conditions.
So for me, I come at this because I fell into the rabbit hole
of asking the question of what is psychology,
and then realized just how fragmented the field is.
We do, and because we don't have a frame
for answering the question of what is psychology,
what we instead have is a fragmented pluralism
of different paradigms, models, and ideas.
That sets the stage for us to be enormously confused
about things like, well, what is a person?
How do we understand psychopathology?
And in this instance, I apply that lens specifically
to the concept of depression.
And so what I'll be sharing with you now
is the behavioral shutdown model.
And I really want to emphasize
that I'm proud of the fact
that the behavioral shutdown model is so commonsensical.
And I really want folks to sort of slap themselves
upside the head and say, well, of course,
and why didn't I think of that?
And how don't we agree on that?
That's what I'm actually after because,
and then think about how many different perspectives
there are and how serious this condition is
in terms of its implications.
And that's what a lot of what the unified theory is about,
is about tweaking much of what can be found
in relationship to commonsense,
but then doing so and putting it together
in a network of ideas, well,
that allow for coherence to be generated.
Coherence meaning harmony between various ideas
that allows for good sense-making.
So where does the behavioral shutdown model come from?
Well, it comes from the unified theory of psychology,
and which I published the meta-theoretical frame
for psychology as a meta-theoretical frame in 2011.
By meta-theory, I mean that if you adopt
the four key ideas that make up the unified theory,
that's the tree of knowledge system,
justification systems theory, behavioral investment theory,
which as we'll see is particularly relevant,
and the influence matrix.
You can then assimilate and integrate the major paradigms
into a coherent language system and a theoretical system
that we use together the key ideas
and gives rise to a more coherent whole.
My current book, The Problem of Psychology and Its Solution,
shifts the focus from the meta-theoretical
into what's called the metaphysical,
and the metaphysical is then focused
on the actual core concepts that define the field,
most century, what are science, and in particular,
what is behavior and mental processes.
And this presentation on depression relates to that
because what it does is it shows really,
it is really much more closely connected
to a definitional conception
than it is a theoretical conception.
A theoretical conception is actually more abstract
and relates to underlying causes.
A definitional system really is about connecting
to what it is that's empirically observable
and developing concepts and categories
that align with what is empirically observable.
At least that's the descriptive metaphysics
that I'm currently in the process of working out.
So from the perspective of the unified theory,
we need to answer the question, what is depression
and why is it part of the human condition?
And here's the answer.
Depression is a state of mental behavioral shutdown.
What do we mean by that?
It's a fundamental withdrawing of psychic energy.
And indeed, you actually have two broad systems
of psychic energy, an approach system and avoidance system
that actually reside on the levels of arousal
or inhibition.
And the connection here is basically
an approach arousal system
versus a reduction in energy withdrawal system
is a fundamental distinction
that what depression fundamentally is about
is a shift into a withdrawal of arousal versus system.
Bottom line is people get passive and negative
as opposed to being active and approaching and positive.
So that's the idea, it stems from a more general idea
which is behavioral investment theory
which is the third key idea in the unified theory
of fundamental linkage between life
or biological dimension of analysis
and mind the basic animal's psychological dimension.
So behavioral investment theory is the joint point then
between life and mind on the tree of knowledge.
It's the idea that the nervous system in general
and brain in particular evolved
as a computational control center
that computes the animal's actions
on an energy investment value system
built via natural and behavioral selection
or evolution and learning.
Here's a picture of a bird.
I'll give you an example of behavioral investment theory
in action.
So ethologists, these are scientists
who study animal behavior in the wild
were exploring crows who would grab welks
which are a little shellfish off the beach
and they would fly them over to an area of rocks
and drop them so they would crack the shell, okay?
Now, that's a task that has this particular
obvious goal orientation to get at the fleshy meat
inside the shell.
And the question is, well, how much energy
would the birds expend
and how close would that be to optimal?
So what you would have there is if you didn't drop
the welk shell from fire enough up, it wouldn't break.
And so you'd have to do it several times
and maybe it would break a little bit
but you have to drop it many.
Of course, if you flew very, very high and dropped it
so that it would break every time,
it would be unnecessary to say fly 100 meters up
and drop it, not to mention the fact
that you potentially lose track of it.
So there was an optimal level that one could predict
that would yield the most breakage
for the least amount of flight.
The researchers calculated that
and what they found indeed was
that there was a very close correspondence
between what they would predict
would be the least amount of effort
to get the shells to break.
This is an example of what's called optimal foraging theory
which basically suggests that animals
when they're in their natural environments
that they've evolved to will generally have
a very clear trade-off between costs and benefits
and attempt to optimally maximize
the calorie and nutritious value of their foods
relative to costs and risks.
In other words, the hunting and food acquisition
is a form of behavioral investment
to get a return on that investment.
The animal must make necessary predictions,
calculations about affordances and costs
and that guidance system is a way to frame
the animal behavior and really the structure
of the nervous system is about processing information
to realize relevant aspects of the environment
that enable the path of behavioral investment
to be charted and enacted.
So behavioral investment theory
is a neurocognitive functionalist view
of mental behavior, I know that's a mouthful,
but neurocognitive basically just means
what you already know and that's the nervous system.
What does the nervous system do?
It's an information processing system.
This gives, behavioral investment theory
then gives rise to a view of the nervous system as that.
This is a depiction of the cognitive aspects
of neurocognitive, neuro, of course,
being the nervous system aspects, the fleshy aspects.
The cognitive refers to the way
in which information is processed,
how it's hierarchically managed and stored and retrieved.
And I won't go into this in any depth,
you can look at the educational video
on behavioral investment theory,
but it is worth noting that on the right-hand side
of that diagram, there are four different layers
of neurocognitive processing of the sensory
fixed action pattern motor response layer.
That's basically an automatic procedural layer
that you can sort of ingrain with habits
and automatic sensory motor responding
that requires very little consciousness.
The second layer is what we call
the operant experiential layer.
That's noted by the PME.
And this really is the layer
of your motivational emotional energy.
And this is crucial for depression
because this is the layer that really gets shifted
in depression where the shift is
from energizing the motivation for approach
and the associated elements of positive affectivity.
What you get is a shift towards a focus on avoidance,
avoidance of loss of future elements
and a shift away from positive approach-oriented motivation.
You then have, on top of that,
you have a deliberation system in other animals.
This is all where the cortex is,
which mentally manipulates possible scenarios
to try to chart the best path of behavioral investment
and then deliberates on that and has to inhibit impulses
and plan accordingly.
That's the frontal lobe.
And then in humans,
and then mostly located in the left hemisphere,
you get a whole nother layer of processing.
That's that language-based processing that we see.
For those of you that are doing things
like Wexler assessments here,
you can kind of see the perceptual reasoning
really assesses that third layer,
that mental manipulation via pictures
and holistic processing.
And then verbal comprehension index,
that's the linguistic comprehension and expression index.
And then you have processing speed and working memory.
So if you're familiar with the Wexler domains,
you can see how they would tie in
and be able to be mapped by this diagram.
Okay.
So at its core, behavioral investment theory
links three big ideas together,
one of which is cognitive neuroscience.
That's the idea that the nervous system
is an information processing system
that makes predictions about what's going to happen,
develops schema, is hierarchically arranged,
and functions as a computational control system.
The other is BF Skinner's operant theory,
which looks at the relationship between
the animal and the environment
and thinks about it in terms of commerce
and the operating effect of the action an animal has
in terms of what are the immediate consequences
that an animal's action has.
And those consequences create
a behavioral selection feedback loop,
such as certain consequences result
in the actions being selected for,
and other consequences result in them being selected against.
It's this behavioral selection operating
on the neurocomputational processes
that really blends cognitive neuroscience
and behavioral science into a package.
And all of this is grounded on an evolutionary formulation.
And that's a picture of Edward O. Wilson.
He studied ants and also generated sociobiology,
which really explored how evolution shapes
the behavioral repertoires of animals,
both in terms of the ways in which they evolve
across the generations,
and then how that sets up learning.
So you have an evolutionary cognitive neuroscience
foundation is what behavioral investment theory gets at.
And it highlights that there are these two broad systems.
One is a behavioral activation approach system
and the other is behavioral inhibition.
In the first years, we were talking about
the circumplex model of affect,
and that emphasized that you have a positive affect
and a negative affect and an arousal
and a calming down system,
when that's active versus passive is a better way to say it.
So behavioral activation really is an energizing
toward the positive.
And what this does is orient toward approach goals,
expend energy to acquire resources,
focus on the benefit side,
generally activates positive affect
and is most obviously associated
with positive reinforcement and operant sense.
On the flip side, you have in terms of brain locations,
generally more centrally located in the left prefrontal.
Behavioral inhibition is more oriented towards
avoidance goals, which are, okay,
things you want to get distance from,
costs, injuries, et cetera.
They're about conserving an acquired resource.
The focus is on costs, loss or threat,
negative affects activated,
punishment avoidance and right prefrontal, okay?
So fundamentally, your control system
is about sort of adding gas to get the good
and putting on the brakes to avoid the bad.
That's the easiest way to think about this.
And you're constantly adding gas and brakes
in a close felt sense.
And here is the basic emotive motivational framework
where you have active spend is fear to avoid,
active spend to approach is desire,
passive approach is relaxation
and passive conservation is depression.
And what immediately you now see here,
remember the question is, well,
why is depression part of our primate system?
Well, now we have a clear opposite,
just like why are some people have so much desire?
It's sort of like, gosh, isn't it really weird
when two people fall in love?
It's like, all they do is talk about how great
the other person is, they all very energetic,
they're in a positive frame of mind.
It's like their whole mode of mood is shifted.
There must be something wrong with them.
The answer is no, the system by design,
when there's an opportunity for a pair bond
that has a long-term potential commitment,
the system by design is activating
a particular type of affiliation with sexual energy
that creates a particular kind of excitable desire.
And that is, so if excitable desire
in a particular kind of opportunity
is part of the architecture,
then we can immediately see why the converse would be true.
So that when your long love of your life leaves you
and that path of opportunity is no longer there
and you're reminded of all the glory that was
and now will no longer be,
we can immediately see why signaling shutdown
and loss and a recognition that the path
of behavioral investment has changed dramatically
and requires recalibration is part and parcel
of the architecture.
So the behavioral shutdown framework,
noting first and foremost that there is a state
of behavioral shutdown that can be activated
in relationship to a pattern of behavioral investment
provides a set of clear answers.
And the primary purpose of the behavioral shutdown model
is to clear a clear functional model of depression
so that biological psychiatrists, clinical psychologists,
social works and late people can have a shared framework
in terms of what this thing is
and why sometimes it is appropriate
to consider it a normal human reaction
as just part of the architecture,
why it's often turns out to be a psychological disorder,
especially in this day and age,
and why it can in certain manifestations
be thought of as a biological disease.
So a depressive reaction or shifts in negative mood
that are adaptive responses toward loss,
a path of behavioral investment that had a desired object
that then is broken or absent or long lost
or most dramatically perhaps, like I said,
a death of a child, the idea that the system
would recognize that loss and need recalibration
and do all sorts of different things
that would result in the logic
of a depressive shutdown as a parent.
It's also the case that if we were to play out,
especially in our modern world,
and I keep saying that,
I'm not gonna get into too much details,
but there are a lot of reasons why a depressive reaction
in the ancient world or in a hunter gatherer society
might elicit a very different kind of reaction
from the social environment, the physical environment,
et cetera, that would minimize it,
whereas in the modern environment,
particular kinds of chronic stress states
and particular kinds of social relations,
particular kinds of beliefs about negative mood,
all potentially set the stage for a vicious cycle.
A vicious cycle ensues when the negative reactions,
negative feelings are followed by negative reactions,
either by the person or by others
in a way that engenders more and more negative feelings
and more and more negative reactions.
This is a vicious psychological pattern,
maladaptive, where shutdown leads to more problems.
Finally, there are the argument
that there would be depressive diseases
that arise out of some kind of malfunctioning
neurobiological state or a state whereby
the depressive shutdown is so pervasive
that it overrides other systems
that are designed to counterbalance it.
So the behavioral shutdown model immediately
then allows us to see why there would be these three domains.
So the answer of what is depression is yes,
it is a normal human reaction and part of human nature.
Yes, it certainly can be a psychological disorder
and yes, it can be a biological disease.
The issue then is now we have the concept,
it's a state of mental behavioral shutdown,
but now the issue is, well, yeah, what is led up?
What's the developmental, what are the driving features
of the shutdown?
And then we can functionally think of, well,
what's put it in its functional awareness
and response category, meaning, okay,
what is the depression in response to?
A depressive reaction might function
to diminish behavioral investment in productive avenues,
signal loss of resources, the need to reevaluate,
communicate need of assistance,
extort demands and others,
facilitate submission and problematic competition,
diminish problematic grandiosity.
You can also think about it as an inevitable state
and complete absence of productive avenues of investment
that an individual then is particularly focused
on preserving what little they have,
defending against risks and avoiding unnecessary losses.
A depression as a psychological disorder
is when the depressive reaction
then generates a maladaptive response.
So initially triggered by a dangerous loss
and effectiveness stress,
but now we get a reaction that causes more difficulties
regarding a more depressive reaction
resulting in more difficulties.
Anybody that's familiar with my formulation
of a neurotic loop, which is the intracyclic formulation
of a portion of an individual
who's very disappointed with their shutdown,
doesn't know what to do about it,
tries to control it, tries to blame themselves.
And we can also think about this in relationship
to the social environment,
where somebody who begins to get depressed is then seen
as kind of a drag, kind of a downer, not a lot of fun.
What's wrong with you?
This would then, both of these
would create maladaptive patterns.
And we see a cycle where thoughts, feelings, acting,
and relating all drive the individual into a dead end.
However, there's nothing here that we would look at
at the physiological level and say,
oh, there's a broken biological system
that's there's a chemical imbalance or any indication,
but rather the pattern simply is maladaptive.
It's an entrenched maladaptive pattern
that results in a vicious cycle of shutdown,
as opposed to anything that would require like a physical
or even the notion that there would be a biological shift.
And again, because of the current mismatch
of our current environment
relative to the environment we involved in,
there's a lot of reasons as to why strong,
depressive reactions may well be maladaptive.
And then finally, there's a biological disease
where depression reaction may be a malfunction, okay?
We can see this in a number of different things.
So if you get a lot of mini strokes,
especially in the positive affect system
of your left hemisphere,
people are much more vulnerable than to feeling depressed
with a dominant right hemisphere system
that's more activated negative.
Well, if you had a bunch of mini strokes
that knocked out your positive affect system,
thyroid fluctuations,
as well as we can start to think about people
who are chronically depressed
and engender a particular stress reaction
and they would have that orients them
or situates them in a sick role
that is really unable to be reestablished
by particular patterns of positive investment.
And so here you see a wide variety of different features
and this is a radically different
and generally reserved for significantly
more severe conditions.
Although not necessarily,
that is somebody could have in theory,
depressive disease like mild depression stemming
from a hypothyroid that then with the enhancement
of the thyroid take some synthroid medication,
all of a sudden that is alleviated.
So it's not necessarily the case
that this is severity,
but we can think certainly in terms of severity
in relationship to being relationship to broken biology.
And this gives rise to a classification that I prefer
to distinguish neurotic versus melancholic depression
and I'll share a blog with you on that.
So a neurotic depression is a low grade negative mood,
low life satisfaction, often mixed with anxiety,
tied to stressors, it may be some loss of pressure
but also can be hidden.
So this is the most common presentation
that we see in an outpatient setting.
We deal mostly we treat neurotic depression,
you might get an persistent depression with adjustment disorder
with depressed mood or a mild,
maybe moderate major depressive episode
meet criteria here.
In contrast, melancholic depression
is really a complete neurophysiological behavioral shutdown.
You see psychomotor retardation,
significant disruption in biorhythms
like much less sleeping, much less eating,
massive anhedonia, serious change in functioning in coping.
Sorry, the thing there.
So that's a way then of thinking about
the kinds of depressions that you see if you engage in,
you work in an inpatient hospital
and the level of impairment that somebody's
in a severe major depressive episode.
That a psychiatrist would identify as a severe MDD.
Note there's mild MDD, which is kind of an oxymoron
but there's severe major depressive episode
and I've certainly seen people basically
can't get out of bed.
Certainly it'd be very difficult to do any psychotherapy with.
Generally you want to do just basic behavioral activation
and support, very minimal goal setting
and anything that they can find any little pleasure
in to give immediate feedback with.
That's not the case of most individuals
in outpatient psychotherapy.
So what are the advantages and implications of this?
It provides a simple, easy functional conception
of depression, readily understandable,
integrates various theoretical on a brain behavior relation,
allows a broad clear conceptual framework
for differentiating depressive reactions
from depressive disorders and depressive diseases
and shifts the focus on what's the cause of behavioral depression.
So notice we're not now, is it a disease
or is it a reaction?
Depression is a state of mental behavioral shutdown.
Now we can see the functional relations
between what has happened, who the person is,
what the context is, what the future holds or potentially
and then that situates then the secondary classification
of the shutdown as either a reaction,
a disorder or a disease.
So the bottom line is depression describes
the state of mental behavioral shutdown.
Remember before I saw different between sort of a theory
and a metaphysical conception,
a metaphysical conception when it's done right.
Then anchors your concepts in categories with clarity.
So this then says, hey, we've been talking about this all wrong.
We need to describe the state of behavioral shutdown.
And then we can shift the focus in relationship to activity,
phenomenology, physiology could be added here
and recognize that what we see is a shift in negative valence
and withdrawal that we could think about
the functional causes of that
and the person environment developmental transaction.
And that gives us a classification
that I believe does justice to the complexity
and enables us to move much in a much clearer
and grounded way between psychology, psychiatry
and other professions as well as the population in general.
