The Little
Mermaid
by
Hans Christian Andersen

from HansAndersenForty-Two

Stories in 1930, translated by

M. R. James -Original story was

published in 1837.

Far out in the sea the water is
as blue as the petals of the loveliest
of cornflowers, and as clear as the
clearest glass; but it is very deep,
deeper than any anchor-cable can reach,
and many church towers would have to
be put one on the top of another to
reach from the bottom out of the water.
Down there live the sea people.

Now you must not think for a
moment that there is only a bare white
sandy bottom there; no, no: there the
most extraordinary trees and plants
grow, which have stems and leaves so
supple that they stir at the slightest
movement of the water, as if they were
alive. All the fish, big and little, flit
among the branches, like the birds in
the air up here. In the deepest place of
all lies the sea king's palace. The walls
are of coral, and the tall pointed
windows of the clearest possible amber,
but the roof is of mussel-shells that

open and shut themselves as the water
moves. It all looks beautiful, for in
everyone of them lie shining pearls, a
single one of which would be the
principal ornament in a Queen's crown.

The sea King down there had been

a widower for many years, but his old
mother kept house for him. She was a
clever woman, but proud of her rank,
for which reason she went about with
twelve oysters on her tail, while the
rest of the nobility might only carry six.
For the rest she deserved high praise,
especially because she was so fond of
the little sea Princesses, her
grandchildren. There were six of them,
beautiful children, but the youngest
was the prettiest of them all. Her skin
was as bright and pure as a rose-leaf,
her eyes were as blue as the deepest
lake; but like all the rest, she had no
feet—her body ended in a fish's tail.
All the love-long day they might play
down in the palace in the great halls
where live flowers grew out of the
walls. The big windows of amber stood

open, and the fishes swam in through
them, just as with us swallows fly in
when we open the windows; but the
fishes used to swim right up to the
little Princesses and feed out of their
hands and allow themselves to be
stroked.

Outside the palace there was a
large garden with fiery red and dark
blue trees, whose fruit shone like gold,
and their flowers were like a flaming
fire, because they were always moving
their stems and leaves. The ground was
of the finest sand, but blue like the
flame of sulphur. Over the whole
expanse down there lay a wonderful
blue sheen. You could more easily
imagine that you were far up in the air
and could see the sky above you and
below you, than that you were at the
bottom of the sea. In a dead calm you
could see the sun: it looked like a
purple flower out of whose cup all the
light was streaming.

Each of the young Princesses had

her little plot in the garden, where

she could dig and plant as she liked. One
would make her flower-bed in the
shape of a whale, another preferred to
have hers like a little mermaid, but the
youngest made hers quite round, like
the sun, and would only have flowers
that shone red like it. She was an odd
child, quiet and thoughtful, and
whereas the other sisters would deck
out their gardens with the quaintest
things, that they had got from sunken
ships, she would only have—besides
the rose-red flowers that were like
the sun far up in the sky—a pretty
statue of marble. It was of a handsome
boy, carved out of bright white stone,
which had come down to the sea bottom
from a wreck. Beside the statue she
planted a rose-red weeping willow,
which grew splendidly and hung its
fresh branches over it, right down to
the blue sand bottom, on which the
shadows showed violet, and moved with
the branches; it looked as if the top and
the roots of the tree were playing at
kissing each other.

She had no greater delight than in

dreaming about the world of men up
above. The old grandmother had to tell
her all she knew about ships and horses
and men and animals. It seemed to her
particularly delightful that up there
on earth the flowers smelt sweet
(which they did not at the sea bottom),
and that the woods were green and the
fish which one saw among the branches
could sing so loud and prettily that it
was a joy to hear them. It was the little
birds that the grandmother called fish,
otherwise they could not have
understood, for they had never seen a
bird.

"When you're full fifteen years
old," said the grandmother, "you shall
have leave to come up out of the sea
and sit on the rocks in the moonlight,
and see the big ships that come sailing by;
and forests and houses you shall see."
During the year that was passing
one of the sisters was fifteen years
old; but the rest—why, each was a year
younger than the next, and so the

youngest had a clear five years to wait
before she could come up from the sea
bottom and see how things go with us.
But the first promised the next one to
tell her what she had seen and had
thought beautiful on the first day, for
their grandmother didn't tell them
enough: there were very many things
they wanted to know about.

None of them was so full of
longing as the youngest, the very one
who had the longest time to wait, and
was so quiet and thoughtful. Many a
night she stood at the open window and
gazed up through the dark blue waters
where the fish went waving their fins
and tails. She could see the moon and
the stars; of course they were very
pale, but, seen through the water,
they looked much larger than they do
to our eyes. If something like a black
cloud passed along beneath them, she
knew that it was either a whale swimming
above her, or even a ship with a number
of people in it. Certainly they never
thought that beneath them there was a

lovely little mermaid stretching her
hands up towards the keel.

And now the eldest Princess was

fifteen years old and could rise up
above the surface of the sea.

When she came back she had a

hundred things to tell; but the most
beautiful thing, she said, was to lie on a
sandbank in the moonlight in the calm
sea, and to see close by the shore the
big town where the lights twinkled like
hundreds of stars, and to hear the
sound of music and the noise and stir of
carts and people, and see all the church
towers and steeples and hear the bells
ringing; and just because she couldn't go
up there, she longed after all that,
most of all.

Oh, how the youngest sister did

listen! And when, later on in the
evening, she stood at the open window
and gazed up through the dark blue
water, she thought about the big town
and all the noise and stir, and then she

fancied she could hear the church bells
ringing down to her.

The year after, the second sister
had leave to rise up through the water
and swim where she liked; she ducked up
just as the sun was going down, and the
sight of that she thought the most
beautiful of all. The whole heaven,
she said, had looked like gold, and the
clouds—oh! the beauty of them she
could not describe: red and violet, they
sailed past above her, but far swifter
than they there flew, like a large
white ribbon, a skein of wild swans away
over the water, to where the sun was.
She swam towards it, but it sank, and the
rosy glow died from the clouds and the
face of the sea.

Next year the third sister went
up; she was the boldest of them all;
and so she swam up a broad river that
ran into the sea. Beautiful green hills
she saw, with rows of vines upon them.
Palaces and mansions peeped out from
among stately woods. She heard all the
birds singing, and the sun shone so hot

that she had to dive beneath the water
to cool her burning face. In a little
inlet she came upon a whole crowd of
young human children; they were quite
naked, and ran about and splashed in
the water. She wanted to play with
them, but they ran away in a fright, and
then came a little black creature (it
was a dog, but she had never seen a dog
before) and it barked at her so
dreadfully that she was terrified and
took refuge in the open sea; but never
could she forget the splendid woods and
the green hills and the pretty children
who could swim in the water, though
they had no fish-tails.

The fourth sister was not so
daring. She stayed out in the lonely sea,
and told them that that was the most
beautiful of all. You could see many
many miles all round, and the sky
arched over you like a great bell of
glass. Ships she had seen, but far away
they looked like gulls. The merry
dolphins had turned somersaults, and
the big whales had squirted up water

out of their nostrils, so that it looked
like hundreds of fountains all around
her.

Now came the turn of the fifth
sister. Her birthday, it happened, was in
winter, and so she saw what the others
had not seen on their first visit. The
sea was all green to look at, and round
about there floated large icebergs,
everyone looking like a pearl, she said,
and yet they were far bigger than the
church towers that men built. They
showed themselves in the strangest
shapes and were like diamonds. She had
seated herself on one of the largest,
and all the ships made a wide circle in
fear, away from the place where she
was sitting and letting the wind set her
long hair flying; but on towards evening
the sky was covered with clouds, it
lightened and thundered, while the
black sea lifted the masses of ice high
up, and made them glitter in the fierce
lightning. Aboard of all the ships they
took in sail, and there was anxiety and
fear, but she sat calmly on her floating

iceberg and watched the blue flashes
strike zig-zagging into the shining sea.

The first time any of the sisters
came to the top of the water, each one
of them was always entranced by all the
new pretty sights she saw, but now that,
as grown girls, they had leave to go up
whenever they liked, it became quite
ordinary to them, and they longed to be
at home again; and after a month had
passed they said that after all it was
far prettier down at the bottom, and
there one was so comfortable at home.
On many an evening the five
sisters would link arms together and
rise in a row above the water. They had
lovely voices, more beautiful than any
human being's, and when a storm was
coming on, and they thought some ships
might be lost, they would swim before
the ships and sing most beautifully of
how pretty it was at the bottom of the
sea, and bade the seafarers not to be
afraid of coming down there.

But they could not understand
their words; they thought it was the
storm. Nor did they see any beautiful
things down there either, for when the
ship sank they were drowned, and only
as dead corpses did they ever reach the
sea King's palace.

When of an evening the sisters
rose like this, arm in arm, up through
the sea, their little sister was left
behind quite alone, looking after them,
and it seemed as if she must have wept,
but a mermaid has no tears, and that
makes her suffer all the more.

"Oh! if only I was fifteen," she

said, "I know I shall become really fond
of that world up there and of the
people who have their homes there!"

At last she was fifteen years old.
"There now! We've got you off our

hands," said the grandmother, the old
widow Queen. "Come here, and let me
dress you out like your other sisters";
and she put a wreath of white lilies on
her hair, only every petal in the

flower was a half-pearl, and the old
lady made eight large oysters take tight
hold of the Princess's tail, to indicate
her high rank.

"But it hurts so," said the little

mermaid.

"Yes, one must suffer a little for

smartness' sake," said the old lady.
Oh dear! She would gladly have
shaken off all this finery and put away
the heavy wreath. The red flowers in
her garden became her much better; but
she dare not change it. "Good-bye," she
said, and rose bright and light as a
bubble, up through the water. The sun
had just gone down when she lifted her
head above the sea, but all the clouds
were still glowing like gold and roses,
and in the midst of the pale red heaven
the evening star shone clear and
beautiful. The air was soft and cool,
and the sea dead calm. There lay a
great ship with three masts; only a
single sail was set, for no wind was
stirring, and round about on the rigging

and on the yard, sailors were sitting.
There was music and singing, and as
evening grew darker hundreds of
variegated lamps were lit. They looked
as if the flags of all nations were
waving in the air. The little mermaid
swam straight up to the cabin window,
and every time a wave lifted her, she
could see through at the windows, clear
as mirrors, numbers of gaily dressed
people; but the handsomest of them all
was the young Prince with the big black
eyes: he was certainly not much over
sixteen, and this was his birthday, and
that was why there were all these fine
doings. The sailors danced on the deck,
and when the young Prince came out
there, more than a hundred rockets
shot up into the sky. They shone as
bright as day, and the little mermaid
was quite frightened and dived down
beneath the water, but soon she put up
her head again, and then it seemed as if
all the stars in the sky were falling
down on her. She had never seen
fireworks like that. Great suns whizzed
round, splendid fire-fish darted into

the blue heaven, and everything was
reflected back from the bright calm sea.
On the ship itself there was so much
light that you could see every least
rope, let alone the people. Oh! how
handsome the young Prince was; he shook
hands with the crew and smiled and
laughed, while the music rang out into
the beautiful night. It grew late, but
the little mermaid could not take her
eyes off the ship and the beautiful
Prince. The coloured lamps were put out,
no more rockets flew up into the sky, no
more guns were let off, but deep down
in the sea there was a murmur and a
rumbling. Meanwhile she sat on the
water and swung up and down, so that
she could see into the cabin; but the
ship now took a swifter pace, one sail
after another was spread, the waves
rose higher, great clouds came up in the
distance, there was lightning. Oh, there
would be a terrible storm; and the
seamen took in sail. The great ship
ploughed with the speed of a bird over
the wild sea, the water piled itself into
huge black mountains, as if to top the

masts, but the ship dived down like a
swan between the tall billows, and rose
again over the heaving waters. To the
little mermaid it seemed just a pleasant
jaunt, but not so to the sailors. The
ship creaked and cracked, the stout
planks bent with the mighty blows that
the sea dealt. The mast snapped in the
midst as if it had been a reed, and the
ship heeled over on her side, while the
water rushed into her hull. Now the
little mermaid saw they were in peril;
she herself had to beware of the beams
and broken pieces of the ship that were
driven about in the sea. At one instant
it was so pitch-dark that she could see
nothing whatever; then, when it
lightened, it was so bright that she
could see everyone on board. Everyone
was leaping off as best he could. The
young Prince above all she looked for,
and she saw him, when the ship parted,
sink down into the deep. For a moment
she was full of joy that now he was
coming down to her; but then she
remembered that men could not live in
the water, and that he could never

come alive to her father's palace. No,
die he must not! So she swam in among
the beams and planks that drove about
in the water, quite forgetting that
they might have crushed her—dived
deep beneath the water, and rose high
among the billows, and so came at last to
the young Prince, who could hardly keep
himself afloat any longer in the stormy
sea. His arms and legs were beginning to
tire, his beautiful eyes were closing;
but he would perforce have died had
not the little mermaid come to him. She
held his head above the water, and let
the waves drive her with him whither
they would.

*

*

*

*

*

At dawn the tempest was over; of
the ship there was not a bit to be seen.
The sun rose red and bright out of the
water, and it seemed as if thereat life
came into the Prince's cheeks; but his
eyes were still closed. The mermaid

kissed his fair high forehead and
stroked back his wet hair. She thought
he resembled the marble statue down in
her little garden. She kissed him again
and wished that he might live after all.

And now she saw in front of her
the dry land, high blue hills on whose
top the white snow shone as if swans
were lying there. Down by the shore
were lovely green woods, and in front
of them lay a church or an abbey (she
knew not what), but at least a building.
Lemon and apple trees grew in the
garden, and before the gate were tall
palms. At this spot the sea made a little
bay; it was dead calm, but very deep
right up to the rocks where the fine
white sand was washed up. Hither she
swam with the fair Prince and laid him on
the sand, but took care that his head
should rest uppermost in the warm
sunshine.

Now the bells rang out from the
great white building, and a number of
young maidens came out through the
gardens. The little mermaid swam

further out, behind some high boulders
which stuck up out of the water, laid
some sea-foam over her hair and her
bosom, so that no one could see her
little face, and there she watched to
see who would come to the poor Prince.
It was not long before a young girl came
that way, and seemed to be quite
terrified, but only for a moment. Then
she fetched more people, and the
mermaid saw the Prince revive, and smile
on all those about him. But on her, out
there, he did not smile; he had, of
course, no notion that she had rescued
him. She felt very sad, and when he was
carried into the great building, she
dived sorrowfully down into the water,
and betook herself home to her
father's palace.

She had always been quiet and

thoughtful, but now she became much
more so. The sisters asked her what she
had seen the first time she went up,
but she did not tell them anything
about it.

Every evening and morning did she

go up to the place where she had left
the Prince. She saw how the fruits in
the garden grew ripe and were picked;
she saw how the snow melted on the
high mountains; but the Prince she
never saw, so she always turned
homeward sadder than before. It was
her one comfort to sit in her little
garden and throw her arms about the
fair marble statue which was like the
Prince; but she took no care of her
flowers, and they spread as in a wild
wood over all the paths, and wove their
long stems and leaves in among the
branches of the trees, so that it was
quite dark there.

At last she could contain herself
no longer, but told one of her sisters,
and at once all the others got to know it,
but nobody else except them and just
one or two other mermaids, who didn't
tell anyone but their dearest friends.
One of these could tell who the Prince
was: she too had seen the fete on the

ship, and knew where he came from and
where his kingdom lay.

"Come, little sister," said the

other Princesses, and with their arms
about each other's shoulders they rose
in a long line out of the sea in front of
the spot where they knew the Prince's
palace was.

It was built of a kind of pale
yellow shining stone, with great marble
steps that you could go down straight
into the sea. Stately gilded domes rose
above the roof, and between the pillars
that surrounded the whole building
stood statues of marble which seemed
alive. Through the clear glass of the
tall windows you could see into the
noble halls, where costly silk curtains
and tapestries were hung, and all the
walls were decked with great paintings
that it was delightful to gaze at. In the
middle of the largest hall a great
fountain splashed; its jet soared high up
towards the glass dome in the roof,
through which the sun shone on the

water and on the beautiful plants that
grew in the wide basin.

Now she knew where he lived, and
thither she came on many an evening and
night upon the water. She swam much
closer to the land than any of the
others had dared to do; she even went
right up the narrow canal beneath the
stately balcony of marble, which cast a
shadow far over the water. Here she
would sit and gaze at the young Prince,
who believed himself to be quite alone
in the bright moonlight.

Many an evening she saw him sail,
to the sound of music, in his splendid
boat, where the flags waved; she
peeped out from among the green weed,
and if the breeze caught her long
silver white veil, and anyone saw it,
they thought it was a swan flapping its
wings.

Many a night when the fishermen
lay out at sea with torches, she heard
them telling all manner of good about
the young Prince, and it made her glad

that she had saved his life when he was
being tossed half dead upon the waves,
and she thought of how close his head
had lain on her bosom, and how lovingly
she had kissed him then; he knew
nothing whatever about it, and could not
so much as dream about her.

She became fonder and fonder of

human people, and more and more did
she long to be able to go up amongst
them. Their world, she thought, was
far larger than hers: for they could
fly far over the sea in ships, climb high
up above the clouds on the lofty
mountains; and the lands they owned
stretched over forests and fields
farther than she could see. There was
a great deal she wanted to know, but
her sisters could not answer all her
questions, so she asked the old
grandmother: she knew well the upper
world, as she very properly called the
countries above the sea.

"If the human people aren't
drowned," the little mermaid inquired,

"can they go on living always? Don't they
die as we do down here in the sea?"
"Yes," said the old lady, "they

have to die, too, and besides, their
lifetime is shorter than ours. We can
live for three hundred years, but
when we cease to be here, we only turn
to foam on the water, and have not
even a grave down here among our dear
ones. We have no immortal souls, we
never live again; we are like the green
weed: once it is cut down it never grows
green again. Human kind, on the other
hand, have a soul that lives always
after the body has turned into earth.
It rises up through the clear air, up to
all the shining stars; just as we rise out
of the sea and look at the human
people's country, so do they rise up to
unknown beautiful places, which we
never attain."

"Why did we have no immortal souls
given us?" said the little mermaid, very
sadly. "I would give all my hundreds of
years that I have to live to be a human

being for only one day, and then get a
share in the heavenly world."

"You mustn't go thinking about
that," said the old lady, "we have a
much happier and better lot than the
people up there."

"So then I've got to die and float
like foam on the sea, and not hear the
noise of the waves and see the lovely
flowers and the red sun! Can't I do
anything at all to gain an everlasting
soul?"

"No," said the old lady, "only if a
human being held you so dear that you
were to him more than father or
mother, and if with all his thoughts and
affections he clung to you and made the
priest lay his right hand in yours with
the promise to be faithful to you here
and for ever, then his soul would flow
over into your body, and you too would
have a share in the destiny of men. He
would give you a soul and still keep his
own. But that can never happen. The
very thing that is counted beautiful

here in the sea, I mean your fish's tail,
they think horrid up there on the
earth; they have no notion of what's
proper: up there people must needs
have two clumsy props which they call
legs, if they're to look nice."

The little mermaid sighed and
looked sadly at her fish's tail. "Let's be
cheerful," said the old lady. "We'll
jump and dance about for the three
hundred years we have to live. It's long
enough in all conscience; after that one
can sleep it out all the pleasanter in
one's grave. To-night we're to have a
court ball."

*

*

*

*

*

Truly, it was a magnificent affair,

such as you never see on earth. The
walls and ceilings of the great ballroom
were of glass, thick but clear. Many
hundreds of large mussel-shells, rose-
red and grass-green, were set in rows
on either side, with a blue flame

burning in them that lighted up the
whole hall and shone out through the
walls, so that the sea outside was all
lit up. You could see all the
innumerable fish, big and little,
swimming round the glass walls. The
scales of some of them shone purple-
red, on others they shone like silver
and gold. In the middle of the hall
there flowed a broad rapid stream, and
on it mermen and mermaids danced to
their own beautiful singing. Such
charming voices no one on earth
possesses. The little mermaid sang the
most beautifully of them all, and they
clapped their hands at her, and for a
moment she felt joy at her heart, for
she knew that she had the loveliest
voice of anyone on earth or sea. But
soon she began to think again about the
world above her. She could not forget
the handsome Prince, and her own
sorrow that she did not, like him,
possess an immortal soul. So she stole
out of her father's palace, and while
everything there was song and
merriment she sat sadly in her little

garden. There she heard the beating
waves sounding down through the water,
and she thought, sure, he is sailing up
there, he whom I love more than father
or mother, he to whom my thoughts cling
and in whose hand I would lay the
destiny of my life. I would risk
everything to win him and an immortal
soul. While my sisters are dancing in my
father's palace, I will go to the old Sea
Witch. I've always been dreadfully
afraid of her, but it may be she can
advise me and help me.

So the little mermaid went off out

of her garden, towards the roaring
maelstrom behind which the witch lived.
She had never been that way before. No
flowers grew there, and no sea grass:
only the bare grey sandy bottom
stretched out round the maelstrom,
where the water whirled round like a
roaring millwheel and swept everything
it caught hold of down with it into the
deep. Right through those tearing
whirls she must go to enter the Sea
Witch's domain, and here for a long way

the only path ran over hot bubbling
mire which the Witch called her peat
moss. Behind it lay her house, in the
middle of a hideous wood. All the trees
and bushes of it were polypi, half
animal and half plant, which looked like
hundred-headed snakes growing out of
the ground. All their branches were
long slimy arms with fingers like pliant
worms, and joint after joint they kept in
motion from the root till the outermost
tip. Everything in the sea that they
could grasp they twined themselves
about, and never let it go again. The
little mermaid was in terrible fear as
she stopped outside the wood. Her
heart beat with terror, and she almost
turned back, but then she thought of
the Prince and of the human soul, and
so she took courage. She bound her long
flowing hair close about her head, so
that the polypi should not catch her by
it; she joined her two hands together on
her breast, and darted along as a fish
darts through the water, in among the
terrible polypi, which stretched out
their pliant arms and fingers after her.

She saw that everyone of these held
something it had caught, and hundreds
of little arms held it like strong bands
of iron. Men who had been lost at sea
and had sunk deep down there, looked
out, white skeletons, from among the
arms of the polypi. Rudders of ships and
chests they held fast; skeletons of
land beasts, and even a little mermaid,
which they had caught and killed. That,
to her, was almost the most frightful
thing of all.

Now she came to a great slimy
clearing in the wood, where large fat
water-snakes wallowed, showing their
ugly whitey-yellow coils. In the centre
of the clearing was a house built of the
white bones of men: there the Sea Witch
sat, making a toad feed out of her
mouth, as we make a little canary bird
eat sugar.

The hideous fat water-snakes she

called her little chicks, and let them
coil about over her great spongy bosom.

"I know well enough what you

want," said the Sea Witch, "and a silly
thing, too; all the same, you shall have
your way, for it'll bring you to a bad
end, my pretty Princess. You want to be
rid of your fish tail and have two props
to walk on instead, like humans, so that
the young Prince may fall in love with
you, and you may get him and an immortal
soul." With that the Witch laughed so
loud and so hideously that the toad and
the snakes tumbled down on to the
ground and wallowed about there.
"You've come just in the nick of time,"
said the Witch; "to-morrow after
sunrise I couldn't help you till another
year came round. I shall make a drink
for you, and with it you must swim to
the land before the sun rises, put
yourself on the beach there, and drink
it up; then your tail will part and open
into what men call pretty legs. But it'll
hurt, it'll be like a sharp sword going
through you. Everybody that sees you
will say you are the prettiest human
child they ever saw. You'll keep your
swimming gait, and no dancer will be able

to float along like you. But every step
you take will be as if you were treading
on a sharp knife, so that you would
think your blood must gush out. If you
can bear all that, I will do what you
wish."

"Yes," said the little mermaid,
with a faltering voice; and she thought
of the Prince and of winning an immortal
soul. "But remember," said the Witch,
"when you've once taken a human shape,
you can never become a mermaid again,
you can never go down through the
water to your sisters or to your
father's palace; and if you don't win
the love of the Prince, so that for you
he forgets father and mother, and
clings to you with all his thoughts, and
makes the priest lay your hands in one
another's, so that you become man and
wife, then you won't get your immortal
soul. On the first morning after he is
married to anyone else, your heart will
break and you will become foam on the
water."

"It is my wish," said the little

mermaid, pale as a corpse.

"But I must be paid, too," said the
witch, "and it's not a small matter that I
require. You have the loveliest voice of
anyone down here at the bottom of the
sea, and with it no doubt you think
you'll be able to charm him; but that
voice you must give me. I must have the
best thing you possess as the price of my
precious drink. I shall have to give you
my own blood in it, that the drink may be
as sharp as a two-edged sword.

"But if you take away my voice,"
said the little mermaid, "what have I
left?"

"Your beautiful form," said the

witch, "and your floating gait, and your
speaking eyes: with them you can easily
delude a human heart. What, have you
lost courage? Put out your little tongue,
and I'll cut it off for the price, and
you shall have the potent drink."

"So be it," said the little mermaid,
and the witch put her cauldron on the

fire to boil the magic drink. "Cleanliness
is a good thing," said she, and scoured
out the cauldron with some snakes which
she tied in a knot. Then she scratched
herself in the breast and let the black
blood drip into the pot. The steam took
the most dreadful shapes, enough to
fill one with fear and horror. Every
moment the witch cast something afresh
into the cauldron, and when it was
really boiling, the sound was like that
of a crocodile weeping. At last the drink
was ready, and it looked like the
clearest of water.

"There you are," said the witch,
and cut off the tongue of the little
mermaid. Now she was dumb, she could
neither sing nor speak.

"If the polypi should catch you

when you are going back through my
wood," said the Witch, "just throw one
drop of that drink on them, and their
arms and fingers will break into a
thousand bits." But there was no need
for the little mermaid to do that; the
polypi shrank back in fear before her

when they saw the shining drink which
glittered in her hand as if it had been a
twinkling star. So she passed quickly
through the wood, and the marsh, and
the roaring maelstrom.

She could see her father's palace.
The torches were quenched in the great
ballroom. No doubt everyone in there
was asleep, but she dared not go to
them now that she was dumb and was
going to leave them for ever. It seemed
as if her heart must burst asunder with
sorrow. She stole into the garden and
took one flower from each of her
sister's flower-beds, and blew on her
fingers a thousand kisses towards the
palace, and rose up through the dark
blue sea.

The sun was not yet up when she
saw the Prince's palace, and clambered
up the stately marble steps. The moon
was shining beautifully bright. The
little mermaid swallowed the sharp
burning drink, and it was as though a
two-edged sword was piercing her
delicate body: she swooned with the pain,

and lay as one dead. When the sun shone
out over the sea, she awoke and felt a
torturing pang, but right in front of
her stood the beautiful young Prince.
He fixed his coal-black eyes on her, so
that she cast her own eyes down, and
saw that her fish's tail was gone and
that she now had the prettiest small
white legs that any young girl could
have. But she was quite naked, so she
wrapped herself in her masses of long
hair. The Prince asked who she was and
how she had come there, and she gazed
at him sweetly and yet sadly with her
dark blue eyes, for she could not speak.
Then he took her by the hand and led
her into the palace. Every step she
took was, as the witch had warned her,
as if she was treading on pointed swords
and sharp knives, yet she bore it gladly.
Led by the Prince's hand, she walked
light as a bubble, and he and everyone
else marvelled at her graceful floating
gait.

Costly robes of silk and muslin
were put upon her, and she was the

fairest of all in the palace; but she was
dumb and could neither speak nor sing.
Beautiful slave girls clad in silks and
gold came forward and sang to the Prince
and his royal parents. One sang more
sweetly than all the rest, and the
Prince applauded her and smiled on her.
Then the little mermaid was sad, for
she knew that she herself had sung
far more sweetly; and she thought: Oh!
if he could but know that to be near him
I have given my voice away for ever!

Then the slave girls danced
graceful floating dances to the noblest
of music, and now the little mermaid
raised her pretty white arms and rose
on tip-toe and floated over the floor,
and danced as none had ever yet danced.
At every movement her beauty grew yet
more on the sight, and her eyes spoke
more deeply to the heart than the song
of the slave girls.

Everyone was enraptured by it,

and more than all, the Prince, who
called her his little foundling; and she
danced again and again, though every

time her foot touched the ground it was
as though she was treading on sharp
knives. The Prince said that now she
should always be near him, and she was
allowed to sleep outside his door on a
cushion of silk.

He had a boy's dress made for her,

so that she might ride with him on
horseback. They rode through the
sweet-smelling woods, where the green
boughs brushed her shoulders, and the
little birds sang in the cover of the
young leaves. With the Prince she
clambered up the high mountains, and
though her delicate feet were cut so
that everyone could see, she only
laughed, and followed him till they
could see the clouds beneath them like
a flock of birds flying towards the
distant lands.

At home at the Prince's palace,

when at night all the others were
asleep, she would go out to the broad
marble stairs, and it cooled her burning
feet to stand in the cold sea water, and

then she thought about those who were
down in the deeps below.

One night her sisters came up arm
in arm, singing mournfully as they swam
on the water, and she beckoned to them,
and they recognized her, and told her
how sad she had made them all. After
that they visited her every night; and
one night she saw far out in the sea,
the old grandmother, who had not been
to the top of the water for many a year;
and the Sea King, with his crown on his
head. They stretched their arms
towards her, but they dared not trust
themselves so near the land as the
sisters.

Day by day she grew dearer to the
Prince: he loved her as one might love a
dear good child, but he never had a
thought of making her his Queen: and
his wife she must be, or else she could
never win an immortal soul, but on his
wedding morning she would turn into
foam on the sea.

"Are not you fonder of me than
of all the rest?" the little mermaid's
eyes seemed to say when he took her in
his arms and kissed her fair brow. "Yes,
you are dearest of all to me," said the
Prince, "for you have the best heart of
them all. You are dearest to me, and
you are like a young maiden whom I saw
once and certainly shall never meet
again. I was on a ship that was wrecked,
and the waves drove me to land near a
holy temple where a number of young
maidens ministered. The youngest of
them found me on the bank and saved my
life. I saw her only twice. She was the
only one I could love in all the world,
but you are like her, you almost stamp
her likeness on my soul. She belongs to
that holy temple, and therefore my
good fortune has sent you to me, and we
never will part." "Ah, he doesn't know
that I saved his life," thought the
little mermaid. "I bore him over the sea,
away to the grove where the temple
stands; I sat behind him in the foam and
watched to see if anyone would come,
and saw the pretty maiden whom he

loves more than me"; and the mermaid
heaved a deep sigh. Weep she could not:
"'The maiden belongs to the holy
temple,' he said; she will never come
out into the world: they will never
meet again. I am with him, I see him every
day. I will tend him and love him and
give up my life to him."

But now the Prince was to be

married, people said, and to take the
beautiful daughter of the neighbouring
king; and it was for that that he was
fitting out such a splendid ship. "They
say, of course, that the Prince is going
to travel to see the country of the
king next door, but it really is to see
his daughter. He's to have a great suite
with him." But the little mermaid shook
her head and laughed: she knew the
Prince's mind better than anyone else.
"I must travel," he had said to her, "I
must see the pretty Princess; my
father and mother require that, but
they will not force me to bring her
home as my bride. I cannot love her. She
is not like the fair maiden of the

temple, as you are. If ever I chose a
bride it would be you first, my dumb
foundling with the speaking eyes." And
he kissed her red lips and played with
her long hair and laid his head on her
heart, so that it dreamed of man's
destiny and an undying soul.

"You're not afraid of the sea, are

you, my dumb child?" said he as they
stood on the splendid ship that was to
bear them to the country of the
neighbouring King. And he told her of
storms and calm, of strange fishes in
the deep, and of what divers had seen
down there, and she smiled at his
description, for, of course, she knew
more than anybody else about the
bottom of the sea. In the moonlit night,
when all but the steersman were asleep,
she sat on the gunwale of the ship and
gazed down through the clear water and
fancied she saw her father's palace. On
the summit of it stood the old
grandmother, with a crown of silver on
her head, gazing up through the swift
current at the ship's keel. Then her

sisters came up upon the water, and
looked mournfully at her and wrung
their white hands. She beckoned to them
and smiled, and wanted to tell them
that all was going well and happily with
her; but then the ship's boy came
towards her, and the sisters dived down:
so he thought the white arms he had
seen were foam on the sea.

Next morning the ship sailed into
the harbour of the neighbouring King's
fine city. All the church bells rang out,
and from the tall towers there came
blaring of trumpets, while the soldiers
paraded with waving flags and glittering
bayonets. Every day there was a fete,
balls and parties followed on one
another; but as yet the Princess was not
there. She was being brought up far
away in a sacred temple, they said, and
there was learning all royal
accomplishments. At last she arrived.
The little mermaid waited, eager

to see her beauty, and she had to
confess that a more graceful form she
had never seen. The skin was so

delicate and pure, and behind the long
dark eyelashes a pair of dark-blue
beautiful eyes smiled out.

"It is you!" said the Prince, "you,

who saved me when I lay like a corpse on
the shore!" and he clasped his blushing
bride in his arms. "Oh, I am more than
happy!" he said to the little mermaid;
"my dearest wish, the thing I never
dared hope for, has been granted me.
You will rejoice in my happiness, for you
are fonder of me than all the rest";
and the little mermaid kissed his hand,
and thought she felt her heart
breaking. His wedding morning would
bring death to her, and would change
her into foam upon the sea.

All the church bells were ringing;

the heralds rode about and proclaimed
the betrothal. On every altar fragrant
oil was burning in precious silver lamps;
the priests swung their censers, and
the bride and bridegroom joined hands
and received the blessing of the Bishop.
The little mermaid, clad in silk and gold,
stood holding the bride's train; but her

ears heard not the festal music, her
eyes saw not the holy rite; she thought,
on the eve of her death, of all that
she had lost in the world.

That very evening the bride and
the bridegroom embarked on the ship,
and the cannons were fired and the
flags waved, and amid-ship was raised a
royal tent of gold and purple with the
loveliest of curtains, and there the
married pair were to sleep in that calm
cool night.

The sails bellied in the wind, and

the ship glided easily and with little
motion, away over the bright sea.

When it grew dark, variegated
lamps were lit and the crew danced
merry dances on the deck. The little
mermaid could not but think of the
first time she rose up out of the sea
and saw that same splendour and
merriment; and she too whirled about in
the dance, swerving as the swallow
swerves when it is chased; and everyone
was in ecstasies of wonder at her: never

before had she danced so wonderfully.
Sharp knives seemed to be cutting her
delicate feet, but she hardly felt it:
the wounds in her heart were sharper.
She knew that was the last night she
would see him for whom she had
forsaken her race and her home, and
given up her lovely voice, and daily had
suffered unending pain unknown to him.
This was the last night that she would
breathe the same air as he, or see the
deep ocean and the starlit heavens. An
eternal night without thought, without
dream, awaited her who neither had a
soul nor could win one.

But all was joy and merriment
aboard the ship till long past midnight.
She laughed and danced with the
thought of death in her heart. The
Prince kissed his beautiful bride, and
she played with his black hair, and arm
in arm they went to rest in the splendid
tent.

It was still and quiet now on the
ship: only the helmsman stood at the
tiller. The little mermaid laid her

white arms on the bulwark and gazed
eastward for the red of dawn: the
first ray of the sun, she knew, would
kill her. Then she saw her sisters rise
out of the sea; they were pale as she,
their beautiful long hair no longer
fluttered in the breeze: it had been
cut off.

"We have given it to the witch to
make her help us, that you may not die
to-night. She has given us a knife. Here
it is! Do you see how sharp it is? Before
the sun rises you must plunge it into
the Prince's heart, and when his warm
blood gushes out upon your feet, they
will grow together into a fish tail and
you will become a mermaid again, and will
be able to come down to us in the water
and live out your three hundred years
before you turn into the dead salt sea
foam. Make haste! He or you must die
before the sun rises. Our old
grandmother has been mourning till her
white hair has fallen off as ours fell
before the witch's shears. Kill the
Prince and come back! Make haste: do you

not see the red band in the heavens? In
a few minutes the sun will climb into
the sky, and then you must die'; and
with a strange heavy sigh they sank
beneath the waves.

The little mermaid drew aside the
purple curtain of the tent and saw the
beautiful bride sleeping with her head
on the Prince's breast, and she stopped
and kissed him on his fair brow, and
looked at the sky where the red of the
dawn was shining brighter and brighter,
looked at the sharp knife, and fixed
her eyes again on the Prince, who in his
sleep was murmuring the name of his
bride. She alone was in his thoughts, and
the knife quivered in the mermaid's
hand—but then—she cast it far out
into the waves, and where it fell they
shone red, and it seemed as if drops of
blood spurted up out of the water. Once
more she gazed with a half-dying glance
on the Prince, and then threw herself
from the ship into the sea, and felt
that her body was dissolving into foam.

Now the sun ascended out of the

sea, and his rays fell mild and warm
upon the death-cold foam, and the
little mermaid felt no touch of death.
She saw the bright sun, and above her
floated hundreds of lovely
transparent forms. Through them she
could see the white sails of the ship
and the rosy clouds in the sky. Their
voices were as music, but so ethereal
that no human ear could hear it, just as
no earthly eye could see them: wingless,
they floated by their own lightness
through the air. The little mermaid saw
that she too had a body like theirs,
which was rising further and further
up out of the foam.

"To whom am I coming?" said she,

and her voice rang like that of the
other beings, so ethereally that no
earthly music can re-echo its sound.
"To the daughters of the air,"
the others answered; "the mermaid has
no immortal soul, and can never gain one
unless she wins the love of a mortal; it
is on a power outside her that her

eternal being depends. The daughters
of the air have no everlasting soul
either, but they can by good deeds
shape one for themselves. We are
flying to the hot countries, where the
stagnant air of pestilence kills men:
there we waft coolness, we spread the
perfume of the flowers through the
air and send men new life and healing.
When for three hundred years we have
striven to do the good we can, we
receive an immortal soul and have a
share in the everlasting happiness of
mankind. You, poor little mermaid, have
striven for that too with all your
heart; you have suffered and endured
and raised yourself into the world of
the spirits of the air, and you also, by
good deeds, can shape for yourself an
immortal soul in the space of three
hundred years."

And the little mermaid raised her

bright arms towards God's sun, and for
the first time she felt the gift of
tears.

On the ship there was stir and

life again. She saw the Prince with his
fair bride seeking for her: in deep
sorrow they gazed down into the
bubbling foam as if they knew she had
cast herself into the waves. Unseen,
she kissed the bride's forehead, and on
him she smiled and then soared upward
with the other children of the air to a
rose-red cloud sailing in the heavens.
"So, when three hundred years are
over, we shall float into the heavenly
kingdom, and we may reach it yet
sooner," whispered one of them.
"Unseen we float into the homes of men,
where children are, and for every day
on which we find a good child that makes
its parents happy and earns their love,
God shortens our time of trial. The
child does not know it when we are
flying through the room; and when we
smile on it in happiness, a year is taken
from the three hundred. But if we see
a perverse and evil child, we have to
weep in sorrow, and every tear we shed
adds a day to our time of trial."

