The way when I was reading your book, the idea that seemed self-evident to me is that
you can't opt out of playing the game.
So life, the human experience, and I suppose the only way to truly opt out would be suicide.
So let's set that aside.
You can't opt out of it.
So you're going to play.
And so now it's just a question of, if I'm right that the human mind has a subconscious
process that's running that rewards you for pursuing getting better at something and punishes
you for not having purpose, not pursuing anything.
And you can't opt out of the game.
Now you're either going to feel good or bad based on whether you pursue something.
And when I introduce people to you, there's sort of two camps.
There's people that read you, watch you, listen to you, see the things that you've done, the
people that you've helped, and they are transformed by it.
And it gives them the chills, the way that it gives me the chills.
And then there's other people that are like, oh, I focus on the dark side.
It's dark energy.
Like, oh, this is crazy.
And honestly, there's an ache in my heart for people that discount that, that have not
sort of looked in the mirror and embraced the reality of the human experience as far as
I can tell, which is you will be subconsciously rewarded for going after this, leveraging
every tool you have, including the dark side, which seems just so obviously real, even if
it's just taking a cold shower.
It's what you said.
Every tool you have, and most people will not use every single tool they have.
Why is that?
Because they're afraid.
They don't know how to control it.
They don't want to acknowledge it.
They're afraid of being judged.
They want to stand out.
They want to be different.
They want women to acknowledge them, but they have so much doubt of what greatness and the
unforgiving race actually requires to win over and over again.
We all have fear.
We all have fear, but these individuals have so much doubt.
Before we started this, you were talking about, oh, I was watching one of your past interviews
that was on TV, and people, they were like, oh man, you come out on, you come here and
you're never nervous.
You've been doing this for so long and you have no fear, and you're like, no, every time
I come out here, I don't care, how many shows have you done now over the years?
Hundreds.
Hundreds.
There's always a fear to sit in here, but you never have any doubt.
That's a cool way to say it.
You never have any doubt of what the outcome is going to be.
Those individuals that won't tap into everything that they have, so the dark side is just because
of the way I phrase it, they think it's this evil and it's this bad thing, and it's not.
Think about the times where everything was going wrong, nothing was going right, what
kept you going, what kept you going, when there was no friends around, there was no
family, you were in that place, what kept you going?
All right, that was your dark energy, that was your dark side.
And think about this, when does a new day start at midnight?
Is it light or dark out?
Dark.
So if a new day starts in the dark, why are you afraid to have, use your dark side for
your new beginnings?
Whoa, whoa.
It's not an evil thing, it's an evil thing if you don't recognize it, it's an evil thing
if you allow it to become destructive, if it's an evil thing, if you use it for excuses,
but if you harness it, it takes you to places that you couldn't even imagine.
And every single winner in all folks, in all forms of life, they may not talk about it,
but they've all tapped into that energy, the light energy, the dark energy, the subconscious
energy, the conscious energy, they use everything, they use everything.
And in order to have winning, winning requires you to do and use everything because you don't
know one day if winning, not even a day, you don't know from minute to minute if winning
is going to wear a halo or it's going to meet you with fangs.
And if you can't deal with the halo, you definitely can't deal with the fangs, you can't deal
with the halo, and they may require different energy.
They may require different energy.
Yeah, the thing that I'm obsessed with is getting people to understand that nature has
given you tools.
I won't say whether they're good or bad tools, but rage is a tool.
Aggression exists for a reason, and it feels different.
And so I understand how the word sort of light energy, dark energy, come to be, Star Wars
has always been such a cool take on that where there's a seduction to the dark side.
And there are moments of time where that's going to be the thing that you need in that
moment to get you through.
I try to spend 80% of my time in the light and think of the beautiful things that I'm
trying to create in the world.
That keeps me going until it doesn't.
And then when it's dark and I'm scared and I'm broken and just exhausted, in those moments,
it's thinking about the people that actively want me to fail.
It's shifting over into an aggressive energy, it's shifting over into rage.
And if you think about how you would react, if somebody attacked the ones that you love,
it wouldn't be with diplomacy, it would be with ferocity.
And to me, it's like acknowledging that millions of years of evolution have led to the moment
where in a moment of crisis, what presents itself to you is aggression, is dominance,
is rage, is attack.
And if in those moments, people view that as a thing to not be touched, a tool not to
be used, that to me is a mistake.
It's a huge mistake.
People say you've got to attack your goals, but you've got to control your feelings.
They label us with all these different things that when it's to get what we want, it's always
got to be in a positive light, a positive light, a positive light.
But when you have individuals, like you said, that are trying to attack you, that attack
you personally, that attack your work ethic, that attack your success, that are trying
to take away everything that you've worked so hard to get to get, are you only going
to use the light, or are you going to use your aggression, are you going to use your
controlled rage, are you going to use those things to protect you?
And if you haven't acknowledged your dark side and you haven't tapped into it and realized
what it is and acknowledged it, just like winning has no loyalty and winning doesn't
know your name, it's going to say, hey, I don't know who you are.
To me, anger is a reaction to what somebody else said to you.
It creates an emotion.
The dark side turns your anger into controlled rage.
Now you're in control, you're in control.
Now how long can you stay in control?
That's the difference.
You can't burn out right away, all of a sudden you just let out all this rage, or do you
know how to control it and place it in the right places, not only to win the battle,
but to win that war.
And we literally have a war going on every single moment.
It may not be out in here, but there's a war that goes on in here all the time with ourselves,
all the time.
And you can't win that war with only light, you can't.
And I agree so ferociously that it's one of those things, whenever I talk about it, people
get super weird.
There is a high level of discomfort that people have around that idea, but I think that it's
so powerful that failing to use it is sort of an acknowledgement of sort of lowering
what is possible for you.
Yes.
People that get uncomfortable usually have the darkest size.
They feel like they're trying to hide it.
They're like, now all of a sudden they're like, whoa, somebody just, he's just talking
it.
I didn't know anybody else was like this.
There's a lot of people out there like this.
People only get acknowledged for it, for all the destructive behavior that happens.
They don't really get acknowledged for all the good that happens with it.
And the people that have the ability to tap into that and get to not only help themselves
but help everybody around.
