Our first guests tonight are both pop culture icons
who have teamed up for the film Weird, the Al Yankovic Story,
which premieres Friday, November 4th on the Roku Channel.
Let's take a look.
-♪ I've heard enough.
And what did you think?
Do you know why they call it the music business?
Uh, why?
Because it's a business.
It's a business!
Are you sure, head kid?
Nobody wants to hear a parody song
when they can hear the real thing for the same price.
What's the point?
Yeah, it makes no financial sense whatsoever.
Please welcome back to the show our friends Daniel Radcliffe
and Weird Al Yankovic.
-♪ I am so happy you're bowing here.
Now, I mentioned this...
Please, please. Legends.
I mentioned this to you backstage,
and hopefully there's at least one other person
who made the mistake I did.
When I watched that scene, I Googled
who was the music executive, and it's you.
Yes. Like, I'm so, your hair is so iconic
that when you have a wig on, you're literally on...
Me and the sea cap, then.
Yeah, exactly. Exactly.
So, gentlemen, this is based...
This is a wonderful film. I laughed so hard.
It's based on a short from 2010 that was on Funny or Die.
So explain the inspiration.
Well, Erica Pell, who directed the movie,
also directed the original Funny or Die clip,
back then, and I think you've just seen
the notorious B.I.G. biopic,
which plays fast and loose with the facts,
and he thought, you know, it would be funny
to do a fake biopic trailer for somebody
who not only is alive, currently,
but who famously, you know,
doesn't have a lot of scandal in their life,
and he thought of me also because, like,
how meta would it be to do a parody
of a guy that's famous for parodies?
Yes, and I should know that the biggest fear
I had about this is it's such a funny idea,
and that the execution wouldn't be as funny as the idea,
and yet it's so funny, and there's so many surprises in it,
and when did you first become aware of Weird Al as a person?
I think probably my...
The same way I became acquainted with
almost all American culture before a certain age,
I think the first time I heard of you was The Simpsons,
and, again, that's why I know most of the things
I know about America, and then...
We're all yellow here.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And then I knew a few songs growing up
when I was a teenager, but it was really when I started
dating my girlfriend 10 years ago,
her and her whole family are devoted Al fans,
and so that was, like, the beginning of my proper education.
Yeah, and you took this very serious.
Not full method, but you did grow a mustache.
Thanks, yeah, no, there's method,
and then there's just growing some facial hair.
You mean the sacrifice?
Yeah, yeah, I also, if anyone has ever...
If anyone ever offers you fake facial hair to wear,
try not to, try and grow your own.
Just say no, yes.
I think that's a very...
I had years where I had many times
had to wear a fake mustache.
It's never believable, and it almost...
You just, it's like talking,
like you feel like your teeth are about to fall out.
Everyone says, oh, it doesn't affect how you talk,
and then you put it on, and you're like,
I think it does, a little bit.
Now, did you have a wish list going into this
of who would play sort of the weird Al part?
Daniel was number one on the list.
All right.
Honestly, Eric and I, we made a small list,
because we want to consider all the options,
but we always went back to Daniel's name,
because for a number, it's like looking into a mirror
when I look at Dan.
Right, I think everyone went all in.
Yeah.
You can do a split screen between us,
and you wouldn't even know.
Yeah, yeah.
No, but Daniel's amazing at comedic acting
and dramatic acting, and because,
it's a comedy movie, obviously,
but we didn't want to play it like a comedy movie.
It's meant to be like a Oscar-bate Hollywood biopic.
Yes.
It is played very straight,
and that is what makes it so deeply funny.
But there is, you mentioned that it plays fast
and loose with the truth,
which is apparent incredibly early on,
but there is some nuggets of truth,
which is you did get your accordion
because a traveling salesman came to the house.
Yeah, that's the crazy thing about this movie.
Some of the things that you would assume,
oh, we made that up.
Some of the things are true.
Like, you know, yeah, I took accordion lessons
because there was, in fact, a door-to-door salesman
that came around, like, selling accordion lessons.
And my first single,
and my Blana was recorded in a public bathroom.
I did single-handedly fight a Colombian death squad.
Yes.
No.
Did you give Daniel any accordion lessons?
Did you have to...
Yeah.
Yeah, although I have recently come clean to Al
that he might have been a tiny bit fast
as he was giving me lessons,
and so I was maybe doing a little bit of nodding along
and being like, can I film you,
and I will slow this down.
But yeah, but Al was gracious enough to...
The first times we met in person
was sort of doing accordion lessons
and me sort of showing what I had learned up to that point.
Again, no one asked me to play accordion,
and in fact, several times, people were like,
it's not necessary.
Please stop.
But I did, I just...
I felt like if I was playing Al in a movie,
it just feels lazy to not at least try
and get a bit better at that.
But you haven't continued on with your learning?
I've continued on in that I still play
the four things I learned to play on our film.
There you go.
And one day, you know, maybe I'll have another lesson.
Accordion for you right here.
It's just like, that is my nightmare.
There's a wonderful scene at a pool
where there are just a million cameos.
And we were talking backstage, Kiva Schaffer and Yormit Coney,
who are two-thirds of the Lonely Island.
They are in it as Alice Cooper and Pee Wee Herman.
I know...
Can I just say, I'll very quickly interrupt.
Yormit's Pee Wee Herman is one of my favourite things
about the film, like, and about filming it,
he is so funny and had that impression locked
and loaded, ready to go.
Yeah, like he's been waiting his whole life
for someone to say, hey, are you free
on a Saturday to play Pee Wee Herman?
One thing about Yormit, I mean, it's a low-budget movie
and Yormit wanted to be in it and he flew himself out
on his own dime from New York to be in the movie.
I'm sure whatever he paid him didn't cover the plane flight.
Right.
Well, you can't see it on screen.
It looks fantastic.
And I should know there are so many wonderful...
It seems like everybody is in it as having so much fun.
And because, again, people are doing impressions
of beloved characters and they're getting to play it straight.
It is such a delightful way to approach this whole thing.
It's also just Halloween, and I have to ask,
because you are, I think, one of...
You're a costume every year.
You post every year how many people.
And there really is all walks of life.
All ages, all sexes.
Everybody is getting on board.
And then, of course, I feel like you have played...
I feel like all the characters you've played in your life
are equally represented on Halloween.
Yes. There is a ton of Allen Ginsberg out there every year.
LAUGHTER
Yes. No, it's lovely.
I don't know how you feel about it,
because it's actually you, if that's any strange.
It's lovely. Yeah. I already enjoy it.
Do you... You know, I imagine you, like everybody else,
have children come to your home for Halloween.
Do people ever... Do kids ever see you and are taken aback?
I think it's happened, like, once that somebody dressed in potter gear
has, like, come to our door.
It hasn't happened, like, a ton out, you know, other than that.
But we've just moved to a new building,
so there's a whole new chance that it's happened.
But, yeah, it's mostly, like, out on the street,
you know, in the west, in the parade,
and stuff, and you see people around, and you can just be like,
oh, yes, well done.
I imagine you try pretty hard on those nights
to, like, dress up way from the character.
Yes. If I'm leaving the house, I'm not dressing as Harry Potter.
Yeah.
You know, one of the nice things is, you know,
it's referenced in the film that artists did ultimately come
to appreciate most of your songs as homage.
I imagine not everyone.
But is it true, because it's a detail in the movie,
that it did sort of boost the sales of the original songs?
That is actually... They call it the Yankovic bump in the movie.
But that is based in reality, because I heard from
Nirvana's record label that when my parody smells like Nirvana
was released, they sold, like, an extra million units of Nevermind.
So, you know, artists' record sales spiked when the parody comes out.
So we kind of took that little nugget and extrapolated
into this whole subplot about Madonna wanting that Yankovic bump.
Yeah.
Do you have a favorite Weird Al Song as we send people off?
I mean, it changes a lot, but at the moment,
the song Bob speaks to the wordy, nerdy part of my brain
that is, like, entirely made of poundrums.
It is an amazing Bob Dylan impression.
And I also got to watch Al perform that the other night
at Carnegie Hall, which is very, very special.
I will say, before we go, I do remember the first time I heard
Eat It on the radio.
And as a kid, as a kid, I remember thinking,
this f***ing changes everything.
And in the movie, there's the same reaction in the movie
as a joke.
And as I'm watching it, I'm like, no, that's how I felt.
It's so great.
It is lovely to see you both.
Thank you so much for joining us tonight.
Daniel Radcliffe, Weird Al Yankovic.
Weird Al Yankovic story from Weird Friday on the Roku Channel.
We'll be right back with Terry Condon.
