So, I'm going to talk about a sort of an abstract topic.
Why do we teach people calculus?
How many people in the room actually have taken or have to take a calculus course at
some point at Guelph?
Yeah, how many of you are sure you're going to need it?
Okay, we had a 90% drop in the number of hands that went up.
And that's part of what I want to talk about.
You may notice that while they look sort of like snowflakes, the last one is horribly
wrong.
No natural snowflake has a five-fold symmetry, and this is actually the result of my trying
to de-stress at some point.
So here is something many of you may have been horrified by in the past.
This is the actual key to calculus, the dread limit.
So what we want to do is find that purple line there that's going along and just brushing
the parabolic black curve at one point.
And the way you do that, at least in most calculus classes, is you start with two points,
the one you're interested in, and one much higher up, and you find that line, then you
sneak up a little, and you find that line, then you sneak up a little, and you find
that line, then you sneak up a little, and you find that line.
Now as long as you're sneaking up, each of those lines has a point, the one you're interested
in, and it also has a rise over a run so you can find the line.
But then at the end, you've just got the one point, so the rise is zero, and the run
is zero.
What's zero divided by zero?
Actually, it can take on almost any value, and that's sort of the point of limits.
So it limits this horrible calculation where we start out dividing by something that's
going to be zero, and then do a bunch of algebra, and at the end, we're not dividing by it anymore,
so we can just plug it in.
It's a way of figuring out what answer you would get if you divided by zero, if you
could divide by zero.
Not a fun process, and it's sort of the first thing you have to learn in calculus.
So here's a little bit of the truth.
Calculus is built on infinitesimal differentials.
DX, if you've had a class, is probably the first infinitesimal differential you've seen,
and they were invented a long time ago by Leibniz, and then Newton invented them.
Well, no, actually, Newton invented them first, but he refused to tell anybody, so Leibniz
gets credit, and we use Leibniz's notation for them.
There was like a 200-year argument about what they were, what they meant, if they existed,
if they were rigorous, and eventually, we managed to put them on a solid footing.
It turns out that they are reciprocals of infinite numbers.
How many people in the room didn't know there were a lot of different kinds of infinite numbers?
Okay, yeah.
So the rest of you did know it?
Cool.
And in fact, this was one of the sort of horrifying things that grew out of this.
We managed to demonstrate that there was no infinity large enough to tell us how many
different types of infinity there were.
If there were, it would lead to a horrible logical contradiction.
And that's what happens when you think about math too much, and it sort of arises naturally
out of calculus, which is something that, for some reason, we think we should teach
two people who are in their first year of university.
Am I conveying to you some sense of the insanity of this?
Okay.
So what's the result?
Most all calculus classes are taught as if calculus is a religion.
Rituals for solving specific problems are memorized, and very little, if any, mathematics
is actually taught.
The techniques you need to actually understand calculus are taught to people somewhere between
the fourth year of a math major and the second year of graduate school.
At that point, you've had enough practice that it won't actually put brains on the
ceiling when your head explodes.
But yet we can't teach you calculus, so what we teach you are the results and useful
techniques that arise from calculus.
So how did we get here?
Well, first of all, calculus is incredibly useful for physics and engineering.
It's an important field of mathematics.
It's used some in chemistry and biology, and economists both use and misuse it quite a
lot.
The original reason calculus was taught so broadly in university was because the Russian
communists have more intercontinental ballistic missiles than we do.
And so for a very long time, Russia, which was about one-fiftieth the size of Western
Europe and the United States working together, terrified the world.
And one of the side effects of that was we decided we needed a lot more aerospace engineers
and rocket scientists, and so calculus was made the default math we had to teach everybody
because, as I said, it's incredibly useful in engineering.
Okay, so there's also an appalling ignorance to the alternatives to teaching calculus as
the first advanced math course.
I'll go into that in a minute.
And finally, when calculus was adopted as the default advanced math, high schools taught
a really solid course of algebra trigonometry and geometry.
A high school would have eight math courses that everybody would take, and you had to
pass them all to graduate.
I believe we're down to needing to take one-and-a-half math courses to graduate from high school
now, and if you're bound for university, that goes all the way up to like two-and-a-half,
and they've deleted three-quarters of the math curriculum from Ontario high schools.
Worse, they've stopped teaching math.
They've started teaching how to get a good score on a standardized test, which is actually,
you know, very different from math.
Okay, now, I tried to put these quotes up here to sort of move my agenda along, and
the one at the top is the one that annoys me the most.
I've never heard somebody say, I'm a baker, and had somebody reply, oh, I'm terrible at
baking.
I've never had somebody say, I'm an auto-mechanic, and, you know, the answer is usually something
about, well, I'm glad there's somebody that can do that, or, you know, oh, I do some of
that myself, not, I suck at that, but people are proud of being mathematical nitwits.
They're happy they can't do math.
Mind you, it means they have a lower income, it means they're easier to cheat, it means
they're easier to lie to, and yet they're proud of it.
And this is largely the result of the way we teach math, and I think this focus on trying
to teach people impossibly weird math for their first math is at least part of the problems.
So, alternatives, combinatorics and probability theory.
This leads into statistics and gives you a solid foundation for it.
How many of you here have to take a statistics course at some point?
Yeah, most of the hands went up, okay.
And the other thing is it gives you problem-solving skills and makes you, as citizens, harder
to cheat.
It's also far easier to teach than calculus.
There's linear algebra.
This is used extensively in computer graphics.
If you have a game console, there are several chips in it that sit there and do nothing
but linear algebra to manipulate the point of view and render the shapes, you know.
When you're looking at Lara Croft, you're actually looking at about 600 linked matrices.
It just looks like a cool woman.
Okay.
So, linear algebra is used in business.
It's used in planning, logistics, ecology.
For instance, one of the things that happens is plants that have just fallen off a, seeds
that have just fallen off a plant aren't ready to germinate.
And there's an internal biochemical process by which they become ready to germinate.
And so, you build this model where there are new seeds, seeds a year old, seeds that are
two years old, seeds that are three years old, and you have probabilities of either sprouting
or going on to the next year.
And when you fit the parameters to that model, what you get is an understanding of when you
need to put down the herbicide, assuming we haven't learned not to yet, to kill the weed.
There's a wonderful plant called a foxtail that puts hemoglobin into its seeds.
And the amount of hemoglobin that goes into the seed gets smaller the further out from
the core of the plant the seed is.
And what happens there is the hemoglobin absorbs oxygen, starving the embryonic plant of oxygen.
But since there's a different amount in different seeds, they come up at different times.
That's why foxtails keep sprouting all summer in low numbers.
And the compartmental model for that one has a complicated term for how much hemoglobin
is in the seed, but that's linear algebra you need, not calculus.
The other thing is linear algebra actually is necessary to do at both advanced calculus
and differential equations.
It's easier to teach than calculus too, so that one would be good even for engineers
as a course before they take calculus.
Dig mathematics, used in computer science, extensively useful and underused in biology.
So I said I have an endowed chair in bioinformatics.
What Wolf did was they hired me to dig biologists out from enormous piles of data.
It used to be 20 years ago that when you found a gene, you had about two years to characterize
the gene, find mutants, and write a couple of papers on the gene.
Now it's, the sequencer found 200 genes this afternoon, quick, do something with them.
And so what they have me do is I do what used to take a biologist two years in 80 seconds.
I don't do it as well, and I have to use a computer, and I have to talk to biologists
a lot to make sure it's doing it right.
But this algorithmic mathematics is taking over a lot of fields of biology.
It's also critical for many types of modeling.
How hard it is depends on how you approach it.
You can actually do non-trivial algorithmic mathematics with Excel.
So graph theory.
This is, you've got some locations, you know the routes between them, you know how long
they are, and you build a network structure.
Graph theory is enormously easier to teach than calculus.
It's used in city planning, logistics, epidemiology.
One of my students won a best paper at the conference award at a conference with 800
plus papers working on epidemiology using graph theory.
Social network analysis.
You can bet Facebook has 50 or 60 PhDs that know graph theory working on how to, well,
essentially make you look at Facebook more, but it's still interesting mathematics.
If you haven't seen Viheart's videos, and I actually looked up this following, so I'm
sure that's right.
They are wonderful.
They cover many mathematical topics.
She speaks about twice as fast as I do, and she has wonderful pictures.
The one on hexaflexagons is beautiful as well.
And in fact, she's an also, and I think one of her lines is, so suppose you're sitting
in a boring calculus class, and you can't stand because the guy's going so slow, and
he's not making any sense at all, and it's not really math anyway, but then you think
about some graph theory.
And then she does these beautiful pictures.
So it's worth looking up her videos as well.
What's that?
Well, okay, so you can read the word, but okay, so this is one, this is my second favorite
Einstein quote.
I'm going to end with my favorite Einstein quote, but that is a picture I did in an attempt
to relax.
I often do fractal pictures, and this one, it isn't just that it's a fractal.
It's one that I sort of, I made an error writing the program, and it did something I'd never
seen before, and you know, much as with, though much less significant, much as with Alexander
Fleming's discovery of penicillin, I went, wait, that's odd, oh, cool.
And it turned out to be a new type of fractal, and it's actually quite ornate.
That one I did for somebody for a Christmas card.
It's got vaguely Christmassy colors.
The thing is, the image is generated by a very short computer program, 36 lines, only
eight of which have anything to do with the math.
The rest are things like, hi, this is a program, please give me some place to store the picture
and so on.
So eight lines of computer code generate that, and most people that have finished four semesters
of calculus couldn't understand it, and they couldn't write the eight lines of code.
I think that's a little sad.
If we're going to teach people math, why don't we teach them math that does stuff like that?
I mean, it's not even hard to teach it to people once you've got the computer.
So what's stopping us from solving these problems?
First of all, most K through 12 teachers came up through the calculus-based system and were
convinced that math is hard, ritualistic, and has few real applications.
This is like child abuse.
It's the gift that keeps on giving.
We teach incomprehensible religious math to the people who will be teachers, and so they
teach incomprehensible religious math to their students, and it goes on and on.
We've been treating calculus and differential equations as the final ultimate math since
the late 1940s, and so there's incredible institutional inertia.
Expect we've never done this before type objections.
We recently developed here at Guelph a one credit, your freshman physics and calculus
at the same time course, integrated physical science 151510, and what I did was I tripled
the amount of math I was covering and covered it much faster, and the result was one person
flunked, two people dropped.
Normally you get 10 to 12 people flunking and 20 people dropping from, of course, the
size I had, so teaching the math much faster I think worked a lot better, partly because
people didn't get bored and stop coming to class.
We also wove it together with the physics demonstrating actual applications.
I talked with Martin, who was the physics instructor, and we collaborated and made sure
that stuff meshed at least fairly well.
Okay, and there were a lot of, we've never done that before, objections when we were
setting it up.
Universities are currently being treated by the government as optional extras that can
be used to balance the budget.
The government officials would never say this, but if you look at how the money is allocated,
it's obviously true.
This means big revisions to the way we teach math are unwelcome budgetary disasters.
Then some faculty focused on teaching, and that word some is there for a reason, would
need to be retrained or replaced.
We've got some wonderful faculty here who are teaching focused.
They can teach any course you throw at them, they know what they're doing.
We've also got some that know how to teach a course, and if we wanted to change the course,
they would be dead.
Having faculty like that, since you don't have to pay them much, because they don't
know how to do much, is another part of keeping the budget under control, but people that
are hired because they're cheap tend to be less versatile.
The final barrier is the textbook industry.
How many people in the room have paid too much for a textbook?
More hands than any other question for the record, and one of them just stayed up a while.
Maybe you paid too much for more than one textbook.
Essentially I have two published textbooks.
One of them is on how to use Darwin's theory of evolution as an engineering optimization
tool.
It's fairly obscure.
The other one is a freshman calculus text that bizarrely I translated from American to
Canadian.
I also developed Math 1030 here, the business math class.
If any of you have taken it, yeah, I apologize, I know, but remember the business professors
were the ones that told me what I had to put in the course.
We've decided that Andrew, the TA who helped me write the book, we've decided we're going
to give the book away.
We're going to put it on the web, we're going to keep updating it, everything will be completely
free.
I'm also working on an update of my evolution as an engineering design tool book.
It will be given away free.
I have had it with the textbook industry.
Right now their current plan to keep sucking money out of you guys is that they will come
up with these websites that you have to pay to subscribe to that will write my homework
problems and test for me and grade them.
Now I have a number of problems with that.
So does the university.
The university has a rule against you being charged one cent beyond your tuition for anything
you have to have to get your grade.
Chemistry was already using these tools and when that rule got passed they had a real
problem and had to somehow compensate.
But the thing that really worries me is they're not really all that good at writing questions
and tests.
And if I give a test that contains impossible, horrible, wrong problems, I'm going to have
real trouble blaming the textbook company.
So I'd prefer to get myself in my own trouble my own way.
Okay, working toward change, what can you do about this mess?
Well, you can exploit the fact that the internet makes it much easier to get content out.
I'll say it again, look at ViHeart's videos.
Khan Academy, which hosts ViHeart and helps support her work, is another attempt to let
people educate themselves.
They put a whole lot of course materials on the web for free.
Where possible push alternate content.
When I was at the second year I was at Guelph, a couple of students and I developed a course,
a math course for art majors in which we emphasized all the mathematics that was developed to
help the Renaissance artists actually learn to make realistic looking pictures, perspective
and so on.
There's actually quite a lot of math buried in art.
And I have three publications on using mathematics to generate art.
One of them in the Journal of Mathematics and Art.
And so, you know, it's a going concern.
There's math and computer graphics.
You can teach mathematical biology without an obsessive calculus focus.
I did this back at Iowa State where I used to work.
You can teach algorithmic math and spreadsheets, even simple things like, you know, is what
the guy said about your car payments true or not.
And a spreadsheet makes that easy to calculate.
And then I really want to push the idea about probability theory as the first math course.
When I was an undergraduate, I invented this game.
You get four six-sided dice.
You roll them.
If there are no sixes, you're lost.
If there's a six, you put, or one or more sixes, you put them aside, roll again.
And you keep doing this.
But if you roll and don't get any sixes, you're allowed to pick up a six and go again.
So the game can take a while.
And the thing is, most people think the odds of actually getting four sixes are about one
in five.
I don't know why, but that's where people arrive intuitively.
And the actual odds are one in 8.2, which I can calculate using linear algebra.
And that meant that I would sit there and let people roll dice.
And if they want, I'd pay them $5.
And if they lost, they'd pay me $1.
And I never had to buy lunch.
And it's because nobody knew any probability theory except me in the whole room.
OK, try to move public schools away from standardized testing preparation.
If you prepare your students for standardized tests,
you just made the results of the test meaningless.
The test is supposed to be assessing whether you've learned certain skills.
If you teach exactly what the test is looking for,
there's no evidence one way or the other that you taught them the other skills.
But ask any of my colleagues in the math department,
the people coming out of high school, have had monotone decreasing, pardon me.
They've been getting worse at doing math.
Monotone decreasing is actually a technical mathematical term,
which I should avoid around people that came out of the current high schools.
The other thing is it damages the students.
One of the reasons the math is so repetitive is they just go over and
over the material that will be on the standardized tests in an attempt to get
a good score because the school's budget depends on it.
This is a truly diseased and corrupt system that is making the time and
money spent on the testing wasted.
And it's also really damaging the students.
Okay, be aware there are a whole lot of other sorts of math besides calculus.
Set theory, group theory, difference equations, graph theory, combinatorics,
agent-based modeling, linear algebra.
And actually I was going to put the whole list on but it doesn't fit on a slide.
Even if I stick to topics you don't need an advanced degree to understand.
We've worked out an incredible amount of mathematics and
almost none of it is taught at university and wealth teaches less than many others.
That's my favorite Einstein quote.
And it speaks to the fact that nobody can try and
make you learn all the math because it's infinite.
Kurt Gödel proved a truly horrifying theorem called the incompleteness theorem.
The formal statement of it is any sufficiently complex formal system
contains true facts that cannot be proven inside the system.
In math, we worked out something called the axioms of set theory.
There are a basic set of things that we have to assume before we can do math.
And it turns out that if you keep going, the number of axioms you need to explain
everything that's true are infinite.
And so math is quite literally a bottomless well.
Now, since my job is discovering new math, for me, this is good news.
Other people may not be quite as happy about it as I am.
But it means there's essentially endless wonder out there in mathematics.
And we've carefully designed a math education system that avoids almost all of it.
Here are two more stress relief pictures.
That one's a fractal, and that one, I can't prove it's a fractal, but
I think it is, and it looks cool.
Okay, so essentially, math goes on forever.
Most of it is unrelated to the real world.
Probably most of it is unrelated to any world that ever existed.
Which means there's infinite room to make your mind stronger and more powerful.
Okay, that's probably enough for now.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
