Two videos. Two videos in one month. Has anyone done that before? Um, I don't think so.
List one YouTuber right now that is uploaded twice in one month. And I'll give you $1,000.
Today's video is going to be a little bit different from what you're used to on the
channel. I've kind of steered away from exposing things and I just make what I want to make
usually, you know, Stranger Danger videos. My dare video, by the way, this is actually
merch and it will come in handy today because the things you're going to see are going to
make you want to say stop a bunch of times. Why am I arm shaking? So anyways, you know,
Stranger Danger videos, dare videos, sex education, bad movies, all stuff that I've been super
interested in talking about. But today is very different. The more I looked into this
topic, the more sure I was that I needed to make a video on it just because it weirds
me out to my core. I don't know what I'm going to title this video yet. I'm pretty
sure it has something to do with like YouTube kids and Hulu, but this story is much more
than that. So strap in and get ready to hear about the horrible world of online children's
entertainment.
Before we talk about what kick started me wanting to make this video, I do need to stress
two things. One, everybody knows how bad YouTube kids is. That's not what this video is about.
You've seen me rant about it before. You've seen other YouTubers rant about it before.
And two, I just need to stress before I talk shit about what this generation of kids are
going to look at. I have to acknowledge that the last few generations have had really targeted
advertising to us. Oh, what's that mom? Turtles and pizza and weapons? Can we give that company
a million dollars? Dad, look at me in the eyes. Yep, the car turns into a robot. And
also, um, the kid from even Stevens is in it. So that's fucking crazy, right? I think
it really kick started in the 70s with things like Star Wars where toys and marketing were
targeted at kids pretty aggressively on TV. But the internet has changed it into a monster
that I don't think anyone could have expected. And that's what today's video is about. Profiting
off children. Isn't that fun? Isn't that a fun topic to talk about? Don't you just feel good
thinking about that? All right, now that we have that out of the way, let's talk about Hulu.
So a few nights ago, I finished rewatching season two of Atlanta. So I just started scrolling through
Hulu kids to see what they had on there. They had things, you know, like regular show and
adventure time, which were kind of, you know, slightly past my time as a kid. I would still
watch them, but I was like becoming a teenager. And those are great shows. People that are a
few years younger than me got excellent television. But current kids today, like young kids,
have the worst entertainment of any generation ever. And that became more apparent to me when I
saw that Ryan's toy reviews, the YouTube kids unboxing toy channel had a Hulu show. And not
only that, it was called Ryan's World Specials presented by Pocket Watch. So already my anti-
advertising to kids brain thinks the name of the show is sponsored even. You don't want to see
SpongeBob SquarePants presented by AutoZone. Saboomafu presented by Dick's Sporting Goods.
And especially because Ryan's toy reviews is centered at very, very young children. We're
talking toddlers to like eight years old. Now, if you don't know the channel Ryan's Toy Reviews,
I'm going to go and give you a little voiceover backstory really quick. Welcome back to Eddie's
backstory corner. So Ryan toys review, otherwise known as Ryan's World is a YouTube channel that
was started on March 16th of 2015. It stars an eight year old boy and has over 22.2 million
subscribers with over 33 billion YouTube views. Without fail, Ryan's channel uploads a video
pretty much every single day. And you're probably thinking what would compel a set of parents to
make their kid work basically a full time job on the internet. The answer is money. When Ryan was
six years old between 2016 and 2017, he was the eighth highest paid YouTuber making 11 million
dollars. Last year he was listed as the highest paid YouTuber making over 22 million dollars.
That's more than the Paul Brothers. That's more than PewDiePie. That's more than pretty much,
I don't know, all the money in the world, I guess. But about two months ago, Ryan faced some
controversy. And when I say Ryan faced, I mean his parents. He's an eight year old boy. He's not
responsible for any of this. At the end of August, the FTC filed a complaint against YouTube because
of Ryan's channel. The FTC said that the channel deceptively promotes a multitude of products
to millions of preschool aged children in violation of FTC law. To sum up the complaint, basically
what they're saying is that over 90% of the content on Ryan's channel is sponsored, but it's
not clear enough for a four year old to discern if it's an ad. If you put sponsored by McDonald's
in the corner of a video screen, a four year old boy is not going to be like,
oh, I understand that Ryan is getting paid to give these views and that his actual views may
differ from this because, you know, I understand endorsement and he is endorsing this product,
so it might not be his normal views. No, instead of that, they're going to eat Play-Doh and shit
their pants because they're a four year old kid. So for now, that's all the backstory that you need
about Ryan's channel. So now that you're an expert in an eight year old's multi-million dollar
YouTube channel, let's check out his Hulu show. So immediately we're greeted by this
extremely poorly animated panda. And I know if you don't like care about animation at all,
it looks fine, but it's super lazy. I mean, look at this backdrop and already don't you think it's
a little unsettling to have a cartoon tell you that they love an eight year old boy's videos,
especially when it's voiced by a grown man just like, hey guys, you know, I love this little boy.
Don't clip that for the love of God. In this show, they have an animated version of Ryan,
where he's a superhero called Red Titan. Now, I know you're thinking it's like,
that's kind of cool for an eight year old boy to see himself as a superhero. But when you really
think about it, it's kind of weird that they're like creating this image of Ryan that is completely
out of his control as a child, right? It's a little bizarre that he's not only a multi-million
dollar YouTube channel where he unboxes toys, but now they're taking his image and just some
random adults are animating it. There's nothing too blatantly like illegal or wrong about it,
but it just feels weird, right? Now, don't worry, his show isn't the worst part about this entire
video. It's gonna get worse, but I still want to show you a little bit more just how low effort
this show is. When you watch the episode, you realize, wait, isn't this exactly like those shitty
animations that were on YouTube kids videos that everybody had a problem with? There's nothing
blatantly gross or weird about these, but they're so low effort. There's not even really like a
narrative and there's not even voiceovers for most of it. It's just like, oh, here's this character
and here's this character and they're playing whack-a-mole. Watch them play whack-a-mole for a
second. What is this? For generations upon generations, kids TV has been dedicated to at
least entertaining them, but for the most part, educating them. Sesame Street takes the opportunity
to entertain kids with these lovable characters and also teach them the alphabet, teach them how
to do math, teach them grammar and spelling, which is also kind of the alphabet. But this is just
flashy garbage to distract your kid on an iPad when you're going on a road trip and you don't
want to hear them talk anymore. I'm not a parent. I don't know what it's like to have an annoying
ass child just screaming in your backseat, but there's got to be a better way than this. There's
so much Ryan content that this kid works a full-time job. Like I said, that was going to be the main
part of this video until I started digging in to PocketWatch, the company that presents Ryan's
show and showed itself at the beginning of the episode. So immediately when I went to PocketWatch's
Wikipedia and I know some people are like, well, Wikipedia is not really a source. Like I know your
teacher said that, but you can look at the sources right here. It's not my main source for the video.
It was just the first thing I looked up, but it says PocketWatch Inc, stylized as pocket.watch,
is a digital media studio that specializes in extending popular kids and family YouTube stars
and characters into global franchises. Gross. That's super gross. Why would you say that? They're
not actively bragging about turning children into global franchises, right? That would be
fucking insane. So I went to PocketWatch's website and it says on the website right away,
PocketWatch is the new studio creating global franchises from the YouTube stars and characters
loved by Generation Alpha. Those are their words. They are bragging about turning an eight-year-old boy
into a global franchise. Am I going fucking crazy? Like we already live in a society,
by the way, we live in a society. We already acknowledged that we fuck up child stars by
making them big and famous, but this is a whole different animal because when you're filming
YouTube videos, there are no current child labor laws that are enforced on YouTube channels. And
I was shocked to find out that Ryan's Hulu show is mainly just repackaged YouTube videos that
they animated over as well, which means it's a TV show that was made with an eight-year-old boy as
the star without active SAG or child labor laws. Um, that sounds illegal. Also looking at PocketWatch's
website, the first thing that you see is a Ryan Mobile Mario Kart clone. He's a real boy. He's
not like even a character in a movie that they're branding. They're branding this kid who has no
idea what's going on. Who are his parents? Who are they? So on the PocketWatch website, you can
scroll down to a button for press and they say, see what they're saying. As in, see what the press
is saying about our company. And, um, the first article they listed, the headline is just a
sentence that makes you want to scream. The headline is, Ryan's toys review is this generation's Mickey
Mouse. Ah, no, please no. Oh my God. Mickey Mouse is a globally recognized trademark worth billions
of dollars. And, um, the fun thing is he's a fictional cartoon character. You cannot treat
an eight-year-old boy like Mickey Mouse, dude. So I looked in more to PocketWatch and the surprises
they just kept coming. First thing I want to mention about PocketWatch is the CEO used to work
at Maker Studios. Now, if you guys don't remember Maker Studios, it was an MCN that was originally
started by YouTubers and then was bought out by Disney for, I believe, like $500 million. And
actually some personal history back in 2014 before my channel took off. I was locked in a Maker Studios
contract and it wasn't good for me. But then as a business, Maker just started canceling contracts,
fucking over creators, and then shut down. When I looked into who was funding PocketWatch,
there was kind of a, I don't know, a standout name in there that I did not expect to find in a
children's YouTube media company. So reading off the list, there's this guy who's an Academy
award-winning producer of Avatar and Titanic. And you're like, oh, that's pretty legit entertainment,
you know, going into it. But the main one that really caught my eye is Downey Ventures,
which is Robert Downey Jr.'s investment company. Iron Man is funding YouTube kids. Tony Stark
himself is funding Ryan's toy reviews. Think about that for a moment. Let it set in. The main
Avenger is paying for the, like, exploitation of this eight-year-old boy becoming a business.
I don't remember that from Iron Man. So reading into a variety article about them getting funding,
there was a quote, there is no other funding team or company better positioned to transform
the kid's digital entertainment space than PocketWatch. Said Alan, a digital media investor
and co-founder of Machinima. Also, somebody on their advisory board worked at Defy Media.
So we have three past company employers. Machinima, a company that made a bunch of money,
then fucked over creators and closed down. Maker Studios, a company that made a bunch of money,
fucked over creators and closed down. And Defy Media, I bet you can fucking guess,
fucked over creators, made a bunch of money and then closed down. So we should totally trust
this company with children and their professional franchises. This sounds fun.
Now I had a video last June where me and Gus Johnson, my dear boy, he's not in his room,
but I'm sending love toward the room so I can reach him when he gets back. We made a video
about Butch Hartman, the creator of Danny Phantom and Fairly Odd Parents and some other shows that
people didn't watch compared to those two. And he had this weird Kickstarter where he was complaining
about how family TV is trash these days and we need more Christian values and we should give him
a bunch of money so he can make a streaming service called Oaxas. So you'd think Butch really cares
about what children are seeing. He wouldn't just work with a shitty, immoral children's company
just to make a quick buck, would he? PocketWatch has one more Hulu show called HobbyKidsTV and we'll
talk about that in a bit. But the main thing I wanted to show you is Butch Hartman actually makes
an animated show for HobbyKidsTV, the family toy YouTube channel. So I clicked on it and
we're just going to watch it together. This is a paid advertisement for Carl's Jr.
Kids, how many times do I have to tell you? No turning everything we own into burgers.
Okay, so I want to stress right away. They did have the mom say it was a paid ad by Carl's Jr.
And there was a little subtitle thing there for about 12 seconds. But the FTC lawsuit I showed
earlier is proof that kids that are younger can't really decipher what an ad fully is. So yeah,
the mom did say it was a paid advertisement and it does say it there for a second. But then we go
into a fully animated show and they don't stress that it's sponsored later. And that becomes a problem.
But breakfast was ages ago. An early lunch isn't such a bad idea. HobbyKids, are you thinking what I'm
thinking? Carl's Jr. For real, we're taking kids content and having your kids' favorite
animated characters just go Carl's Jr. This is such blatant, scummy advertising to children.
If you are making little animated characters for a 30 second spot on a kid's show and those
animated characters say, let's go to Carl's Jr. At least it's a Carl's Jr. ad. But not every
episode of this show is an ad for Carl's Jr. There are other animated episodes. Whoa, the line for
Carl's Jr. is long today. I'm gonna order a cheeseburger, fries, and a yummy milk. No one makes
charbroiled burgers as good as Carl's Jr. And everyone knows Carl's Jr. makes the best burgers
in the universe. It's so just gross. It's gross advertising. And shame on you, Butch Hartman.
Danny Phantom was fucking great, dude. What happened to you? And I think, you know, before we move on,
this is what's really bothering me about it. The YouTube kid stuff already seemed super scummy.
But it was always just parents kind of manipulating their kids to make a ton of money,
which wasn't cool. And we all made videos on it. But at least it was contained to that.
What Pocket Watch is suggesting is that traditional media is now adopting this really kind of,
in a way, like abusive to children way of modeling things. These kids are working full time jobs
as entertainers. And they have no say in it. It's already bad with child actors. But at least we
have an established industry to make sure it's cool for them. I don't know if there's anybody
looking out for these kids. I don't know if it's just this Pocket Watch company going to the parents.
We're going to make you millions of dollars. And the parents are like, okay, take my kid for as
long as you need. Or in fact, we'll shoot at our house and just send you the footage. Because this
isn't just like Hulu making a show out of it. This is a company funded by the biggest actor in the
world in the biggest franchise. Hulu is a giant streaming service with multimillion dollar networks
behind them. And Butch Hartman is a classic TV show producer. He created two beloved shows that
were ran on regular television. Pocket Watch signed a deal with Paramount Pictures to make an
unboxing movie for kids. This is a real industry problem now. I just, I don't know. I'm worried
that people aren't going to be as angry about this as I am. So I just really like picture
how much you enjoyed playing with toys as a kid. I liked it for way too long. Like a lot of people
I've talked to, I would stow a bunch of toys under my blanket in my bed. And at night, I would just
play with my toys and run through different stories and use my imagination for years. Like a
little too long, I did it until I was like 10 or 11 because I loved it so much. These four, and
there are many more children on YouTube having this, are getting completely robbed of a normal
childhood. They are not asking to be famous. I know I read an article where Ryan Toys Review's mom
said that he loved YouTube videos, and he asked like, why don't I have a YouTube channel? And
that's well and good when you're making videos with your kid. But when he becomes the highest
earner on YouTube, you need to rethink whether you can just use the excuse, oh, it's Ryan's passion.
Because Ryan has a Nick Jr. TV show, and he has a Hulu show now, and he has a line in Target,
and a line of toys in Walmart, and a video game coming out. Do you think he pictured like, oh,
I want to make $22 million next year. He probably just wanted to make a few videos with his parents.
I'm almost sure that Robert Downey Jr. cares about kids, but I don't think he knows the extent
of what this investment is. I don't know if Butch Hartman thinks it's as manipulative as it is.
He might just see it as a side gig. But all of these traditional media people put all their
efforts in, and the kids are the ones that are harmed out of it. So thank you for watching the
video, and here's a word from our sponsor. Hey guys, I'm sorry I wanted to see how tall my tripod
would get, and it got stuck, so I gotta do the ad from here. Thank you Audible for sponsoring
today's video. Everyone say thank you Audible. Let me ask you something. Did you know that Audible
has the largest selection of audiobooks out of anybody ever? Including Audible originals,
and I know what your dumb baby brain is thinking. Eddie, what's an Audible original? I have no idea,
and I can't critically think at all. Put it together. There are original audiobooks,
documentaries, and scripted shows made by Audible, obviously. You can listen to these audiobooks
on any device, including Mobile and Alexa. Hey Google, can you play Audible audiobooks?
Voice actions aren't available for that app. You're an idiot. You're a stupid idiot, Google.
As an Audible member, every month you get to choose one free audiobook, regardless of the price,
and two Audible originals. Oh, what's that? You want a 30-day free trial? You want to start a free
trial for Audible, because it sounds good from what I'm saying? Then go to audible.com slash
Eddie. Eddy, why? Spell my name with a Y. Stop getting it wrong and spelling it with an IE.
You can also text my name, Eddie, with a Y, to 500-500. I'll say it one more time. You dumb,
dumb idiot baby. That's audible.com slash Eddie, with a Y, or text Eddie, with a Y, to 500-500.
And while you're there, I recommend Slaughterhouse 5 by Kurt Vonnegut. It was a great experience,
and I think everyone should listen to Slaughterhouse 5, so go pick up that audiobook, and thanks for
watching the video. I'm sorry it was so depressing. So click off the video now. Bye. Click off the
video. Goodbye. Bye-bye. Click off the video. Do it. Click off the video before I cut to the music.
Thank you. Carrie L. Justin D. W. L. Sammy Derrick. Laura Sarah Kelly Colleen Sloan Bernard
Rosalie Mel Olivia Damian Nick Gabrielle Matthew The Hanging Judge Dom Kenzie Mallory Jackie Kimmy
Aurora Ezra James Diana Cybercase Brandon Alex Taper Tamer Megan Player N. Brandon
The Raisins Reese Amanda Nietzsche von Carreck Haley Elizabeth Peter Mullen Chelsea Josie Michael
Tyler Dave and Janet Marin Jeremy Cody. Thank you guys so much.
